Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the related notes thereto, included in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause future results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” For the purposes of this section, “we,” “us,” “our,” “Onyx,” the “Company” and “PARTS iD” each refer to Onyx prior to the closing of the Business Combination and PARTS iD, Inc. following the closing of the Business Combination, as the context indicates, unless the context otherwise refers to Legacy Acquisition Corp.
Overview
PARTS iD, Inc. is a technology-driven, digital commerce company focused on creating custom infrastructure and unique user experiences within niche markets. The success of the Company has inspired pursuit of our long-term strategy to scale into similar markets via our proprietary built, modular digital commerce technology platform. While our core focus continues to be automotive, in August 2018, we launched seven additional verticals (including BOATiD.com, MOTORCYCLEiD.com, CAMPERiD.com and more) which demonstrates fungibility of our technology platform. These verticals address similar market challenges and focus on the enthusiasts’ needs through our seamless shopping experience using proprietary tools and techniques.
Although the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has caused economic disruptions on a global scale, and created significant uncertainty, we believe it increased the adoption of online shopping by consumers and, for periods during which stimulus payments were disbursed by the government, increased demand, which had a positive effect on the Company’s revenue and profitability. However, there was a decline in traffic after the first quarter of 2021, primarily due to an increase in the average cost-per-click in the Company’s search advertising programs and lower consumer discretionary spend that adversely impacted marketing productivity. We also experienced increased order cancellations in 2021 due to supply chain disruptions. Despite the decrease in traffic and increased order cancellations, increases in the conversion rate and average order values resulted in higher revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year.
COVID-19 and related containment measures have disrupted the supply chain, negatively affecting the Company and our industry. In 2021, spikes in the price of steel and other materials, low in-stock rates by our key suppliers, workforce shortages and shipping and seaport delays led to increases in the cost of goods sold, which negatively impacted gross margins of the Company. In 2021, supply chain challenges increased order cancellations and shipping costs. Our real-time multi-sourced inventory model helped us mitigate some of the risk by sourcing certain products from secondary and tertiary sources during 2021, but these measures resulted in increased costs. We continue to pass a portion of the increased costs through to our customers, while balancing the need to maintain price competitiveness.
Management continues to focus on efforts to drive growth, including product cultivation, vendor optimization, distribution network expansion and marketing diversification with a greater emphasis on the additional verticals, original equipment (“OE”) and repair parts business. We also recently filled a number of key executive positions to support this growth, including hiring leaders for our key categories of Boating and Marine and RV/Camper.
Key Financial and Operating Metrics
We measure our business using financial and operating metrics, as well as non-GAAP financial measures. See “Results of Operations - Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for more information on non-GAAP financial measures. We monitor several key business metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, develop financial forecasts and make strategic decisions, including the following traffic and engagement metrics:
For the Year Ended December 31,
We use the metrics above to gauge our ability to acquire targeted traffic and keep users engaged. This information informs us of how effective our proprietary technology, data, and content is, and helps us define our strategic roadmap and key initiatives.
Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue increased $47.8 million, or 11.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to increases in the conversion rate of 11.3% and in the average order value of 12.9%, partially offset by a decrease in traffic of 14.4%.
Supply chain disruptions adversely impacted net sales. Cancellations of sales orders increased to 12.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 10.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cancellation rates resulted in $10 million more in cancellations in 2021 compared to 2020, and $30 million more in cancellations in 2021 compared to 2019.
The increase in the site conversion rate was primarily attributable to search engine bidding automation and optimization, continuous customer experience enhancements and pricing initiatives, product cultivation, and continued e-commerce adoption. The increase in the average order value was primarily attributable to increases in the average number of items per order, changes in the mix of categories of items sold and inflation.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold is composed of product cost, the associated fulfillment and handling costs charged by vendors, if any, and shipping costs. In the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of goods sold increased by $43.4 million, or 13.8%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cost of goods sold was primarily driven by an increase in the number of orders or products sold, as well as increases in cost of product and shipping costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of goods sold was 79.9% of revenue, compared to 78.6% of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020. The 1.3% increase in cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue was primarily attributable to ongoing supply chain disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had to source some products from alternate vendors that had higher price points due to product price inflation and higher shipping costs, which higher prices were not passed on to the customer entirely. We have now begun to pass a portion of the increased costs through to our customers, while balancing the need to maintain price competitiveness. Management only expects these cost pressures to materially ease if and when the COVID-19 pandemic and related containment measures abate, which cannot be currently predicted with any certainty.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit increased $4.4 million, or 5.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to the 11.9% increase in revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by the increase in cost of goods sold due primarily to increases in product costs and ongoing supply chain disruptions associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross margin of 20.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021, was lower than the gross margin of 21.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to increases in product and shipping costs associated with ongoing supply chain disruptions as discussed above.
Operating Expenses
Advertising expenses increased $9.0 million, or 26.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in advertising costs was primarily attributable to (i) an increase in average cost-per-click, (ii) a change in the mix of advertising channels used, and (iii) testing of new advertising campaigns and content development. Management believes investment in advertisement is one of the key drivers of revenue and its efficiency is measured by management in terms of revenue per advertisement dollar spent.
Decreases in overall available searches and increasing competition, coupled with additional campaigns that were transitioned to automated bidding from manual bidding, led to higher costs-per-click for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
The consequent higher advertising cost was partly offset by an increase in the site conversion rate and the average order value. Management continues to take steps to diversify advertising in new channels, such as paid social and customer retention programs to drive growth.
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses increased $5.3 million, or 11.9%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase of (i) $4.9 million in non-cash stock compensation expense, (ii) $4.0 million in public company operating expenses, and (iii) $1.3 million in merchant services provider processing fees in line with the increase in revenue, partially offset by a $5.5 million decrease in business combination transaction expenses which occurred in the year ended December 31, 2020 but did not reoccur in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Depreciation expenses increased $0.6 million, or 8.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $1,223, or 14.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Expenses
Income tax expenses decreased by $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the effective income tax rate was 12.91% compared to (61.08)% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in rate was primarily attributable to changes in state taxes and the incurrence of expenses that are not deductible for income tax purposes.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
This report includes non-GAAP financial measures that differ from financial measures calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). These non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similar measures reported by other companies and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, other measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Management uses non-GAAP financial measures internally to evaluate the performance of the business. Additionally, management believes certain non-GAAP measures provide meaningful incremental information to investors to consider when evaluating the performance of the Company.
To this end, we provide EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, which are non-GAAP financial measures. EBITDA consists of net income (loss) plus (a) interest expense; (b) income tax provision (or less benefit); and (c) depreciation expense. Adjusted EBITDA consists of EBITDA plus stock compensation expense and other costs, fees, expenses, write offs and other items that do not impact the fundamentals of our operations, as described further below following the reconciliation of these metrics. Management believes these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to investors in their assessment of the performance of our business. The exclusion of certain expenses in calculating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA facilitates operating performance comparisons on a period-to-period basis as these costs may vary independent of business performance. Accordingly, we believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and the Board.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider these measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
● Although depreciation is a non-cash charge, the assets being depreciated may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect cash capital expenditure requirements for such replacements or for new capital expenditure requirements;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in our working capital;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect income tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us;
● EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect depreciation and interest expenses associated with the lease financing obligations; and
● Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Because of these limitations, you should consider EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including various cash flow metrics, net income (loss) and our other GAAP results.
The following table reflects the reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated.
(1) Represents the expenses incurred solely related to the Business Combination that closed in November 2020. It primarily includes investment banker fees, legal fees, professional fees for accountants and SEC and Hart-Scott-Rodino filing fees.
(2) Represents the excess compensation paid to one of the two founders of Onyx over the amount management believes would have been the compensation of an independent professional CEO for the applicable reporting periods.
(3) Represents legal and settlement expenses and gains related to significant matters that do not impact the fundamentals of our operations, pertaining to: (i) causes of action between certain of the Company’s shareholders and which involves claims directly against the Company seeking the fulfillment of alleged indemnification obligations with respect to these matters, and (ii) trademark and IP protection cases. We are involved in routine IP litigation, commercial litigation and other various litigation matters. We review litigation matters from both a qualitative and quantitative perspective to determine if excluding the losses or gains will provide our investors with useful incremental information. Litigation matters can vary in their characteristics, frequency and significance to our operating results.
(4) Includes write-offs of advances and certain fraud loss claims from earlier years that we determined were uncollectible.
Net income (loss) decreased by $10.1 million to a net loss of $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to net income of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net income (loss) was primarily driven by increases in advertising costs, non-cash stock compensation expense and public company operating expenses, as discussed above. The year-over-year decrease in Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021, was attributable to the decrease in net income (loss), partially offset by the decrease in business combination transaction expenses during 2020 that did not recur in 2021, as noted in the reconciliation table above.
Free Cash Flow
To provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we have also disclosed free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less capital expenditures (which consist of purchases of property and equipment and website and software development costs). We have provided a reconciliation below of free cash flow to net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
We have included free cash flow in this report because it is an important indicator of our liquidity as it measures the amount of cash we generate. Accordingly, we believe that free cash flow provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management.
Free cash flow has limitations as a financial measure, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. There are limitations to using non-GAAP financial measures, including that other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate free cash flow differently. Because of these limitations, you should consider free cash flow alongside other financial performance measures, including net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, capital expenditures and our other GAAP results.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities to free cash flow for each of the periods indicated.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s cash was $23.2 million and $22.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our ability to maintain adequate liquidity for our operations is dependent upon a number of factors, including our revenue and earnings, the impacts of COVID-19 on macroeconomic conditions, and our ability to take further cost savings and cash conservation measures if necessary. At this time, we believe that cash flows generated from operations and our cash will be sufficient to meet our anticipated operating cash needs for at least the next twelve months. However, any projections of future cash needs and cash flows are subject to substantial uncertainty. See Item 1A of Part I, “Risk Factors” for a discussion of the factors that may impact our ability to maintain adequate liquidity.
Cash Flow Summary
The change in cash and cash equivalents is as follows:
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from operations, particularly negative working capital.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The net cash provided by operating activities consist of our net income (loss), adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, and share based compensation expense, as well as the effect of changes in working capital and other activities. Operating cash flows can be volatile and are sensitive to many factors, including changes in working capital and our net income (loss). We have a negative working capital model (current liabilities exceed current assets). Any profitable growth in revenue results in incremental cash for the Company, as we receive funds when customers place orders on the website, while accounts payable are paid over a period of time, based on vendor terms, which range on average from one week to eight weeks.
Cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $8.6 million and was driven primarily by the impact of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $7.5 million, cash provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5.5 million, and share based compensation expense of $4.8 million.
Cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020, was $22.0 million and was driven primarily by cash provided by operating assets and liabilities of $13.9 million and the impact of non-cash depreciation and amortization expense of $6.9 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $7.6 million and $7.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, consisting primarily of website and software development costs in both years. Cash used in investing activities varies depending on the timing of technology and product development cycles.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $0.02 million, compared to $6.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily related to a cash payout of $5.6 million for the cancellation of Legacy common stock warrants in the year ended December 31, 2020, that did not reoccur in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Future Cash Requirements
Operating Leases
The Company has several non-cancelable operating leases for facilities and vehicles that expire over the next four years. Rental expense for operating leases was $1,207,969 and $1,220,408 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Future minimum lease payments under non-cancelable operating leases as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
Debt and Capital Structure Activity
We had no borrowings as of December 31, 2021. However, we continually evaluate opportunities to sell additional equity or debt securities, obtain credit facilities, obtain finance and operating lease arrangements, and/or enter into financing obligations for strategic reasons or to further strengthen our financial position. The sale of additional equity or convertible debt securities would be dilutive to our shareholders. In addition, we will, from time to time, consider the acquisition of, or investment in, complementary businesses, products, services, capital infrastructure, and technologies, which might affect our liquidity requirements or cause us to secure additional financing, or issue additional equity or debt securities. There can be no assurance that additional credit lines or financing instruments will be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures consists primarily of website and software development, and the amount and timing thereof varies depending on the timing of technology and product development cycles.
Dividends
The Company has never paid dividends on any of our capital stock and currently intends to retain any future earnings to fund the growth of our business. Any determination to pay dividends in the future will be at the discretion of the Board and will depend on our financial condition, operating results, capital requirements, general business conditions and other factors that the Board may deem relevant.
Cash Taxes
Taxes paid in cash in the year ended December 31, 2021 were $4,209 (none in the year ended December 31, 2020). As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $8,173,388 in federal net operating losses (“NOL”), all remaining from 2019 and onwards and accordingly available to offset future taxable income indefinitely. However, the NOL’s are subject to an 80% of taxable income limitation for all periods after January 1, 2021. The Company does not currently anticipate any significant increase or decrease of the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Critical accounting estimates are those estimates made in accordance with GAAP that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operation of the registrant. These items require the application of management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often because of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. In preparing our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, management has made estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
In preparing these financial statements, management has utilized available information, including our past history, industry standards and the current and projected economic environments, among other factors, in forming its estimates, assumptions and judgments, giving due consideration to materiality. Because the use of estimates is inherent in GAAP, actual results could differ from those estimates. In addition, other companies may utilize different estimates, which may impact comparability of our results of operations to those of companies in similar businesses. A summary of the accounting estimates that management believes are critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements is set forth below. See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for our other significant accounting policies and accounting pronouncements that may impact the Company’s consolidated financial position, earnings, cash flows or disclosures.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASU 2014-09”). This new standard replaced all previous accounting guidance on this topic, eliminated all industry-specific guidance and provided a unified model to determine how revenue is recognized. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. In doing so, companies need to use more judgment and make more estimates than under prior guidance. Judgments include identifying performance obligations in the contract, estimating the amount of consideration to include in the transaction price, and allocating the transaction price to each performance obligation.
In determining the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under its agreements, we perform the following steps: (i) identify contracts with customers; (ii) identify performance obligation(s); (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s); and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation.
We recognize revenue on product sales through our website as the principal in the transaction, as we have concluded we control the product before it is transferred to the customer. We control products when we are the entity responsible for fulfilling the promise to the customer and take responsibility for the acceptability of the goods, assume inventory risk from shipment through the delivery date, have discretion in establishing prices, and select the product vendors of products sold.
Our revenue recognition is impacted by estimates of unshipped and undelivered orders at the end of the applicable reporting period. As we ship a large volume of packages through multiple carriers, actual delivery dates may not always be available, and as such we estimate delivery dates based on historical data. If actual unshipped and undelivered orders are not consistent with our estimates, the impact on our revenue for the applicable reporting period could be material. The Company has two types of customer liabilities: (i) amounts received from customers prior to the delivery of products are recorded as customer deposits on our balance sheets and are recognized as revenue when the products are delivered, amounting to $15,497,857 and $16,185,648 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively and (ii) site credits, which are initially recorded in accrued expenses and are recognized as revenue in the period they are redeemed, amounting to $2,855,998 and $2,422,051 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The outstanding days from the order date of our unshipped and undelivered orders based on our actual determination were, on average, 11.6 days as of December 31, 2021, and 12.7 days as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in time between outstanding days from December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020 was due to our prioritizing vendors with higher inventory levels.
Sales discounts earned by customers at the time of purchase and taxes collected from customers, which are remitted to governmental authorities, are deducted from gross revenue in determining net revenue. Allowances for sales returns are estimated and recorded based on historical experience and reduce product revenue, inclusive of shipping fees, by expected product returns. Net allowances for sales returns as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $738,465 and $1,062,077, respectively.
If actual sales returns are not consistent with our estimates, or if we have to make adjustments, we may incur future losses or gains that could be material.
Adjustments to our estimated net allowances for sales returns over the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Website and Software Development
We capitalize certain costs associated with website and software (technology platform including the catalog) developed for internal use in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350-50, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Website Development Costs, and ASC 350-40, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal Use Software, when both the preliminary project design and the testing stage are completed and management has authorized further funding for the project, which it deems probable of completion and to be used for the function intended. Capitalized costs include amounts directly related to website and software development such as contractors’ fees, payroll and payroll-related costs for employees who are directly associated with and who devote time to our internal-use software. Capitalization of such costs ceases when the project is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Capitalized costs are amortized over a three-year period commencing on the date that the specific module or platform is placed in service. Costs incurred during the preliminary stages of development and ongoing maintenance costs are expensed as incurred. Determinations as to when a project is substantially complete and what constitutes ongoing maintenance require judgments and estimates by management. We periodically review the carrying values of capitalized costs and makes judgments as to ultimate realization.
The amount of capitalized software costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Stock-Based Compensation
Compensation expense related to stock option awards and restricted stock units granted to certain employees, directors and consultants is based on the fair value of the awards on the grant date. If the service inception date precedes the grant date, accrual of compensation cost for periods before the grant date is based on the fair value of the award at the reporting date. In the period in which the grant date occurs, cumulative compensation cost is adjusted to reflect the cumulative effect of measuring compensation cost based on fair value at the grant date rather than the fair value previously used at the service inception date or any subsequent reporting date. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur. The Company recognizes compensation cost related to time-vested options and restricted stock units with graded vesting features on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Compensation cost related to a performance-vesting options and performance-based units, where a performance condition or a market condition that affects vesting exists, is recognized over the shortest of the explicit, implicit, or defined service periods. Compensation cost is adjusted depending on whether or not the performance condition is achieved. If the achievement of the performance condition is probable or becomes probable, the full fair value of the award is recognized. If the achievement of the performance condition is not probable or ceases to be probable, then no compensation cost is recognized or amounts previously recognized are reversed.
Changes in expectations and outcomes different from estimates (such as the achievement or non- achievement of performance conditions) may cause a significant adjustment to earnings in a reporting period as timing and amount of expense recognition is highly dependent on management’s estimate.
Deferred Tax Assets
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and net operating loss carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates for years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by the amount of any tax benefit that, based on available evidence, is not expected to be realized, and a corresponding allowance is established. The current income tax provision reflects the tax consequences of revenues and expenses currently taxable or deductible on the Company’s various income tax returns for the reporting year.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable balances include amounts due from customers. The Company periodically reviews its accounts receivable balances to determine whether an allowance for doubtful accounts is necessary based on an analysis of past due accounts, historical occurrences of credit losses, existing economic conditions, and other circumstances that may indicate that the realization of an account is in doubt. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company determined that an allowance for doubtful accounts was not necessary. As circumstances change, it could result in material adjustments to the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
PARTS iD is not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this report for information on how recent accounting pronouncements have affected or may affect our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.