ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis is presented in five sections as below and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains certain forward-looking information. See “Special Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” above for certain information concerning those forward-looking statements.
•Overview
•Results of Operations
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Outlook
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
OVERVIEW
Ideanomics was incorporated in the State of Nevada on October 19, 2004.
Through December 31, 2021, the Company operates in one segment with two business units, Ideanomics Mobility and Ideanomics Capital. Ideanomics Mobility is driving EV adoption by assembling a synergistic ecosystem of subsidiaries and investments across the three key pillars of EV: Vehicles, Charging, and Energy. These three pillars provide the foundation for Ideanomics Mobility’s planned offering of unique business solutions such as CaaS and VaaS.
Ideanomics Capital is the Company’s fintech business unit, which focuses on leveraging technology and innovation to improve efficiency, transparency, and profitability for the financial services industry.
Immaterial Corrections of Prior Period Financial Statements
The Company has determined that there were immaterial errors in the consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to its accounting of the acquisition of 51% of the ownership interests of Tree Technologies, a Malaysian company engaged in the EV market, in December 2019. The Company determined that it did not recognize a deferred tax liability and consequently, additional goodwill, in the initial purchase price allocation of Tree Technologies as of December 31, 2019, which also resulted in certain income tax benefits not being recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the Company determined that it did not recognize certain measurement period adjustments for the Tree Technologies acquisition as of December 31, 2020 and income tax benefits associated with the impairment of the marketing and distribution agreement acquired in the acquisition during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The Company also determined that a legal agreement the Company entered into whereby the Company took possession of a property in Qingdao, China for no consideration was incorrectly accounted for as a lease in accordance with ASC 842.
Additionally, the Company changed the accounting model for one investment from that of a cost method investment to an equity method investment.
The Company assessed the materiality of these errors in accordance with Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 99, Materiality, and the Company determined that, qualitatively, the amounts, individually and in the aggregate, would have no bearing on the decision-making process of a reasonable investor. Accordingly, the Company is correcting the relevant consolidated financial statements and related footnotes as of and for the year ended December 31, 2020 within these consolidated financial statements.
The Company intends to revise its condensed consolidated financial statements for the periods ended March 31, 2021, June 30, 2021, and September 30, 2021 through subsequent periodic filings.
The following table reflects the impact of the immaterial corrections discussed above on the Company’s previously reported consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
The following table reflects the impact of the immaterial corrections discussed above on the Company’s previously reported consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands:)
The following table reflects the impact of the immaterial corrections discussed above on the Company’s previously reported consolidated statement of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
Liquidity and Going Concern
The accompanying consolidated financial statements of the Company have been prepared assuming the Company will continue as a going concern and in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America. The going concern basis of presentation assumes that the Company will continue in operation one year after the date these financial statements are issued and will be able to realize its assets and discharge its liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. Pursuant to the requirements of the ASC 205, management must evaluate whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for one year from the date these financial statements are issued.
This evaluation does not take into consideration the potential mitigating effect of management’s plans that have not been fully implemented or are not within control of the Company as of the date the financial statements are issued. When substantial doubt exists under this methodology, management evaluates whether the mitigating effect of its plans sufficiently alleviates substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The mitigating effect of management’s plans, however, is only considered if both (1) it is probable that the plans will be effectively implemented within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued, and (2) it is probable that the plans, when implemented, will mitigate the relevant conditions or events that raise substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
The Company operates in one segment with two business units, Ideanomics Mobility and Ideanomics Capital. Ideanomics Mobility has as its mission the acceleration of commercial adoption of electric vehicles. Ideanomics Capital is the Company’s fintech business unit, which focuses on leveraging technology and innovation to improve efficiency, transparency, and profitability for the financial services industry. The Company has two pending acquisitions to add to its Mobility business unit: Energica, an Italian manufacturer of high-performing electric motorcycles, and VIA, a U.S. manufacturer of electric commercial vehicles including Class 2 through Class 5 cargo vans, trucks, and buses.
On September 15, 2021, the Company announced it had entered into an agreement to launch a voluntary conditional tender offer in concert with the founders of Energica for shares of Energica, pursuant to which Ideanomics plans to increase its investment from 20.0% in Energica to approximately 70.0%. The Energica founders shall continue to own 29.0% of Energica.
On February 9, 2022, the Company wired €52.5 million ($60.3 million) to an escrow account in order to facilitate and fund the conditional tender offer. On March 4, 2022, the Company received sufficient tendered shares to reach the 90.0% threshold for the tender to become irrevocable. The transaction received final approval from Italian regulatory authorities and closed on March 14, 2022.
The Company is in the in the process of obtaining required shareholder approval to acquire 100% of VIA. The total aggregate consideration payable in connection with this transaction is equal to $630.0 million, consisting of an upfront payment at the closing of the transaction of $450.0 million, more than $62.9 million of which has been paid to date (prior to closing) in cash as documented in the form of convertible notes, as well as an earnout payment of up to $180.0 million. The remaining consideration for the acquisition of VIA is to be consummated with Ideanomics common stock, rather than cash. However, transaction fees are material and estimated to be $45.0 million, and it is anticipated that VIA will require operational and capital funding of $260.0 million. The Company has filed a registration statement on Form S-4 regarding shareholder approval for the transaction. As of the date of these financial statements, the registration statement had not been declared effective, and the
financial statements contained therein must be updated to December 31, 2021. An amended S-4 statement with the required updated financial statements is anticipated to be filed with the SEC in the fourth quarter of 2022. The terms of the agreement stated that either party may terminate the agreement under specified conditions as of August 31, 2022, however the Company has exercised its option to extend that date to September 30, 2022..
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $269.9 million, of which $11.8 million is held in China and is subject to local foreign exchange regulations in that country, $0.4 million is held at a consolidated entity which requires the minority interest’s permission to withdraw, and additionally two subsidiaries have required capital or liquidity requirements of $2.2 million. The Company also had accounts payable and accrued expenses of $15.6 million, other current liabilities of $7.1 million, current contingent consideration of $0.6 million, lease payments due within the next twelve months of $3.1 million, and payments of short-term and long-term debt due within the next twelve months of $58.1 million. Additionally, the Company has committed to invest in the MDI Fund a total of $25.0 million, of which $20.4 million remains and may be called at any time. The Company had a net loss of $256.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and an accumulated deficit of $605.8 million.
As of June 30, 2022, the Company’s principal source of liquidity is its unrestricted cash balance in the amount of $85.5 million of which $12.2 million is held by the Company’s subsidiaries located and China and is subject to foreign exchange control regulations and $2.2 million is minimum regulatory capital required to be held by US operating companies - we do not consider cash balances held in China or required minimum regulatory capital to be part of the Company’s liquid cash balances. The Company had negative cash flow from operating activities of $81.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2022. The Company has experienced greater net losses and negative cash flows from operating and investing activities in the third quarter consistent with its business plan for ongoing activities and planned acquisitions. As of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, securing additional financing is in progress, and as such management has limited the extent to which it is taking actions to delay, scale back, or abandon future expenditures. As such, management’s actions to preserve an adequate level of liquidity for a period extending twelve months from the date of the filing of this Form 10-K are no longer sufficient on their own without additional financing, to mitigate the conditions raising substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. We currently do not have adequate cash to meet our short or long-term needs. In the event additional capital is raised, it may have a dilutive effect on our existing stockholders.
The Company’s ability to raise capital is critical. On September 1, 2022, the company entered into a SEPA with YA II PN. The Company will be able to sell up to sixty million of the Company’s shares of common stock, par value $0.001 per share (the at the Company’s request any time during the P36M months following the date of the SEPA’s entrance into force. The shares would be purchased at 95.0% of the Market Price (as defined below) and would be subject to certain limitations, including that YA could not purchase any shares that would result in it owning more than 5.0% of the Company’s common stock. Market Price is the lowest daily VWAP of the Common Shares during the three consecutive trading days commencing on the advance notice date, other than the daily VWAP on any excluded days. VWAP means, for any trading day, the daily volume weighted average price of the Common Shares for such trading day on the principal market during regular trading hours as reported by Bloomberg L.P. Pursuant to the SEPA, the Company is required to register all shares which YA may acquire. The Company agreed to file with the SEC a Registration Statement (as defined in the SEPA) registering all of the shares of common stock that are to be offered and sold to YA pursuant to the SEPA. The Company is required to have a Registration Statement declared effective by the SEC before it can raise any funds using the SEPA. Unless earlier terminated as provided under the SEPA, the SEPA shall terminate automatically on the earliest of (i) the first day of the month next following the 36-month anniversary of the Effective Date or (ii) the date on which the YA shall have made payment of Advances (as defined in the SEPA) pursuant to the SEPA for the Common Shares equal to the Commitment Amount (as defined in the SEPA).
The Company believes that its current level of cash and cash equivalents are not sufficient to fund continuing operations and the addition of the one planned acquisition in various stages of completion. The Company will need to bring in new capital to support its growth and, as evidenced from its successful capital raising activities in 2020 and 2021, believes it has the ability to continue to do so. However, there can be no assurance that this will occur. As described in Note 15(a), on October 25, 2021 the Company executed a security purchase agreement with YA II PN, whereby the Company issued a convertible note of $75.0 million, and received aggregate gross proceeds of $75.0 million. The note is scheduled to mature on October 24, 2022 and bears interest at an annual rate of 4.0%, which would increase to 18.0% in the event of default. The note has a fixed conversion price of $1.88. The conversion price is not subject to adjustment except for subdivisions or combinations of common stock. Commencing April 1, 2022, the Company has the obligation to redeem $8.3 million per month, against the unpaid principal. This amount may be reduced by any conversions by YA II or optional redemptions made by the Company. As of December 31, 2021, after the conversion of principal in the amount of $17.5 million, $57.5 million remained outstanding.
The Company has various vehicles through which it could raise a limited amount of equity funding, however, these are subject to market conditions which are not within management’s control. As our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q was not filed timely, we will not be Form S-3 eligible until August 9, 2023, which could make fund raising more difficult or more expensive. Management continues to seek to raise additional funds through the issuance of equity, mezzanine or debt securities. As we seek additional sources of financing, there can be no assurance that such financing would be available to us on favorable terms or at all. Our ability to obtain additional financing in the debt and equity capital markets is subject to several factors, including market and economic conditions, our performance and investor sentiment with respect to us and our business and industry. These factors individually and collectively raise doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. We currently do not have adequate cash to meet our short or long-term needs. In the event additional capital is raised, it may have a dilutive effect on our existing stockholders.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
Our business is expected to be impacted by both macroeconomic and Ideanomics-specific factors. The following factors have been part of the transformation of the Company which affected the results of our operations in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
•Our ability to transform our business and to meet internal or external expectations of future performance. In connection with this transformation, we are in the process of considerable changes, which include assembling a new management team in the United States and overseas, reconfiguring our business structure, continuing to further enhance our controls, procedures, and oversight during this transformation, and expanding our mission and business lines for continued growth. It is uncertain whether these efforts will prove beneficial or whether we will be able to develop the necessary business models, infrastructure and systems to support our businesses. To succeed, among other things, we will need to have or hire the right talent to execute our business strategy. Market acceptance of new product and service offerings will be dependent in part on our ability to include functionality and usability that address customer requirements, and optimally price our products and services to meet customer demand and cover our costs.
•Our ability to remain competitive. We will continue to face intense competition: these new technologies are constantly evolving, and our competitors may introduce new platforms and solutions that are superior to ours. In addition, our competitors may be able to adapt more quickly to new technologies or may be able to devote greater resources to the development, marketing and sale of their products than we can. We may never establish and maintain a competitive position in the hybrid financing and logistics management businesses.
•The fluctuation in earnings resulting from acquisitions, strategic equity investments, the formation of joint ventures, and in-licenses of technology. Our results of operations may fluctuate from period to period based on our entry into new transactions to expand our business. In addition, while we intend to contribute cash and other assets to our investments, we do not intend for our holding company to conduct significant research and development activities. In general, we intend research and development activities to be conducted by our technology partners and licensors. These fluctuations in growth or costs and in our investments and partnerships may contribute to significant fluctuations in the results of our operations.
Effects of COVID-19
COVID-19 is an infectious disease cause by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus. The disease was first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, the capital of China’s Hubei province, and has since spread globally, resulting in the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. As of August 31, 2022, over 607.6 million cases had been reported across the globe, resulting in 6.5 million deaths.
The spread of COVID-19 has caused significant disruption to society as a whole, including the workplace. The resulting impact on the global supply chain has disrupted most aspects of national and international commerce, with government-mandated social distancing measures imposing stay-at-home and work-from-home orders in almost every country. The effects of social distancing have shut down significant parts of the local, regional, national, and international economies, for limited or extended periods of time, with the exception of government designated essential services.
In many parts of the world, stay-at-home and work-from-home orders were relaxed during the summer of 2020 as the effects of the Coronavirus appeared to lessen, and economic activity began to recover. However, commencing in the autumn and fall of 2020, the U.S. as well as countries in Europe, South America and Asia began to experience an increase in new COVID-19 cases, and in some cases local, state, and national governments began to reinstate restrictive measures to stem the spread of the virus. The U.S. and other countries also experienced an increase in new COVID-19 cases after the fall and winter holiday
season, with new, more infectious variants of COVID-19 identified. Various vaccines have been developed, with vaccination programs in effect worldwide, though reaching acceptable levels for worldwide immunization against COVID-19 remains challenging at the local, regional and global level.
The future effects of the virus are difficult to predict, due to uncertainty about the course of the virus, different variants that may evolve, and the supply of the vaccine on a local, regional, and global basis, as well as the ability to implement vaccination programs in a short time frame.
The Company does not anticipate significant adverse effects on its operations’ revenue as compared to its business plan in the near- or mid-term, although the future effects of COVID-19 may result in regional restrictive measures which may constrain the Company’s operations, and supply chain shortages of various materials may have a negative effect on our EV sales or production capacity in the longer-term. The Company's Tree Technologies business, which focuses on the sale of motorbikes in the ASEAN region, is experiencing disruption in its operations as a result the continued lockdowns in the region, which have adversely impacted its ability to fulfill committed orders.
The Company continues to monitor the overall situation with COVID-19 and its effects on local, regional and global economies.
Information about segments
The Company’s chief operating decision maker has been identified as the chief executive officer, who reviews consolidated results when making decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance of the Company. Therefore, the Company operates in one segment with two business units: Ideanomics Mobility and Ideanomics Capital.
Our Unconsolidated Equity Investments
The investments where the Company exercises significant influence, but not control, are classified as long-term equity investments and accounted for using the equity method. Under the equity method, the investment is initially recorded at cost and adjusted for our share of undistributed earnings or losses of the investee. Investment losses are recognized until the investment is written down to nil, provided that we do not guarantee the investee’s obligations or we are not committed to provide additional funding. Refer to Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Taxation
United States
Ideanomics, Inc. and its US subsidiaries are subject to the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. Prior to 2021, no provision for income taxes has been provided as none of the companies then part of the company had taxable profit since inception. At the acquisition of Grapevine in 2018, deferred tax liabilities were recorded relating to intangible assets recorded for financial reporting purposes but not recognized for income tax purposes. The intangible assets consequently could not provide deductible amortization expense for income tax purposes. The deferred tax liabilities were recorded on the acquisition date to the extent that they could not be offset by usable NOL carryforwards acquired in the acquisition. These deferred tax liabilities were reduced, providing an income tax benefit, to the extent that the intangible assets were reduced by amortization expense and additional NOL carryforwards were created to offset the liabilities. These benefits include $0.1 million in 2019. The 2019 amount related to activities in the first two quarters of 2019. Ideanomics increased its ownership in Grapevine such that beginning with the third quarter of 2019, the result of which was that Grapevine activities would be included in the consolidated tax return of Ideanomics, Inc. As a result, the valuation allowance provided against Ideanomics’ deferred tax assets were reduced by $0.4million, the amount of Grapevine’s remaining deferred tax liabilities as that portion of Ideanomics’ NOL carryovers could then be utilized to offset these liabilities.
At the acquisition of each of Timios, WAVE, US Hybrid and Solectrac in 2021, the companies immediately became includable in the consolidated federal tax return of Ideanomics. WAVE will be included in the state tax returns of Ideanomics. In the case of each acquisition, intangible assets were recognized for financial reporting purposes that were not recognized for income tax purposes. This, in combination with some smaller temporary differences of the four acquired businesses, resulted in the recognition of $12.2 million deferred tax liabilities. The federal deferred tax liabilities, and the WAVE state deferred tax liabilities created, resulted in the valuation allowance on Ideanomics’ deferred tax assets being reduced by a similar amount. Ideanomics’ net deferred tax assets had previously been judged to be more likely than not to be unable to reduce the Company’s income tax liability and consequently were completely offset by a valuation allowance. Once the acquisitions of four acquired
businesses occurred, a portion of Ideanomics’ deferred tax assets could be utilized in offsetting most of the newly acquired deferred tax liabilities, this resulted in a one-time income tax benefit of $10.1 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, there was an income tax benefit of $11.8 million, of which $11.4 million was from operations in the US. This consisted principally of the $10.1 million one-time benefit. In addition, Timios, US Hybrid and Solectrac have taxable income or loss reported on certain separate state tax returns and consequently have related state income tax expense or benefit. For the year ended December 31, 2021 the three companies have losses, which results in state income tax benefits consisting of those losses being used to reduce the state deferred tax liabilities recognized in the acquisitions. The net state income tax (benefit) for Timios, US Hybrid and Solectrac was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.There was an additional $0.1 million federal income tax benefit, principally consisting of the reduction, through amortization or impairment of intangible assets, of federal deferred tax liabilities recognized in acquisitions that had not allowed for the release of Ideanomics’ valuation allowances.
TCJA includes provision for GILTI under which taxes on foreign income are imposed on the excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of certain foreign subsidiaries. TCJA also enacted the BEAT under which taxes are imposed on certain base eroding payments to related foreign companies, subject to certain requirements.
Based on 2021, 2020 and 2019 financial results, the company has determined that there is no GILTI or BEAT tax liability.
In addition, the TCJA now entitles U.S. companies that owns 10.0% or more of a foreign corporation a 100% dividends-received deduction for the foreign-source portion of dividends paid by such foreign corporation. Also, NOLs arising after December 31, 2017 are deductible only to the extent of 80.0% of the taxpayer’s taxable income, and may be carried forward indefinitely but generally not allowed to be carried back.
Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands
Under current laws of the Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands, the Company is not subject to tax on its income or capital gains. In addition, dividend payments are not subject to withholding tax in the Cayman Islands or British Virgin Islands.
Hong Kong
The Company’s subsidiaries incorporated in Hong Kong are subject to Profits Tax of 16.5%. Tax expense of $0.1 million was recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019 relating to the income on one Hong Kong subsidiary, subsequently disposed of, relating to a gain recorded on the sale of VIE related assets. All other Hong Kong subsidiaries’ activities relate to support and ownership of businesses outside of Hong Kong, and consequently their expenses do not create operating loss carryovers.
The PRC
Under the PRC’s EIT Law, the company’s Chinese subsidiaries are subject to an EIT of 25.0%.
The Company’s future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as tax legislation, geographic composition of its pre-tax income and non-tax deductible expenses incurred. The Company’s management regularly monitors these legislative developments to determine if there are changes in the statutory income tax rate.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, one of the Company’s PRC subsidiaries incurred a tax obligation of $0.6 million relating to its EV sales. The entity did not have operating loss carryovers and is not able to utilize the loss carryovers of other subsidiaries. The transactions under which the VIE agreements were terminated resulted in gains to one VIE entity, prior to deconsolidation, which triggered a tax expense of $0.2 million. Other PRC entities either had losses that created additional operating loss carryovers, where the related deferred tax assets were offset by a valuation allowance, or had income that would have resulted in a current tax liability, except that they were able to offset those liabilities with operating loss carryovers from prior years. The use of prior year carryovers, in all cases for which the related deferred tax assets all had previously been offset by a valuation allowance, avoided $0.2 million of income tax expense.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, all of the Company’s PRC subsidiaries incurred losses that created operating loss carryovers. Certain of the subsidiaries had previously established operating loss carryovers expired as PRC loss carryovers are generally allowed to be carried over five years. The deferred tax assets related to the operating loss carryovers have been fully offset by valuation allowances meaning that there was no income tax expense or benefit for the Company’s PRC subsidiaries these years.
Malaysia
At the acquisition of Tree Technologies at the end of 2019, the Company recognized approximately $8.2 million of deferred tax liabilities related to land-use rights and a distribution and marketing agreement with carrying values well in excess of their tax basis. During the year ended December 31, 2020, Tree Technologies recorded a $3.3 million income tax benefit. This resulted principally from a $3.1 million benefit from amortization and eventual impairment, of the distribution and marketing agreement which resulted in the reversal of the deferred tax liabilities related to the agreement. The remaining $0.2 million benefit resulted from the operating losses creating carryovers that could offset part of the remaining deferred tax liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 Tree Technologies recorded a $0.4 million deferred tax benefit. This benefit resulted from operating loss carryovers part of which were able to offset previously recorded deferred tax liabilities and part of which were offset by a valuation allowance.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (USD in thousands, except per share amounts)
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (USD in thousands, except per share amounts)
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Revenues (USD in thousands)
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $114.1 million as compared to $26.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $87.3 million. The increase was mainly due to the Company’s acquisition of Timios, which generated revenue of $72.7 million from the acquisition closing date through December 31, 2021. No revenue was generated related to title and escrow services for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company earned revenues of $31.1 million from sales of EV products as compared to $19.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $11.7 million. The increase was primarily due to an increase in EV product sales in China and incremental revenue from acquisitions made in the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenues from the Charging, battery and powertrain products and services product lines were generated almost exclusively from revenues generated by the acquisitions made in the year ended December 31, 2021. No revenue was generated from the sale of Combustion engine vehicles for the year ended December 31, 2021.
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $26.8 million as compared to $44.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $17.8 million, or 40%. The decrease was due to there being no revenue generated from Digital asset management services in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $40.7 million in the prior year. The Company generated $19.5 million from the sale of EV products as compared to $2.7 million from the sale of EV services in the prior year, a shift of category and an increase of $16.8 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company earned revenues of $5.2 million from the sale of combustion engine vehicles; the sale of combustion engine vehicles is not the Company's primary focus, however, from time to time, the Company will sell combustion engine vehicles if a client places an order. During 2020, the Company made its first sales of charging and battery equipment. Revenues from the digital advertising services provided by Grapevine were $1.6 million as compared to $1.2 million in the prior year, an increase of $0.5 million or 39%. Grapevine was considered a non-core asset for Ideanomics.
Cost of revenue (USD in thousands)
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Cost of revenues was $90.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cost of revenues increased by $66.2 million. The increase was mainly due to the Company’s acquisition of Timios, which had recorded cost of revenues of $48.7 million related to title and escrow service from the acquisition closing date through December 31, 2021. No cost related to title and escrow services were incurred for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to an increase in EV product sales in China and incremental revenue from acquisitions made in the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenues from the Charging, battery and powertrain products and services product lines were generated almost exclusively from revenues generated by the acquisitions made in the year ended December 31, 2021. No revenue and associated cost was generated related Combustion engine vehicles for the year ended December 31, 2021.
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Cost of revenues was $24.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The cost of revenues increased by $23.2 million. From a comparability perspective, the cost of revenue during 2019 is not indicative of the business in 2020. The cost of revenue during 2019 was primarily associated with the digital asset management services and creator payments from the Grapevine business. The cost of revenue from the sale of EVs was $18.0 million; there was no cost of revenue recorded for the sale of EV services during 2019 as the company acted as agent in the sale of EVs in 2019 and consequently revenues were recorded on “net” basis without any corresponding cost of revenues. Cost of revenues from the sale of combustion engine vehicles was $5.1 million; there were no sales of combustion engine vehicles in the prior year. Cost of revenues for charging and batteries was $0.5 million; there were no sales of charging and batteries in the prior year. The cost of revenues for the digital advertising services provided by Grapevine were $1.1 million as compared to $1.0 million in the prior year, an increase of $0.1 million or 6.8%.
Gross profit (USD in thousands)
n/m = Not Meaningful - represents percentage changes, in terms of absolute value over 100%.
Gross profit ratio
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $23.2 million, as compared to gross profit of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gross profit ratio for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 20.4%, while in 2020, it was 8.0%. The increase was mainly due to the high gross margin from sales of title and escrow services for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.1 million, as compared to $43.1 million during the same period in 2019, a decrease of $41.1 million. The decrease was primarily due to revenue from digital asset management services in 2019 which was not repeated in 2020 and had a low cost of revenue. The gross profit earned from the sale of EV products was $1.4 million as compared to $2.7 million from the sale of EV Services in the prior year, a decrease of $1.3 million. The Company acted in an agent capacity in the sale of EVs in 2019 and consequentially the revenue was recorded as a service on a "net" basis without any cost of revenue which resulted in a higher gross profit and gross margin.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Our selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $72.8 million as compared to $32.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $40.4 million. The increase was principally due to costs related to the operations of the Timios, WAVE, Solectrac and US Hybrid acquisitions completed in the current year, stock based compensation expense related to RSU grants, increased compensation, payroll tax and benefit expense arising from the hiring undertaken to expand the business and built out the corporate infrastructure and associated recruitment expense, partially offset by lower operating expenses in China and lower rent expense due to the termination of the company’s lease on its headquarters property in New York City due to Covid 19.
Our selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.4 million as compared to
$24.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $7.5 million. The majority of the increase was due to increased stock based compensation expense, bonuses and sales commissions and salaries resulting from the increase in employee numbers and sales activity, and bad debt expense which was partially offset by lower spending on travel and entertainment due to the restrictions on travel and entertaining arising from COVID-19 and lower severance expense.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.8 million as compared to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 a decrease of $0.9 million. The expense for the prior year included costs related to technical development and design into EV trucks, there was no expense research related to EV trucks in the current year. Expense in the current period was primarily incurred in connection with EV motorbikes in Malaysia, and research and development activities in WAVE , Solectrac and US Hybrid. No research and development expense was incurred in 2019.
Professional fees
Professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $34.7 million as compared to $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $22.2 million. The increase in professional fees was principally related to the merger and acquisition activity undertaken during 2021 including fees related to due diligence, post-merger integration activities, regulatory filings and fund raising activity, expenses incurred by affiliates acquired during 2021 which did not exist in the prior year, increased fees incurred in the general operation of the business reflecting the heightened level of business activity, costs incurred for audit and other regulatory filings and advice on patent and intellectual property matters.
Professional fees for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $12.5 million as compared to $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $6.7 million. The majority of this increase was due to increased expense for investor relations programs, legal fee expense related to regulatory inquires, fund raising and merger and acquisition activities, and class action lawsuits. Expenses for consultants and contractors increased as a result of the Company's continued expansion.
Asset Impairments and Goodwill Impairments
The following table summarizes the impairment losses recorded in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, (in thousands):
Additional information related to the impairment losses recorded in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 is as follows:
Year Ended December 31, 2021
•The Company recorded impairment loss of $13.7 million related to Timios lender relationship and trade name and $5.8 million related to Timios goodwill.
•The Company recorded impairment loss of $23.9 million related to WAVE patents and trademarks and $35.7million related to WAVE goodwill.
•The Company recorded impairment loss of $7.0 million related to US Hybrid patents and trademarks and $42.2 million related to US Hybrid goodwill.
•The Company recorded impairment loss of $6.0 million related to Solectrac patents and trademarks and $17.7million related to Solectrac goodwill.
•The Company recorded impairment loss of $4.5 million as the Company fully impaired the cost method investments in two entities.
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $0.1 million related to ROU assets due to the closure of one Timios office and one China office.
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $15.8 million related to an available for sale securities.
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $7.9 million related to an equity investment.
Year Ended December 31, 2020
•The Company recorded impairment losses of $16.7 million related to its equity method investments, Glory and Intelligenta. In the fourth quarter of 2020, Tree Technologies obtained its own domestic manufacturing license, and determined that it would not purchase vehicles from Tree Manufacturing, Glory’s subsidiary, and that the investment in Glory was therefore impaired. The Company evaluated the business prospects of Intelligenta in light of the continued political tensions between China and the U.S., and determined that its business prospects had diminished.
•The Company recorded impairment losses of $20.3 million related to intangible assets:
◦An impairment loss of $12.5 million related to Tree Technologies marketing and distribution agreement with Tree Manufacturing after Tree manufacturing obtained its own domestic manufacturing license, and determined that it would not purchase vehicles from Tree Manufacturing.
◦Impairment losses of $7.1 million related to DBOT’s intangible assets, its continuing membership agreement and customer list.
◦An impairment loss of $0.8 million related to Grapevine’s influencer network, after determining that the attrition rate of the influencer network was higher than expected.
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $9.3 million related to the goodwill of its consolidated subsidiary, DBOT, and recorded an impairment loss of $8.8 million for Tree Technologies, after evaluating its business prospects.
•The Company recorded impairment losses of $6.4 million related to right of use assets after ceasing to use the related real estate premises.
•The Company recorded impairment losses of $3.3 million related to its investment in Fintech Village, and recorded an impairment loss of $2.0 million for the related asset retirement cost.
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $0.2 million related to a cost method investment after its price per share declined in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2019
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $61.1 million in the fourth quarter of 2019 related to GTB which the Company had received in connections with a services agreement and an asset purchase agreement with GT Dollar Pte, a minority shareholder at the time of the transaction. On October 29, 2019, GTB had an unexpected significant decline in quoted price, from $17.00 to $1.84. This decline continued through the fourth quarter of 2019, and on December 31, 2019 the quoted price was $0.23. As a result of this decline in quoted price, and its inability to convert GTB into other digital currencies which were more liquid, or fiat currency, the Company performed an impairment analysis and recorded an impairment loss.
•The Company recorded a $13.1 million impairment loss in Glory, an equity method investment, in the fourth quarter of 2019, when it became apparent that Glory’s subsidiary, Tree Manufacturing, would not receive the land use rights to 250 acres of vacant land and other assets.
•The Company recorded a $5.7 million impairment loss related to a secure mobile financial information, social, and messaging platform that has been designed for streamlining financial-based communication for professional and retail users. Management determined these assets had no future use and recorded an impairment loss.
•The Company recorded impairment losses of $3.0 million in two non-marketable equity investments after management evaluated their performance.
•The Company recorded an impairment loss of $2.3 million in the third quarter of 2019 in connection with four buildings in Fintech Village, which were later demolished, and recorded an impairment loss of $1.5 million for the related asset retirement cost.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration, net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, change in fair value of contingent consideration, net of $(9.6) million represents the remeasurement gain of $1.6 million of the contingent consideration payable to the former Solectrac shareholder and remeasurement gain of $8.0 million of the contingent consideration payable to the Tree Technology shareholders.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, change in fair value of contingent consideration, net of $(5.5) million represents the remeasurement loss of $1.5 million of the contingent consideration payable to the former DBOT shareholder and remeasurement gain of $7.0 million of the contingent consideration payable to the Tree Technology shareholders.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, change in fair value of contingent consideration, net of $5.1 million represents the remeasurement of the contingent consideration payable to the former DBOT shareholders due to the decline in Ideanomics’ stock price.
Litigation settlements
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an expense of $5.4 million related to settlement of litigation. The Rudani shareholder class action lawsuit was settled for $5.0 million. There were no such litigation settlements in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.1 million as compared to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.8 million. The increase was mainly due to the increase in amortization expense recorded by Timios, WAVE, Solectrac and US Hybrid, which were acquired in 2021.
Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $5.3 million as compared to $2.2 million for 2019, an increase of $3.1 million. The increase was mainly due to the increase in amortization expense arising from the shortening of the useful life on an IP intangible asset.
Loss from operations
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $259.6 million as compared to loss of $95.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 an increase of $163.9 million. The increased loss from operations included the operating loss from Timios, WAVE, Solectrac and US Hybrid, which were acquired in 2021 partially offset by the gain resulting from a change in the fair value of contingent consideration.
Loss from operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $95.6 million as compared to loss of $68.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 an increase of $27.1 million. The increased Loss from Operations is due to number of factors, the gross profit for 2019 included revenues from digital asset services which had a gross profit margin of almost 100% which was not repeated in 2020, increased expenses for selling, general and administrative, research and development, professional fees, and depreciation and amortization expense partially offset by lower impairment charges and a gain resulting from a change in the fair value of contingent consideration.
Interest income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.5 million as compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.4 million. The increase was mainly due to the income recognized from the investment in notes receivables, while earlier years interest income was generated primarily on deposits held in banks.
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.1 million as compared to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The interest income for the year ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 mainly represents the income generated from deposit in banks.
Interest expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.1 million as compared to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $13.9 million. The decrease was mainly due to the amortization of BCFs of $14.5 million associated with the convertible notes in the year ended December 31, 2020 which did not arise in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.1 million as compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $10.4 million. The increase was primarily due to increased expense related to amortization of BCFs arising from the modification of convertible notes. The following table summarizes the breakdown of the interest expense (in thousands):
Expense due to conversion of notes
There were no such conversions for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Conversion expense of $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the expense recognized as a result of the reduction of conversion price to induce the conversion of the convertible notes from related parties.
There were no such conversions for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain (loss) on extinguishment of debt
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a gain of $0.3 million on WAVE Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on the extinguishment of debt of $8.9 million, as it paid a promissory note prior to its scheduled maturity. The Company also settled several outstanding balances with vendors and recorded a gain of $0.5 million.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $3.9 million which resulted from modifications made to various convertible notes.
(Loss) gain on disposal of subsidiaries, net
The following table summarizes gains and (losses) recorded in “(Loss) gain on disposal of subsidiaries, net” in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Gain (loss) on disposal of subsidiaries was a loss of $1.3 million for year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a gain of $0.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Gain (loss) on disposal of subsidiaries was a gain of $0.3 million for year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss of $1.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Gain on remeasurement of investment
Gain on remeasurement of investment was $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 which resulted from the remeasurement of the Company's investment in Solectrac to its fair value as of the date the Company obtained the remainder of the Solectrac shares outstanding and commenced consolidating Solectrac.
There were no such remeasurements for the year ended December 31, 2020.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company increased its ownership in DBOT and consolidated DBOT in July 2019. Immediately prior to the consummation of the acquisition, the Company’s investment in DBOT had a fair value of $3.1 million, and the Company recorded a loss of $3.2 million to record the investment in DBOT to its fair value.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $6.6 million for year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $5.3 million. The decrease was mainly due to 2020 income being unusually high from lease early termination settlements, which includes a gain of $4.9 million recognized from the settlement agreements to terminate leases early for the New York City headquarters at 55 Broadway and a gain of $0.8 million from the DBOT lease settlement with the landlord
Other income (expense), net was an income of $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a loss of $0.4 million for the year ended, an increase of $7.0 million. The increase was mainly due to a gain of $4.9 million recognized from the settlement agreements to terminate leases early for the New York City headquarters at 55 Broadway a gain of $0.8 million from the DBOT lease settlement with the landlord in addition to sublease income $0.1 million in year ended December 31, 2020.
Income tax (expense) benefit
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the income tax benefit of $11.8 million is mainly due to $10.1 million of one-time benefits relating to acquisitions, net state income benefit of $1.2 million for recently acquired entities, and a $0.1 million of other U.S. federal income tax benefit and a $0.4 million deferred tax benefit from our Tree Technologies, our Malaysian subsidiary.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, the income tax benefit of $3.3 million income tax benefit is from Tree Technologies. It consist of $3.1 million benefit from amortization and eventual impairment, of a distribution and marketing agreement which resulted in the reversal of the deferred tax liabilities related to the agreement, and $0.2 million benefit resulted from the operating losses creating carryovers that could offset part of Tree Technologies’ remaining deferred tax liabilities. For the year ended December 31, 2020, other than the $3.3 million Tree Technologies benefit, income tax expense is nil because of NOL and deferred tax assets related to the NOLs had been offset by a valuation allowance. The Company had established a 100.0% valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets due to its history of pre-tax losses and the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
In the year ended December 31, 2019, one PRC subsidiary, generated income related to EV sales that resulted in $0.6 million income tax expense, two Ideanomics China entities, that have since been disposed of, generated a one-time gain the required triggering a tax expense of $0.3 million while the company had a one-time deferred tax benefit of $0.5 million related to the acquisition of Grapevine. Other than these matters, resulting in a net income tax expense of $0.4 million, there were no other income tax expense because of NOL and deferred tax assets related to the NOL had been offset by a valuation allowance. The Company had established a 100.0% valuation allowance against its net deferred tax assets due to its history of pre-tax losses and the likelihood that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Impairment of and equity in loss of equity method investees
Impairment of and equity in loss of equity method investees was $11.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $16.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $5.3 million. The decrease was mainly due to
impairments losses of $16.7 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an impairment loss of $7.9 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Impairment of and equity in loss of equity method investments for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.8 million as compared to $13.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $3.1 million. The increase was mainly due to impairments losses of $16.7 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to an impairment loss of $13.1 million recorded in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net (income)/loss attributable to non-controlling interest
Net (income)/loss attributable to non-controlling interests was a $0.7 million loss in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a $10.5 million loss for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is mainly due to there is significant loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 from Tree Technology.
Net (income)/loss attributable to non-controlling interests was a $10.5 million loss in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to a net income of $0.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The loss in 2020 is primarily due to net loss from Tree Technology. The gain in 2019 is primarily due to the taxis commission revenue recognized in an entity in which we have a 50.1% ownership.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and cash equivalents of $269.9 million. Approximately $27.9 million was held in accounts outside of the United States, primarily in Hong Kong and the PRC.
Due to the strict regulations governing the transfer of funds held in the PRC to other jurisdictions, the Company does not consider funds held in its PRC entities to be available to fund operations and investment outside of the PRC and consequently does not include them when evaluating the liquidity needs of its businesses operating outside of the PRC.
Timios holds various regulatory licenses related to its business as a title insurance agency and is required to hold a minimum cash balance of $2.0 million. As a broker-dealer, JUSTLY has minimum capital requirements. JUSTLY had cash of $0.2 million as of December 31, 2021, which was necessary for JUSTLY to meet its minimum capital requirements. The Company consolidates a 51.0% owned investment in an entity which is based in Singapore. This entity had cash of $0.4 million as of December 31, 2021. The agreement of the Company’s partner in this entity is required prior to disbursement of this entity’s funds for certain defined expenditures.
As of June 30, 2022, the Company’s principal source of liquidity is its unrestricted cash balance in the amount of $85.5 million of which $12.2 million is held by the Company’s subsidiaries located and China and is subject to foreign exchange control regulations and $2.2 million is minimum regulatory capital required to be held by US operating companies - we do not consider cash balances held in China or required minimum regulatory capital to be part of the Company’s liquid cash balances. The Company had negative cash flow from operating activities of $81.8 million for the six months ended June 30, 2022. The Company has experienced greater net losses and negative cash flows from operating and investing activities in the third quarter consistent with its business plan for ongoing activities and planned acquisitions. As of the date of the filing of this Form 10-K, securing additional financing is in progress, and as such management has limited the extent to which it is taking actions to delay, scale back, or abandon future expenditures. As such, management’s actions to preserve an adequate level of liquidity for a period extending twelve months from the date of the filing of this Form 10-K are no longer sufficient on their own without additional financing, to mitigate the conditions raising substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. We currently do not have adequate cash to meet our short or long-term needs. In the event additional capital is raised, it may have a dilutive effect on our existing stockholders.
We have short-term debt obligations of $58.1 million and lease obligations of $3.1 million which come due in the year ending December 31, 2021. We currently have no long-term debt obligations, and have lease obligations of $9.6 million which come due from the years ending December 31, 2022 through 2030.
The following table provides a summary of net cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $75.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to cash used in operating activities of $41.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily due to (1) an increase in net loss from $111.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 to $256.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021, (2) total non-cash adjustments to net loss were $190.8 million and $81.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively; and (3) total changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions resulted in a decrease of $9.6 million and $11.3 million in cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash used in operating activities increased by $27.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to (1) an increase in net loss from $96.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019 to $111.6 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, (2) total non-cash adjustments to net loss was $81.4 million and $77.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively; and (3) total changes in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions resulted in a decrease of $11.3 million and an increase of $6.1 million in cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $220.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to expenditures incurred for the acquisitions of Timios, WAVE, Solectrac and US Hybrid, the investments in Energica, TM2, VIA, the MDI Fund and FNL, the acquisition of the convertible notes with Silk EV, VIA and InoBat, and partially offset by the proceeds from the disposal of Fintech Village. Cash used in investing activities was $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the investment to Solectrac. Cash used in investing activities was $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the payment of $1.8 million for Fintech Village.
Financing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received $399.3 million from financing activities versus $208.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received $196.8 million from the issuance of common stock and the exercise of stock options, $295.0 million from the issuance of convertible notes and made repayments of $88.8 million, including a $80.0 million convertible note and a $8.8 million redeemable non-controlling interest. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company received $191.4 million from the issuance of common stock and the exercise of warrants and options, $27.0 million from the issuance of convertible notes, $7.1 million from noncontrolling shareholders contribution and made repayments of $17.5 million, primarily of a $12.0 million convertible note and other borrowings. For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company received $9.1 million from the issuance of convertible notes, and $2.8 million from the issuance of common stock.
The Company expects to continue to raise both equity and debt finance to support the Company’s investment plans and operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance sheet arrangements are obligations the Company has with nonconsolidated entities related to transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements. The Company holds interests in investments accounted for under the equity method of accounting. The Company does not control these investments and therefore does not consolidate them.
We do not have other off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity or capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to an investor in our securities.
Seasonality
The Company expects that EV orders and sales will be influenced by the amount and timing of budgeted expenditure by its customers. Typically, the Company would expect to see higher sales at the start of the year when companies start executing on their capital programs and at the end of the year when companies are spending any surplus or uncommitted budget before the new budget cycle commences. The Company’s EV businesses are in the early stage of their development and consequently do not have sufficient trading histories to project seasonal buying patterns with any degree of confidence. Revenues generated by the Company’s Timios Title Agency business are impacted by the volume and timing of orders, typically the first quarter of the year shows a decline in revenues reflecting the lower orders in fourth quarter of the year due to the impact of holidays.
OUTLOOK
The Company has two distinct business units, Ideanomics Mobility and Ideanomics Capital. Each is focused on the growth opportunity, fueled by technological and legislative disruption, taking place in the automotive, energy, and financial services industries. Ideanomics Mobility has as its mission the acceleration of commercial adoption of electric vehicles. Ideanomics Capital focuses on providing a range of financing programs in support of the sale of EVs and associated charging and energy storage systems by Ideanomics Mobility. The Company believes these two business units provide an opportunity for the Company to benefit from the value creation that can be achieved in the short, medium, and long-term through establishing competitive products and services which can enable the capture of market share sufficient to sustain profitable operations.
IDEANOMICS MOBILITY
The Ideanomics Mobility business unit seeks to accelerate the commercial adoption of electric vehicles. The Company’s EV and technology acquisitions during 2021completed the foundation for the development of four product-focused verticals comprised of off-highway, two-wheeler, on-highway, and energy and charging services. This integrated offering helps support business progress toward its mission of offering fleet operators a range of vehicles and associated charging systems through a single procurement partner.
By combining leading EV technologies, products, knowledge, and capabilities across the Company’s four product verticals, Ideanomics anticipates that it will be able to rapidly develop unique zero emission mobility solutions in both the off-highway and on-highway commercial vehicle markets. These are anticipated to include the provision of commercial electric vans, trucks, and buses, electric tractors, and two-wheeled transportation, supported by the provision of energy services and infrastructure for the EV market consisting of charging systems, energy storage, energy generation, including hydrogen and solar, and associated data and management applications. These will be supported by financing programs which have been developed to enable commercial fleet operators to migrate away from gasoline and diesel-powered vehicles with minimal disruption to their business models and balance sheet. Together, these products and services will provide the Company with the capability to assist commercial fleet operators to transition with confidence to BEV and FCEV and meet their zero-emission objectives.
By choosing the integrated platform approach from Ideanomics Mobility, the commercial fleet operator will benefit from a single source solution that supports all aspects of the transition to EV, from early-stage requirements analysis, charging infrastructure specification and installation, vehicle procurement and deployment, training, vehicle- and charging-derived data management, operationalization management services, and financing.
To support the cost of transition from fossil fuels to BEV and FCEV, Ideanomics will offer fleet operators the complete financial and management support to confidently migrate from traditional CapEx models to an OpEx model, releasing capital to support traditional business growth and have the simplicity, predictability, and certainty of a monthly subscription which covers all aspects of EV fleet operations. These programs will also have the added advantage of providing Ideanomics with predictable recurring revenues. These Mobility-as-a-Service solutions are comprised of financing programs we refer to as VaaS and CaaS.
The Company anticipates that the shift from combustion engine vehicles to zero-emission vehicles is a complex process that most fleet operators do not have the expertise to manage. The Company anticipates that vendors selling a single product will be at a disadvantage compared to the Company’s integrated offering. The Company believes this will create a unique opportunity for the Company to become a trusted partner, providing services to analyze and define a customer’s needs, specifying and installing charging infrastructure, procuring and deploying vehicles, administering training, and operationalizing management
services. In addition, the Company anticipates that its as-a-Service financing models will make it possible for more customers to transition to zero-emission vehicles as an operating expense rather than a large upfront capital expenditure.
At the operating business level, further investment is planned to support continuous technology and product development and the associated manufacturing and assembly expansion to support increasing demand and revenue achievement.
Global supply chain slowdowns and shipping constraints continue to present challenges at each of the operating companies within the Ideanomics Mobility business unit.
IDEANOMICS CAPITAL
Fintech continues to provide opportunities which could generate high rates of return through the deployment of technology to disrupt existing business models.
Ideanomics Capital provides a range of financing programs in support of the sale of EVs and associated charging and energy storage systems by Ideanomics Mobility. Some of these finance programs are disruptive, subscription-based, models which are new-to-market offerings designed to help commercial fleet operators absorb the cost of transitioning to EV by removing CapEx costs as a barrier to entry. The company anticipates continuing the provision of resources and expertise for the development of these financing programs, which will underpin sales and revenues of Ideanomics Mobility. We call these financing programs CaaS and VaaS, and MaaS when combined, and they form part of our Ideanomics Mobility offering to commercial fleet operators. Over time, it is Ideanomics intention to focus Ideanomics Capital as the financial services arm of Ideanomics Mobility and to divest its other fintech assets accordingly.
Environmental Matters
We are subject to various federal, state and local laws and regulations governing, among other things, hazardous materials, environmental contamination and the protection of the environment. We have made, and expect to make in the future, expenditures to comply with such laws and regulations, but cannot predict the full amount of such future expenditures. We may also incur fines and penalties from time to time associated with noncompliance with such laws and regulations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires the Company’s management to make assumptions, estimates, and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. Company management has identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of its financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of its financial condition and results of operations and require management’s difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management’s current judgments. Company management believes the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of its financial statements. Company management has reviewed the critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of the promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine the amount and timing of revenue recognition for the arrangements that the Company determines are within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps: (1) identify the contract(s) with the customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies the respective performance obligations.
A performance obligation may be satisfied over time or at a point in time. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied over time is generally evaluated by measuring our progress in satisfying the performance obligation as evidenced by the transfer of the goods or services to the customer. Revenue from a performance obligation satisfied at a point in time is recognized at the point in time when the customer obtains control over the promised good.
The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the promised goods or services, or the transaction price. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate consideration promised in a contract that includes a variable amount, or variable consideration, and estimate the amount of consideration that is due to us. Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that we believe it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of revenue recognized will not occur.
Additionally, an analysis is performed in order to evaluate whether the Company is acting as a principal, in which case revenue is reported on a gross basis, or as an agent, in which case revenue is reported on a net basis. This analysis considers whether or not the Company obtains control of the specified goods or services before they are transferred to the customer, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in establishing price.
EV and Related Revenue
The Company’s EV contracts are typically with large enterprises and consequently are heavily negotiated as to the product(s) or service(s) to be provided; consequently, the accounting treatment for the reporting of revenues may vary materially between contracts including whether the revenue is reported on a gross or net basis.
For certain EV contracts recognized over time, the Company uses the cost-to-total cost method to recognize the revenue over the life of the contract. For EV contracts with revenue recognized over time, the revenue recognized is determined based upon the costs incurred as compared to the estimate of the total costs incurred.
For EV contracts recognized at a point in time, the Company recognizes revenue when control passes to the customer, which is generally based on shipping terms that address when title and risk and rewards pass to the customer. However, the Company also considers certain customer acceptance provisions as certain contracts with customers include installation, testing, certification or other acceptance provisions. In instances where contractual terms include a provision for customer acceptance, the Company considers whether it has previously demonstrated that the product meets objective criteria specified by either the seller or customer in assessing whether control has passed to the customer.
Contracts entered into with governmental agencies for services and products are analyzed in order to determine if they should be accounted for under a revenue recognition model pursuant to ASC 606 or a grant model under ASC 958. If accounted for pursuant to a grant model, the Company must determine if the grant is conditional or unconditional, and if conditional any barriers exist which must be overcome. If unconditional, the grant is recognized as revenue immediately, and if conditional, the grant is recognized as revenue as and when the barriers are overcome. The significant barrier to the current conditional grants are that the expenses incurred must meet the qualifications as established by the respective governmental agencies, so that the grant revenue is recognized as the qualified expenses are incurred.
Long-lived Assets
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and intangible assets, excluding goodwill, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows independent of other assets. An impairment loss would be recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows generated from the assets are less than their carrying amount.
Factors which could result in the Company performing an impairment review include significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results, significant changes in the manner of use of the assets or the strategy for our business, and significant negative industry or economic trends.
The assumptions and estimates used to determine future values and remaining useful lives of our intangible and other long-lived assets are complex and subjective. They can be affected by various factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our forecasts for future expansion development.
As a result of the impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded impairment losses related to intangible assets of $21.6 million.
As a result of the impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded impairment losses related to land, asset retirement costs, influencer networks, a membership agreement, and a marketing and distribution agreement of $22.5 million.
As part of the impairment analyses discussed above in the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company also evaluated the remaining useful life of intangible assets, and determined that one intangible asset, IP, no longer had a useful life and recorded amortization expense of $2.1 million.
As a result of the impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company recorded an impairment loss related to a secure mobile financial information, social and messaging platform of $5.7 million and recorded an impairment loss related to digital currency, GTB, of $61.1 million.
Accounting for Business Combinations
Our consolidated financial statements include the operations of acquired businesses subsequent to the closing of the transaction. We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recognized at their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Transaction costs are expensed as incurred.
Accounting for business combinations requires our management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially at the acquisition date including the identification of and our estimates for intangible assets, contractual obligations assumed, restructuring liabilities, pre-acquisition contingencies and contingent consideration, where applicable. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based in part on historical experience and information obtained from our management of the acquired companies and are inherently uncertain.
When estimating fair value, depending on the nature and complexity of the asset or liability, we may use one or all of the following techniques:
•Income approach, which is based on the present value of a future stream of net cash flows;
•Market approach, which is based on market prices and other information from market transactions involving identical or comparable assets or liabilities; and
•Cost approach, which is based on the cost to acquire or construct comparable assets, less an allowance for functional and/or economic obsolescence.
Fair value methodologies depend on the following types of inputs:
•Quoted prices for identical assets or liabilities in active markets (Level 1 inputs);
•Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, or quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or inputs other than quoted prices that are directly or indirectly observable, or inputs that are derived principally from, or corroborated by, observable market data by correlation or other means (Level 2 inputs); and
•Unobservable inputs that reflect estimates and assumptions (Level 3 inputs).
The determination of fair value is extremely subjective and complex, and requires judgements concerning future events, including future cash flows, the appropriate discount factors and weighted average cost of capital, and market comparability, among other factors. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that may affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over fair value of identifiable net assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Application of goodwill impairment tests requires significant management judgment, including the identification of reporting units, assigning assets, liabilities and goodwill to reporting units and determination of fair value of each reporting unit. The Company performs goodwill impairment testing at the reporting unit level which is defined as the operating segment or one level below the operating segment. One level below the operating segment, or component, is a business for which discrete financial information is available and regularly reviewed by segment management. The Company tests goodwill for impairment annually, on October 1, or more frequently when events or changes in circumstances indicate it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit has declined below its carrying amount. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment using qualitative and/or quantitative testing procedures.
The Company has the option to first perform qualitative testing to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Judgment applied when performing the qualitative analysis includes consideration of macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, overall financial performance of the reporting unit, composition, personnel or strategy changes affecting the reporting unit and recoverability of asset groups within a reporting unit. If, after assessing the totality of events and circumstances, the Company determines it is not more-likely-than-not that the fair value of a reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, then performing the quantitative impairment test is unnecessary. However, if the Company concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform the quantitative impairment test by calculating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount.
The fair value of a reporting unit may be determined using externally quoted prices (if available), a discounted cash flow model, or a market approach. Judgments applied when performing the quantitative analysis includes estimating future cash flows, determining appropriate discount rates and making other assumptions. Changes in these judgments, estimates and assumptions could materially affect the determination of fair value for each reporting unit.
An impairment loss, if any, is recorded when the fair value of a reporting unit has declined below its carrying amount.
As a result of its goodwill impairment analyses performed in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded goodwill impairment losses of $101.5 million and $18.1 million, respectively. The Company recorded no goodwill impairment losses in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Long-term Investments
The Company accounts for equity investments through which management exercises significant influence but does not have control over the investee under the equity method. Under the equity method, the investment is initially recorded at cost and adjusted for the Company’s share of undistributed earnings or losses of the investee. The Company’s share of losses is not recognized when the investment is reduced to zero unless the Company guarantees the investees’ obligations or the Company has committed to providing additional funding.
The equity investments which are not consolidated or accounted for under the equity method are either carried at fair value or under the measurement alternative upon the adoption of the ASU No. 2016-01.
The Company utilizes the measurement alternative for equity investments that do not have readily determinable fair values and measures these investments at cost less impairment plus or minus observable price changes in orderly transactions for an identical or similar investment of the same issuer.
Management periodically reviews long-term investments for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the investment may not be fully recoverable. Management considers impairment indicators such as negative changes in industry and market conditions, financial performance, business prospects, and other relevant events and factors. If indicators exist, further analysis must be performed in order to determine if the impairment, if any, is other-than-temporary. If the impairment is deemed to be other-than-temporary, the fair value of the investment must be determined. In the absence of quoted market prices, management must use judgement to determine the fair value of the investment, considering such factors as current economic and market conditions, the operating performance of the entities, including current earnings trends and forecasted cash flows, and other company and industry specific information. If the fair value of the investment is below the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recorded to record the investment at fair value.
The Company recorded impairment losses of $4.5 million, $0.2 million and $3.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for equity investments accounted for under the measurement alternative, and recorded impairment losses of $7.9, $16.6 million and $13.1 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, for investments accounted for as equity method investments.
Inventory
The valuation of inventory requires us to estimate obsolete or excess inventory. as well as inventory that is not of saleable quality. The determination of obsolete or excess inventory requires us to estimate the future demand for our products. The estimate of future demand is compared to work-in-process and finished goods inventory levels to determine the amount, if any, of obsolete or excess inventory. As of December 31, 2021, we had total work-in-process inventory of $0.1 million, raw materials inventory of $0.2 million and total finished goods inventory of $5.8 million. The demand forecast is included in the development of our short-term manufacturing plans to enable consistency between inventory valuation and inventory decisions. Product-specific facts and circumstances reviewed in the inventory valuation process include a review of the customer base, the
stage of the product life cycle of our products, consumer confidence, and customer acceptance of our products, as well as an assessment of the selling price in relation to the product cost. If our demand forecast for specific products is greater than actual demand and we fail to reduce manufacturing output accordingly, we could be required to write off inventory, which would negatively impact our gross margin.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance on deferred tax assets is established when management considers it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Tax benefits from an uncertain tax position are only recognized if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate resolution. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recorded as incurred as a component of income tax expense. The Company has not recognized any tax benefits from uncertain tax positions for any of the reporting periods presented.
Taxes based on gross revenue rather than on net income are not considered CIT and are instead included in selling, general and administrative expense in the statement of operations.
The Company files federal and state income tax returns. These returns remain subject to examination by taxing authorities for all years after December 31, 2018.