Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company with a business strategy focused on the clinical development, and ultimately the commercialization, of drug candidates for rare disease indications characterized by small, well-defined patient populations with serious unmet medical needs. Our current focus is to identify and potentially acquire rights to novel development and commercial stage rare disease programs through new business development opportunities, including additional strategic alternatives. We have in the past and may in the future explore collaborative alliances to support development and commercialization of any of our drug candidates.
Until May 2021, we were developing tilsotolimod, via intratumoral injection, for the treatment of anti-PD1 refractory metastatic melanoma in combination with ipilimumab, an anti-CTLA4 antibody marketed as Yervoy® by Bristol Myers Squibb Company (“BMS”) in a Phase 3 registration trial. During the first quarter of 2021, we announced that ILLUMINATE-301, the Company’s pivotal registration trial of tilsotolimod in combination with ipilimumab versus ipilimumab alone in patients with anti-PD-1 refractory advanced melanoma, did not meet its primary endpoint of Objective Response Rate (“ORR”). Based on subsequent evaluation of the full data set, in May 2021, we announced that we would not continue the trial to its Overall Survival (“OS”) primary endpoint.
Through December 2021, we were also evaluating intratumoral tilsotolimod in combination with nivolumab, an anti-PD1 antibody marketed as Opdivo® by BMS, and ipilimumab for the treatment of multiple solid tumors in a multicohort Phase 2 trial. In December 2021, we announced that preliminary data from the second 10 patients dosed in the safety cohort of ILLUMINATE-206 showed a safety profile consistent with the first 10 patients in ILLUMINATE-206 and with prior studies. No further enrollment in ILLUMINATE-206 is planned at this time.
While our clinical trials with tilsotolimod have not yet translated into a new treatment alternative for patients, data supporting tilsotolimod’s mechanism of action and encouraging safety profile from across the array of pre-clinical and clinical work to date, together with its intellectual property protection, are noteworthy. As a result, in December 2021, we announced that we will consider an out-licensing arrangement so that its full potential may continue to be explored on behalf of patients who do not respond to traditional immunotherapy.
Historically, substantially all our revenues have been from collaboration and license agreements, although we did not generate any such revenue in 2021, and we have received no revenues from the sale of commercial products. Going forward, we plan to continue to invest in research and development. Accordingly, we anticipate a significant portion of our operating expenses will continue to be related to research and development in 2022 and beyond. See additional information below under the headings “Results of Operations” regarding research and development expenses to date and “Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources” regarding our future funding requirements.
Recent Events and Updates
Reduction-in-Force
In April 2021, following the announcement that the ILLUMINATE-301 trial did not meet its primary endpoint of ORR, we implemented a reduction-in-force which affected approximately 50% of our workforce through September 30, 2021, primarily in the area of research and development. The decision was made in order to align our workforce with our needs in light of the outcome of ILLUMINATE-301’s ORR endpoint, our ongoing ILLUMINATE development program, and other business development activities focused on identifying new portfolio opportunities.
In connection with these actions, we incurred and paid termination costs for the reduction in workforce, which includes severance, benefits and related costs, of approximately $1.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Nasdaq Compliance
As previously disclosed, on November 26, 2021, we received a deficiency letter (the “Nasdaq Letter”) from the Nasdaq Listing Qualifications Department, notifying us that the Company is not in compliance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2), which requires the Company to maintain a minimum bid price of at least $1 per share for continued listing on The Nasdaq Capital Market (the “Minimum Bid Requirement”). The Company’s failure to comply with the Minimum Bid Requirement was based on the Company’s common stock per share price being below the $1 threshold for a period of 30 consecutive business days. In accordance with Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A) (the “Compliance Period Rule”), the Company has been provided an initial period of 180 calendar days (the “Compliance Date”), to regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement. If, at any time before the Compliance Date, the bid price for the Company’s common stock closes at $1.00 or more per share for a minimum of 10 consecutive business days, as required under Nasdaq requirements, the Staff will provide written notification to the Company that it complies with the Minimum Bid Requirement, unless the Staff exercises its discretion to extend this 10-day period pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(H).
If the Company does not regain compliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement by the Compliance Date, the Company may be eligible for an additional 180 calendar day compliance period (the “Second Compliance Period”). To qualify, the Company would need to meet the continued listing requirement for the market value of publicly held shares and all other initial listing standards of the Nasdaq Capital Market, with the exception of the Minimum Bid Requirement, and provide written notice to the Staff of its intention to cure the deficiency during the Second Compliance Period.
Neither the Nasdaq Letter nor the Company’s noncompliance with the Minimum Bid Requirement have an immediate effect on the listing or trading of the Company’s common stock, which continues to trade on The Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “IDRA.”
Results of Operations
The following is a discussion of results of operations for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020. For a discussion of results of operations for fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019, please refer to Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
For each of our research and development programs, we incur both direct and indirect expenses. We track direct research and development expenses by program, which include third-party costs such as contract research, consulting and clinical trial and manufacturing costs. We do not allocate indirect research and development expenses, which may include regulatory, laboratory (equipment and supplies), personnel, facility, and other overhead costs (including depreciation and amortization), to specific programs.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, our overall research and development expenses declined by 34% as compared to 2020, primarily due to decreases in external development costs associated with tilsotolimod (IMO-2125). This decrease is primarily related to: (i) costs incurred with contract research organizations during the year ended December 31, 2021 to support our ILLUMINATE-301 trial, which was discontinued by the Company in the second quarter of 2021; and (ii) lower costs incurred with drug manufacturing activities. The decrease of the research and development expenses is offset by the costs associated with ILLUMINATE-206 and the Scriptr Agreement.
Tilsotolimod (IMO-2125) external development expenses as well as expenses related to the Scriptr Agreement (as more fully described under the heading “Collaborative Alliances” above in Item 1.) will continue to be a significant portion of our total research and development spending in 2022.
In the table below, research and development expenses are set forth in the following categories: Tilsotolimod (IMO-2125) and other drug development expenses.
Tilsotolimod (IMO-2125) External Development Expenses
These expenses include external expenses we have incurred in connection with the development of tilsotolimod as part of our immuno-oncology program. These external expenses include payments to independent contractors and vendors for drug development activities conducted after the initiation of tilsotolimod clinical development in immuno-oncology, but exclude internal costs such as payroll and overhead expenses.
We commenced clinical development of tilsotolimod as part of our immuno-oncology program in July 2015, and from July 2015 through December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $91.1 million in tilsotolimod external development expenses, including costs associated with the preparation for and conduct of ILLUMINATE-204, ILLUMINATE-101, ILLUMINATE-301, ILLUMINATE-206, and the manufacture of additional drug substance for use in our clinical trials and additional nonclinical studies.
Other Drug Development Expenses
These expenses include internal costs, such as payroll and overhead expenses, associated with all our clinical development programs. In addition, these expenses include external expenses, such as payments to contract vendors, associated with compounds that were previously being developed but are not currently being developed. We incurred $2.1 million of expenses within other drug development expenses related to our research collaboration with Scriptr in 2021
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll, stock-based compensation expense, consulting fees and professional legal fees associated with our patent applications and maintenance, our corporate regulatory filing requirements, our corporate legal matters, and our business development initiatives. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses totaled $10.0 million and $11.9 million, respectively.
General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $1.9 million, or 16.3%, in 2021 as compared to 2020, primarily due to lower salary, bonus, stock compensation expense, employee-related expense related to terminated employees as part of our reduction-in-force, and commercial research support costs, partially offset by increased consulting expenses.
Restructuring Costs
In April 2021, following the announcement that the ILLUMINATE-301 trial did not meet its primary endpoint of ORR, we implemented a reduction-in-force which affected approximately 50% of the workforce through December 31, 2021, primarily in the area of research and development. The decision was made in order to align our workforce with its needs in light of the outcome of ILLUMINATE-301’s ORR endpoint, its ongoing ILLUMINATE development program and other business development activities focused on identifying new portfolio opportunities.
Restructuring costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $1.3 million and is comprised of termination costs including severance, benefits and related costs. No such costs were incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Income
Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 totaled $0.1 million and $0.2 million, respectively. The decrease in 2021, as compared to 2020, was primarily due to lower interest rates and decrease in average short-term investment and cash balances and yields.
Amounts may fluctuate from period to period due to changes in average investment balances, including commercial paper and money market funds classified as cash equivalents, and composition of investments.
Warrant Revaluation Gain or Loss
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a non-cash warrant revaluation gain (loss) of approximately $7.0 million and $(3.7) million, respectively.
The non-cash gain for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the derecognition of the warrant liability in the first quarter of 2021 due to the termination of such liability-classified warrants that were issued in connection with our December 2019 Private Placement.
The non-cash loss for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 relate to the revaluation of our liability-classified warrants issued in connection with the December 2019 Private Placement. Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of our outstanding warrants, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period. These fluctuations may be due to a variety of factors, including changes in our stock price and changes in estimated stock price volatility over the remaining life of the warrants. Warrant revaluation loss for 2020 was driven primarily by an increase in our stock price during each period. More specifically, the significant warrant revaluation loss for the 2020 period was primarily due to the approximate 102% increase in our stock price during the period January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
The non-cash warrant revaluation gain (loss) mentioned above are fully described in Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Future Tranche Right Revaluation Gain or Loss
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a non-cash future tranche right revaluation gain (loss) of approximately $118.8 million and $(72.4) million, respectively.
The non-cash gain for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the derecognition of the future tranche right liability in the first quarter of 2021 due to the termination of the future tranche rights that were issued in connection with our December 2019 Private Placement.
The non-cash loss for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the revaluation of our liability-classified tranche rights liability issued in connection with the December 2019 Private Placement. Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the future tranche rights, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period. These fluctuations may be due to a variety of factors, including changes in our stock price and changes in estimated stock price volatility over the remaining estimated lives of the future tranche rights. Changes in the fair value of the future tranche right liability and resulting future tranche right revaluation loss for 2020 was driven primarily by an increase in our stock price during the periods. More specifically, the significant future tranche right revaluation loss for the 2020 period was primarily due to the approximate 102% increase in our stock price during the period January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020.
Both non-cash future tranche right revaluation gain (loss) for the respective periods are fully described in Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Net Income or Loss to Common Stockholders
As a result of the factors discussed above, our net income (loss) was $98.1 million and $(112.7) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See Note 16 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional details.
Net Operating Loss Carryforwards
We have completed several financings since the effective date of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which as of December 31, 2021, have resulted in ownership changes that will significantly limit our ability to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) and tax credit carryforwards. In December 2017, we completed a study which determined that ownership changes had occurred. The federal and state net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards and related deferred tax assets discussed below and included in Note 13 to the financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K have been adjusted to reflect the limitations that resulted from this study. The Company continues to monitor equity activity and potential ownership changes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cumulative federal and state NOLs of approximately $327.5 million and $322.0­ million available to reduce federal and state taxable income, respectively. As a result of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, federal net operating losses incurred for taxable years beginning after January 1, 2018 have an unlimited carryforward period, but can only be utilized to offset 80% of taxable income in future taxable periods. Of the $327.5 million of federal NOLs, $130.1 million have an unlimited carryforward and the remaining NOLs are still subject to expiration through 2037. State NOLs are still subject to expiration according to the laws of each respective jurisdiction. The Company files state tax returns in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania whereby both jurisdictions impose a 20-year carryforward period. All $322.0 million of state NOLs expire through 2041, with the first year of expiration being 2032 for $23.4 million of Massachusetts NOLs. In addition, at December 31, 2021, the Company had cumulative federal and state tax credit carryforwards of $26.7 million and $1.9 million, respectively, available to reduce federal and state income taxes, respectively, which expire through 2041 and 2033, respectively, for federal and state purposes, other than those that have an unlimited carryforward period.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Financial Condition
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $735.5 million. To date, substantially all our revenues have been from collaboration and license agreements and we have received no revenues from the sale of commercial products. We generated no revenue for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
We have devoted substantially all our efforts to research and development, including clinical trials, and we have not completed development of any commercial products. Our research and development activities, together with our general and administrative expenses, are expected to continue to result in substantial operating losses for the foreseeable future. These losses, among other things, have had and will continue to have an adverse effect on our stockholders’ equity, total assets and working capital. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drug candidates, and if approved, commercial products, we are unable to predict the extent of any future losses, whether or when any of our drug candidates will become commercially available or when we will become profitable, if at all.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
We require cash to fund our operating expenses and to make capital expenditures. Historically, we have funded our cash requirements primarily through the following:
(i) sale of common stock, preferred stock and future tranche rights and warrants (including pre-funded warrants);
(ii) exercise of warrants;
(iii) debt financing, including capital leases;
(iv) license fees, research funding and milestone payments under collaborative and license agreements; and
(v) interest income.
We filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 on August 4, 2020, which was declared effective on September 2, 2020, relating to the sale, from time to time, in one or more transactions, up to $150.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, depository shares and warrants.
LPC Purchase Agreement
On March 4, 2019, we entered into a Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, Lincoln Park has committed to purchase an aggregate of $35.0 million of shares of Company common stock from time to time at our sole discretion (the “LPC Purchase Agreement”).
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we sold 800,000 and 750,000 shares of common stock, respectively, pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement, resulting in net proceeds of $4.2 million and $1.7 million, respectively. The LPC Purchase Agreement had a 36-month term which expired on March 4, 2022. Accordingly, we no longer have access to capital under the LPC Purchase Agreement.
ATM Agreement
In November 2018, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with JMP Securities LLC (“JMP”) pursuant to which we may issue and sell shares of its common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million through JMP as its agent.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we sold 5,117,357 and 3,608,713 shares of common stock, respectively, pursuant to the ATM Agreement, resulting in net proceeds, after deduction of commissions and other offering expenses, of $15.3 million and $12.3 million, respectively. As of March 31, 2022, we may sell up to an additional $19.5 million of shares under the ATM Agreement.
The LPC Purchase Agreement and ATM Agreement are more fully described in Note 8 of the notes to our financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Funding Requirements
We had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $32.5 million at December 31, 2021. We believe based on our current operating plan, our existing cash, cash equivalents on hand as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operations through the one-year period subsequent to the filing date of this Form 10-K. Specifically, we believe our available funds will be sufficient to enable us to perform the following:
(i) fund business development related activities, such as identifying and potentially acquiring rights to novel development and commercial stage rare disease programs, including additional strategic alternatives;
(ii) conclude our current Low-Dose, High-Frequency Cohort of our Phase 2 study of tilsotolimod in combination with nivolumab and ipilimumab for the treatment of MSS-CRC (ILLUMINATE-206);
(iii) conclude our Phase 3 clinical trial of tilsotolimod in combination with ipilimumab for the treatment of anti-PD1 refractory metastatic melanoma (ILLUMINATE-301);
(iv) fund certain research including investigator initiated clinical trials of tilsotolimod and the Scriptr Agreement; and
(v) maintain a level of general and administrative expenses to support the business.
In addition, we are seeking and expect to continue to seek additional funding through collaborations, the sale or license of assets or financings of equity or debt securities. We believe the key factors which will affect our ability to obtain funding are:
(i) the receptivity of the capital markets to any in-licensing, product acquisition or other transaction we may enter into;
(ii) the receptivity of the capital markets to financings by biotechnology companies generally and companies with drug candidates and technologies similar to ours specifically;
(iii) the results of our clinical development activities in our drug candidates we develop on the timelines anticipated;
(iv) competitive and potentially competitive products and technologies and investors' receptivity to our drug candidates we develop and the technology underlying them in light of competitive products and technologies;
(v) the cost, timing, and outcome of regulatory reviews;
(vi) our ability to enter into additional collaborations with biotechnology and pharmaceutical companies and the success of such collaborations; and
(vii) the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to global economy and capital markets, and to our business and our financial results.
In addition, increases in expenses or delays in clinical development may adversely impact our cash position and require additional funds or cost reductions.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of the primary sources and uses of cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities. The net cash used in operating activities for all periods presented consists primarily of our net income (losses) adjusted for non-cash charges/gains and changes in components of working capital. The decrease in cash outflow for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, related primarily to lower costs incurred for our tilsotolimod development program during 2021.
Investing Activities. Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities primarily consisted of the following amounts relating to our investments in available-for-sale securities and purchases and disposals of property and equipment:
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale securities were $4.5 million; and
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, proceeds from the maturity of available-for-sale securities of $10.5 million, substantially offset by the purchase of $12.2 million of available-for-sale securities.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of the following amounts raised in connection with the following transactions:
● For the year ended December 31, 2021, aggregate net proceeds of $19.5 million from financing arrangements consisting of $4.2 million received pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement and $15.3 million received under the ATM Agreement, plus $0.3 million received from the exercise of stock options and warrants, partially offset by $0.4 million in payments related to our short-term insurance premium financing arrangement; and
● For the year ended December 31, 2020, aggregate net proceeds of $28.8 million from financing arrangements consisting of $14.8 million received pursuant to the April 2020 and July 2020 Securities Purchase Agreements, $1.7 million received pursuant to the LPC Purchase Agreement and $12.3 million received under the ATM Agreement, plus an additional $0.1 million in proceeds from employee stock purchases under our 2017 Employee Stock Purchase Plan, partially offset by $0.2 million in payments related to our short-term insurance premium financing arrangement.
Material Cash Requirements
As of December 31, 2021, we had a material lease commitment in an aggregate amount of $0.8 million relating to our facility in Exton, Pennsylvania. This lease expires on May 31, 2025. See Note 12 of the Notes to Financial Statements in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to warrant and future tranche right liabilities and related revaluation gains (losses), research and development prepayments, accruals and related expenses, and stock-based compensation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We regard an accounting estimate or assumption underlying our financial statements as a “critical accounting estimate” where:
● the nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the level of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change; and
● the impact of the estimates and assumptions on financial condition or operating performance is material.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Research and Development Prepayments, Accruals and Related Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued and prepaid expenses for research and development activities performed by third parties, including Clinical Research Organizations (“CROs”) clinical investigators and our research collaboration partners. These estimates are made as of the reporting date of the work completed over the life of the individual study in accordance with agreements established with CROs and clinical trial sites. Some CROs invoice us on a monthly basis, while others invoice upon achievement of milestones and the expense is recorded as services are rendered. We determine the estimates of research and development activities incurred at the end of each reporting period through discussion with internal personnel and outside service providers and research collaboration partners as to the progress or stage of completion of trials or services, as of the end of each reporting period, pursuant to contracts with clinical trial centers and CROs and the agreed upon fee to be paid for such services. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Clinical trial site costs related to patient enrollments are recorded as patients are entered into the trial.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize all share-based payments to employees and directors as expense in our statements of operations based on their fair values. We record compensation expense over an award’s requisite service period, or vesting period, based on the award’s fair value at the date of grant. Our policy is to charge the fair value of stock options as an expense, adjusted for forfeitures, on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, which is generally four years for employees and one year for directors.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock option grants. The Black-Scholes option pricing model relies on a number of key assumptions to calculate estimated fair values, including assumptions as to average risk-free interest rate, expected dividend yield, expected life and expected volatility. For the assumed risk-free interest rate, we use the U.S. Treasury security rate with a term equal to the expected life of the option. Our assumed dividend yield of zero is based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends to common stockholders and have no present intention to pay cash dividends. We use an expected option life based on actual experience. Our assumption for expected volatility is based on the actual stock-price volatility over a period equal to the expected life of the option.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions for estimating stock-based compensation expense in future periods, or if we decide to use a different valuation model, the stock-based compensation expense we recognize in future periods may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the current period and could materially affect our loss from operations, net income (loss) and earnings (loss) per share. It may also result in a lack of comparability with other companies that use different models, methods and assumptions. The Black-Scholes option pricing model was developed for use in estimating the fair value of traded options that have no vesting restrictions and are fully transferable. These characteristics are not present in our option grants. Although the Black-Scholes option pricing model is widely used, existing valuation models, including the Black-Scholes option pricing model, may not provide reliable measures of the fair values of our stock-based compensation.
Warrant and Future Tranche Right Liabilities and Related Revaluation Gain (Loss)
We entered into the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement, as more fully described in Note 7 of the Notes to Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K, pursuant to which we issued shares of convertible preferred stock with detachable warrants. Additionally, the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement contains call options on redeemable preferred shares with warrants (conditionally exercisable for shares that are puttable), which we refer to as future tranche rights.
We determined that these warrants and future tranche rights represent freestanding financial instruments and account for both the warrants and future tranche rights as liabilities, which requires the measurement of the fair value of the liability at the time of issuance and recording changes as a charge to current earnings at each reporting period, which is included in Warrant Liability Revaluation Expense and/or Future Tranche Right Liability Revaluation Expense in our statements of operations.
Warrant Liability. We use an option pricing model to value our liability-classified warrants. Inherent in the valuation model are assumptions related to volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected term, dividend rate, and other scenarios (i.e. probability of complex features of the warrants being triggered). Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the warrants, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period.
Future Tranche Right Liability. We use both a lattice model and a Monte Carlo simulation to value the future tranche rights. We selected these models as we believe they are reflective of all significant assumptions that market participants would likely consider in negotiating the transfer of the future tranche rights. Such assumptions include, among other inputs, stock price volatility, risk-free rates, and expected terms inclusive of early exercise and cancellation assumptions. Due to the nature of and inputs in the model used to assess the fair value of the future tranche rights, it is not abnormal to experience significant fluctuations during each remeasurement period.
All outstanding warrants and future tranche rights previously issued pursuant to the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement were terminated during the three months ended March 31, 2021. Accordingly, we are no longer eligible to receive additional proceeds pursuant to the December 2019 Securities Purchase Agreement and the related warrant liability and future tranche right liability were derecognized during the three months ended March 31, 2021.
New Accounting Pronouncements
New accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 2 of the Notes to Financial Statements in this Form 10-K.