ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
References in this report to “we,” “us” or the “Company” refer to INFINT Acquisition Corporation. References to our “management” or our “management team” refer to our officers and directors, and references to the “Sponsor” refer to InFinT Capital LLC. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the annual financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward looking statements. Such forward looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this Annual Report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including but not limited to, those detailed in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from March 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to consummate the IPO, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $181,695, which consisted of operating costs of $183,619, offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,924.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 23, 2021, the Company consummated its initial public offering of 17,391,200 of its units. Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share, $0.0001 par value per share, and one-half of one warrant, with each whole Warrant entitling the holder to purchase one Ordinary Share at a price of $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $173,912,000.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, the Company consummated the private placement of 7,032,580 warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total proceeds of $7,032,580, to the Company’s sponsor, InFinT Capital LLC. The Private Warrants are identical to the Warrants sold in the IPO.
On November 23, 2021, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 764,262 Private Warrants in connection with the underwriter’s exercise of its over-allotment option to purchase an additional 2,608,680 Units for gross proceeds of $26,086,800. The Private Warrants were sold at $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating additional gross proceeds of $764,262. Following the closing of the over-allotment option, the Company generated total gross proceeds of $207,795,642 from the IPO and the Private Placement, of which the Company raised $199,998,800 in the IPO, $7,796,842 in the Private Placement and of which $202,998,782 was placed in the Company’s trust account established in connection with the IPO.
For the period from March 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $(711,252). Net loss of $181,695 was offset by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $1,924. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $527,633 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $203,000,706 consisting of securities held in a money market fund and government bonds that invests in United States government treasury bills, bonds or notes with a maturity of 185 days or less. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our taxes. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, to acquire a target business and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect a Business Combination, the remaining funds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our Business Combination if the funds available to us outside of the Trust Account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us $1,028,183 of cash on our operating account and working capital of $1,555,816. We will use these funds primarily to find and evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. The interest income earned on the investments in our trust account are unavailable to fund operating expenses.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of notes may be converted upon consummation of a Business Combination into additional Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans.
We will have until 12 months from the closing of the IPO to consummate our initial business combination. However, if we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate our initial business combination within 12 months, we may, by resolution of our board if requested by our Sponsor, extend the period of time to consummate a business combination up to two times, each by an additional three months (for a total of up to 18 months to complete a business combination), subject to the Sponsor depositing additional funds into the trust account as set out below. Pursuant to the terms of the trust agreement to be entered into between us and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC, in order to extend the time available for us to consummate our initial business combination, our initial shareholders or their affiliates or designees, upon five days advance notice prior to the applicable deadline, must deposit into the trust account for each three-month extension, $2,999,982 ($0.15 per share in either case) on or prior to the date of the applicable deadline, up to an aggregate of $5,999,964, or approximately $0.30 per share. Any such payments would be made in the form of a loan. Any such loans will be non-interest bearing and payable upon the consummation of our initial business combination. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into private placement warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. Furthermore, the letter agreement with our initial Shareholders contains a provision pursuant to which our Sponsor has agreed to waive its right to be repaid for such loans out of the funds held in the trust account in the event that we do not complete a business combination. In the event that we receive notice from our Sponsor five days prior to the applicable deadline of its wish for us to effect an extension, we intend to issue a press release announcing such intention at least three days prior to the applicable deadline. In addition, we intend to issue a press release the day after the applicable deadline announcing whether or not the funds had been timely deposited. Our Sponsor and its affiliates or designees are not obligated to fund the trust account to extend the time for us to complete our initial business combination. If we choose to extend the period of time to consummate a business combination as set forth herein, you will not have the ability to vote or redeem your shares in connection with either of the three-month extensions. However, if we seek to complete a business combination during an extension period, investors will still be able to vote and redeem their shares in connection with that business combination. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has not borrow any amount from Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an agreement to pay our Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on November 23, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
In connection with our initial business combination, we are obligated to pay our expenses relating thereto, including the deferred underwriting commission payable to our underwriter in an amount equal to 3.0% of the total gross proceeds raised in the offering, or $5,999,964, upon consummation of our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
The Company accounts for its ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”. Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered by the Company to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in the amount of $202,998,782 are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheet.
Net loss per ordinary share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary share outstanding during the period, excluding ordinary share subject to forfeiture. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary share and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.