Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 16, 2020 in Delaware and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more target businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our Initial Public Offering, the sale of the Private Placement Warrants that occurred simultaneously with the completion of our Initial Public Offering, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with a business combination to the owner of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A common stock if shares of preferred stock are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us;
● and may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our Class A common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and identifying a target for our Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with identifying and completing a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $17,368,804, which consists of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $19,471 and reduction in warrant liability of $20,193,591, offset by operating costs of $2,844,258.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $300,025,015 consisting of U.S. treasury bills with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the Trust Account will used by us to pay franchise and income taxes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $88,770 held outside the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we generated net income of $17,368,804 and cash used in operating activities was $1,284,501 which includes interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $19,471, change in warrant liability of 20,193,591 and changes in operating assets and liabilities which used $1,559,757 of cash from operating activities.
If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amounts necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required on a non-interest bearing basis. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per half warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans.
On November 11, 2021, we issued a promissory note (the “Note”) in the principal amount of up to $500,000 to the sponsor. The Note was issued in connection with advances the sponsor has made, and may make in the future, to us for working capital expenses. The Note bears no interest and is due and payable upon the earlier of (i) October 5, 2022 or (ii) the date on which we consummate our initial business combination. At the election of the sponsor, all or a portion of the unpaid principal amount of the Note may be converted into warrants of the Company, each warrant exercisable for one half share of our Class A common stock upon the consummation of an initial business combination (the “Conversion Warrants”), equal to: (x) the portion of the principal amount of the Note being converted, divided by (y) $1.00, rounded up to the nearest whole number of warrants. The Conversion Warrants are identical to the private placement warrants. The Conversion Warrants and their underlying securities are entitled to the registration rights set forth in the Note. As of December 31, 2021, $200,000 was outstanding under the Note. On March 21, 2022, we amended the Note to (i) increase the principal amount to up to $1,000,000 and (ii) eliminate the conversion rights from the Note.
If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a Business Combination. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
As a result of the above, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have determined that the liquidity condition and date for mandatory liquidation and dissolution raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through October 5, 2022, the scheduled liquidation date of the Company if it does not complete a Business Combination prior to such date. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay our sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support provided to us. We began incurring these fees on October 1, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to underwriting discounts and commissions of 5.5%, of which 2.0% ($6,000,000) was paid at the closing of the Initial Public Offering, and 3.5% ($10,500,000) was deferred. The deferred discount will become payable to the representative of the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. The underwriters are not entitled to any interest accrued on the deferred discount.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Derivative Liability
In accordance with ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging: Contracts in an Entities Own Equity, entities must consider whether to classify contracts that may be settled in its own stock, such as warrants, as equity of the entity or as an asset or liability. If an event that is not within the entity’s control could require net cash settlement, then the contract should be classified as an asset or a liability rather than as equity. We have determined because the terms of Public Warrants include a provision that entitles all warrant holders to receive cash for their warrants in the event of a qualifying cash tender offer, while only certain of the holders of the underlying shares of common stock would be entitled to receive cash, our warrants should be classified as derivative liability measured at fair value, with changes in fair value each period reported in earnings. Further if our Sponsor Warrants are held by someone other initial purchases of the Sponsor Warrants or their permitted transferees, the Sponsor Warrants will be redeemable by the Company and exercisable by such holders on the same basis as the Public Warrants. Because the terms of the Sponsor Warrants and Public Warrants are so similar, we classified both types of warrants as a derivative liability measured at fair value. Volatility in our common stock and Public Warrants may result in significant changes in the value of the derivatives and resulting gains and losses on our statement of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating income (loss) per common share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) the private placement since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per common share is the same as basic net income (loss) per common share for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. As we are a smaller reporting company, adoption of ASU 2020-06 will be required for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods with those fiscal years. The Company is still evaluating the impact of ASU 2020-06 and will adopt as required.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.