Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We operate in a very competitive and rapidly changing environment that involves numerous known and unknown risks and uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in any of our forward-looking statements are reasonable, actual results could differ materially from those projected or assumed in any of our forward-looking statements. Our future quarterly and annual revenues, operating income, results of operations and cash flows, as well as any forward-looking statement, are subject to change and to inherent risks and uncertainties, such as those disclosed or incorporated by reference in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Important factors that could cause our actual results, performance and achievements, or industry results to differ materially from estimates or projections contained in our forward-looking statements include, among others, the following: uncertainty of the magnitude, duration, geographic reach and impact on the global economy of the COVID-19 pandemic; our ability to pay our debt; compliance with our credit agreements; risks associated with acquisitions or investments; integration of businesses we have acquired; worldwide economic conditions and credit tightening which could impact our operating results; less than anticipated growth rates in broadly defined business information services & advisory sector; the termination, delay, or reduction in scope to engagements with our clients; fluctuating operating results from factors outside of our control; a decrease in revenues from failure to secure new project-based advisory engagements; the inability to achieve or maintain adequate utilization for our consultants; the loss of money on our fixed-fee or capped fee contracts; contracts with contingent-based revenue may cause unusual variations in our operating results; our ability to maintain our existing services and products; the profitability from expanding our service offering; our ability to develop and offer the new services and products that we need to remain competitive; our potential failure to anticipate and respond to market trends; our ability to protect important intellectual property rights; our ability to face and compete with competition; a loss of key executives could adversely affect our business; our reliance on key members of our management team; the ability to attract, retain and train skilled advisory and other professionals; agreements with certain clients that limit the ability of particular advisors to work on some engagements for a period of time; the financial impact of losing one or more of our large clients; the exposure to international operations could negatively impact our future revenue and growth; data protection laws and self-regulatory codes may restrict our activities and increase our costs; our exposure to risks related to cybersecurity; our international operations expose us to foreign currency exchange rate risk; we may be subject to claims for substantial damages by our clients arising out of disruptions to their businesses or inadequate service and our insurance coverage may be inadequate; we could be liable to our clients for damages and subject to liability and our reputation could be damaged if our confidential information or client data is compromised; failure to maintain effective internal control over financial reporting could adversely affect our business and the market price of our Common Stock; client restrictions on the use of client data could adversely affect our activities; we may not be able to maintain the equity in our brand name; our actual operating results may differ significantly from our guidance; and other
risks and uncertainties. The potential fluctuations in our operating income could cause period-to-period comparisons of operating results not to be meaningful and could provide an unreliable indication of future operating results. A description of the risk factors associated with our business is included under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A. of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which is incorporated herein by reference.
BUSINESS OVERVIEW
ISG (Information Services Group) (Nasdaq: III) is a leading global technology research and advisory firm. A trusted business partner to over 800 clients, including more than 75 of the top 100 enterprises in our markets, ISG is committed to helping corporations, public sector organizations, and service and technology providers achieve operational excellence and faster growth. The firm specializes in digital transformation services, including automation, cloud and data analytics; sourcing advisory; managed governance and risk services; network carrier services; technology strategy and operations design; change management; market intelligence and technology research and analysis. Founded in 2006, and based in Stamford, Conn., ISG employs more than 1,300 digital-ready professionals operating in more than 20 countries-a global team known for its innovative thinking, market influence, deep industry and technology expertise, and world-class research and analytical capabilities based on the industry’s most comprehensive marketplace data. For more information, visit www.isg-one.com.
Our strategy is to strengthen our existing market position and develop new services and products to support future growth plans. As a result, we are focused on growing our existing service model, expanding geographically, developing new industry sectors, productizing market data assets, expanding our managed services offerings and growing via acquisitions. Although we do not expect any adverse conditions that will impact our ability to execute against our strategy over the next twelve months, the more significant factors that could limit our ability to grow in these areas include global macro-economic conditions and the impact on the overall sourcing market, competition, our ability to retain advisors and reductions in discretionary spending with our top client accounts or other significant client events. Other areas that could impact the business would also include natural disasters, pandemics, such as COVID-19, legislative and regulatory changes and capital market disruptions.
We principally derive revenues from fees for services generated on a project by project basis. Prior to the commencement of a project, we reach agreement with the client on rates for services based upon the scope of the project, staffing requirements and the level of client involvement. Revenues for services rendered are recognized on a time and materials basis or on a fixed fee or capped fee basis in accordance with accounting and disclosure requirements for revenue recognition.
Revenues for time and materials contracts are recognized based on the number of hours worked by our advisors at an agreed upon rate per hour and are recognized in the period in which services are performed. Revenues for time and materials contracts are billed monthly, semimonthly or in accordance with the specific contractual terms of each project.
We also derive our revenues from certain recurring revenue streams. These include such annuity-based ISG offerings as ISG GovernX, Research, Software as a Subscription (Automation licenses), ISG Inform and the multi-year Public Sector contracts. These offerings are characterized by subscriptions (i.e., renewal centric as opposed to project centric revenue streams) or, in some instances, multi-year contracts. Our digital services now span a volume of offerings and have become embedded as part of even our traditional transaction services. Digital enablement provides capabilities, digital insights and better engagement with clients and partners.
Our results are impacted principally by our full-time consultants’ utilization rate, the number of business days in each quarter and the number of our revenue-generating professionals who are available to work. Our utilization rate can be negatively affected by increased hiring because there is generally a transition period for new professionals that result in a temporary drop in our utilization rate. Our utilization rate can also be affected by seasonal variations in the demand for our services from our clients. The number of business workdays is also affected by the number of vacation days taken by our consultants and holidays in each quarter. We typically have fewer business workdays available in the fourth quarter of the year, which can impact revenues during that period. Time-and-expense engagements do not provide us with a high degree of predictability as to performance in future periods. Unexpected changes in the demand for our services can result in significant variations in utilization and revenues and present a challenge to optimal hiring and staffing. The volume of work performed for any particular client can vary widely from period to period.
CURRENT ENVIRONMENT
In March 2020, the World Health Organization categorized the disease caused by the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") as a pandemic, and it continues to spread extensively throughout the United States and the rest of the world, particularly in recent months with the impact of the Omicron variant of the COVID-19 virus identified in the fourth quarter of 2021. The outbreak of COVID-19 and public and private sector measures to reduce its transmission, such as business closures and limits on operations, the adoption of social distancing measures and public and private mandates to work-from-home, stay-at-home and shelter-in-place, in particular in the early months of the pandemic, adversely impacted our business and demand for our services as some businesses adjusted, reduced or suspended operating activities, which negatively impacted the markets we serve and our results of operations, cash flows and financial position throughout 2020. In 2021, despite the economic and health impacts from the spread of the Delta and Omicron variants of the COVID-19 virus, we positively benefited from the effects of robust economic recovery in many of our principal markets as vaccination efforts took hold and the overall
public health situation improved in many markets. We continue to believe that our focus on our strategic strengths, which include talent, our ISG NEXT operating model, data management capabilities, and the relevance of our offerings, position us well to navigate a rapidly changing marketplace. The future course of the pandemic is unpredictable, and the extent of its impact on our business will vary depending on the duration and severity of the continuing economic and operational impacts of COVID-19. The impact of the variants identified in 2021 and the pace of improvements in health and economic conditions has not been uniform across all geographies and could be threatened by such factors as the continued spread of the Omicron or other variants to the COVID-19 virus and limitations on the effectiveness of mass vaccination and other public health efforts to mitigate the impact of the pandemic.
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we responded swiftly in support of our people, our clients and our communities. To protect our employees, and to do our part in stopping the spread of COVID-19, within days, our entire global workforce had moved to a remote work environment. Prior to the rapid spread of the Omicron variant in the fourth quarter of 2021, a significant portion of our workforce had begun to return to the office at least part of the time, although much of our worldwide workforce continues to work from home. We recognized the importance of regular communication to reassure employees and to keep them updated on our plans as the pandemic continues to unfold. We continue to adjust our practices to facilitate the new working environments and take into account the need of many employees to work during non-traditional hours and juggle home lives and work responsibilities.
We believe we have had significant success in maintaining and continuing to advance the quality of our services notwithstanding extensive changes required by the pandemic. With respect to managing costs, we undertook multiple initiatives to align our expenses with changes in revenue. The steps we took in 2020 across the firm, included freezes on hiring and temporary labor, major cuts in non-essential spending, staff reductions and furloughs and salary reductions, including voluntary salary reductions for our senior corporate management team. Several of these actions were discontinued in 2021 as revenue growth returned.
In 2020, the Company also took restructuring actions to lower our operating expenses structurally and permanently relative to revenue and to accelerate the transformation of our business. Most of these actions were based on our experience and learning in the COVID-19 pandemic and a resulting review of our operations. Notably, we foresee a greater role for work-from-home in a hybrid office-home model to deliver and support our services in a post-COVID world.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
ISG delivered its best year ever in 2021. Our success is reflected in our share price, as investors continue to take note of our performance. During 2021, our share price rose 133 percent. For the year, we increased shareholder value by more than $214 million and returned $21 million of capital to our shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases.
Our ISG NEXT operating model, introduced in the third quarter of 2020, really proved to be a game-changer in 2021. Our solution-centric approach is resonating with clients and allowing us to expand our relationships by offering more end-to-end solutions, supported by our ISG Research and ISG Platform businesses. We also have sharpened our focus on key industry segments, marshalling our vertical expertise with targeted industry solutions to capture more business in several sectors. And we are realizing the service and productivity benefits of our virtual ISG iFlex™ global delivery network, which allows us to support our clients as one firm, across borders and time zones, leveraging the tools and information found in our cloud-based ISG Workbench.
Our ISG Platform business, anchored by our ISG GovernX supplier management solution, continues to grow-in the breadth of its offerings, in the number of clients we serve, and in revenues. In 2021, we added new third-party risk management capabilities to GovernX, and continued to expand our other platform offerings. Our ISG Research business delivered double-digit revenue growth, fueled, in particular, by the expansion of our ISG Provider Lens™ provider evaluation research business, which doubled in size in 2021.
During 2021, we took steps toward building our capabilities in several areas that show great promise for the firm, including ISG Digital Engineering, ISG Cybersecurity, and ISG Enterprise Cloud, a new approach to the market aimed at partnering with hyperscalers to support client transitions to the public cloud.
We are proud of our efforts to advance our Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) agenda in areas including Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Awareness (the IDEA team), Environmental Practices, Women in Digital and ISG Cares. Each of these have fostered greater awareness of social issues and enhanced our ability to make a positive impact in our firm and in the communities we serve.
As we look ahead to even greater success in 2022, we can look back on 2021 as a year of enormous accomplishment and success.
It was a year when we began to emerge from the worst of the pandemic, streamlined our operations and positioned ourselves for greater efficiency and growth. Under the umbrella of ISG NEXT, we simplified what we do, how we go to market and concentrated on the essence of how our clients benefit from ISG. As a result, we achieved record financial results and our investors rewarded us with a growing share price. Most importantly, we now have a solid foundation upon which to deliver robust growth in 2022 and in the years ahead.
ISG continues to have momentum in the marketplace and with our clients. Market demand for all things digital is at record highs, and there is no doubt we have the right people, the right solutions, and the right approach to help every client navigate the still-challenging passage to becoming a fully digital enterprise. Most every enterprise today is focused on continuous transformation: being nimble and agile to continuously adjust their operating models to rapidly changing technology and business conditions. This will create ongoing, sustainable demand for our advice, support, and services.
We are confident the best lies ahead for our firm and our clients as we power through the challenges of a rapidly changing world-and realize new levels of operational excellence and growth, together.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues are generally derived from fixed fee contracts as well as engagements priced on a time and materials basis, which are recorded based on actual time worked as the services are performed. In addition, we also earn revenues which are contingent on the attainment of certain contractual milestones. Revenues related to materials (mainly out-of-pocket expenses such as airfare, lodging and meals) required during an engagement generally do not include a profit mark up and can be charged and reimbursed separately or as part of the overall fee arrangement. Invoices are issued to clients monthly, semimonthly or in accordance with the specific contractual terms of each project.
We operate in one segment, fact-based sourcing advisory services. We operate principally in the Americas, Europe, and Asia Pacific. Our foreign operations are subject to local government regulations and to the uncertainties of the economic and political conditions of those areas, and the revenue for our foreign operations is predominantly invoiced and collected in local currency.
Geographical revenue information for the segment is as follows:
Revenues increased by $28.7 million or approximately 12% in 2021. The increase in revenues in the Americas was primarily attributable to an increase in our Advisory and Research service lines, as our clients made investments in their digital infrastructure and spending levels rebounded from the COVID-19 pandemic. The increase in revenues in Asia Pacific was primarily attributable to an increase in our Advisory service line, primarily in Australia. The increase in revenues in Europe was primarily attributable to an increase in our Research service line, primarily in Germany. The translation of foreign currency revenues into U.S. dollars positively impacted performance compared to the prior year in Europe and Asia Pacific.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents a breakdown of our operating expenses by functional category:
Total operating expenses increased by $12.7 million, or approximately 5%, for 2021. The increase in operating expenses were due primarily to higher compensation expenses of $12.2 million and contract labor of $11.9 million. The cost increases were partially offset by lower travel and entertainment of $4.5 million, non-cash stock compensation of $2.4 million, restructuring costs of $1.4 million, bad debt
expense of $1.0 million, communications expense of $0.5 million, occupancy expenses of $0.4 million, and contingent consideration of $0.3 million, as well as general cost savings initiatives implemented in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the ISG NEXT operating model.
Compensation costs consist of a mix of fixed and variable salaries, annual bonuses, benefits and retirement plan contributions. Statutory and 401(k) plans are offered to employees as appropriate. Direct costs also include employee taxes, health insurance, workers compensation and disability insurance.
A portion of compensation expenses for certain billable employees are allocated between direct costs and selling, general and administrative costs based on relative time spent between billable and non-billable activities.
Selling costs consist principally of compensation expense related to business development, proposal preparation and delivery, and negotiation of new client contracts. Selling costs also include travel expenses relating to the pursuit of sales opportunities, expenses for hosting periodic client conferences, public relations activities, participation in industry conferences, industry relations, website maintenance and business intelligence activities. Additionally, we maintain a dedicated global marketing function responsible for developing and managing sales campaigns, brand promotion, the ISG Index and assembling client proposals.
We maintain a comprehensive program for training and professional development with the related costs included in SG&A. Related expenses include product training, updates on new service offerings or methodologies and development of client project management skills. Also included in training and professional development are expenses associated with the development, enhancement and maintenance of our proprietary methodologies and tools and the systems that support them.
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist principally of executive management compensation, allocations of billable employee compensation related to general management activities, IT infrastructure, and costs for the finance, accounting, information technology and human resource functions. General and administrative costs also reflect continued investment associated with implementing and operating client and employee management systems. Because our billable personnel operate remotely or on client premises, all occupancy expenses are recorded as general and administrative.
Depreciation and amortization expense in 2021 and 2020 were $5.3 million and $6.2 million, respectively. The decrease of $0.9 million in depreciation and amortization expense was primarily due to intangible assets that were fully amortized in the prior year. Depreciation expense is generally computed by applying the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of assets. We also capitalize some costs associated with the purchase and development of internal-use software, system conversions and website development costs. These costs are amortized over the estimated useful life of the software or system.
We amortize our intangible assets (e.g., client relationships and databases) over their estimated useful lives. Goodwill related to acquisitions is not amortized but is subject to annual impairment testing.
Other Expense, Net
The following table presents a breakdown of other expense, net:
The total decrease of $1.2 million was primarily the result of lower interest expense attributable to our lower debt balance and lower interest rates.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective tax rate varies from period to period based on the mix of earnings among the various state and foreign tax jurisdictions in which business is conducted and the level of non-deductible expenses incurred in any given period. Our effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 32.8% compared to 53.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The variance between the US statutory rate of 21.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily caused by the impact of higher tax rates applicable on company earnings in foreign jurisdictions and non-deductible expenses for tax purposes in the U.S.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL PRESENTATION
This management’s discussion and analysis presents supplemental measures of our performance that are derived from our consolidated financial information but are not presented in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). We refer to these financial measures, which are considered “non-GAAP financial measures” under SEC rules, as adjusted EBITDA, adjusted net income, and adjusted earnings per diluted share, each as defined below. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for information about our use of these non-GAAP financial measures, including our reasons for including these measures and reconciliations of each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
We use non-GAAP financial measures to supplement the financial information presented on a GAAP basis. We provide adjusted EBITDA (defined as net income, plus interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, foreign currency transaction gains/losses, non-cash stock compensation, change in contingent consideration, acquisition-related costs, severance, integration and other expense, and financing-related costs), adjusted net income (defined as net income, plus amortization of intangible assets, non-cash stock compensation, foreign currency transaction gains/losses, change in contingent consideration, acquisition-related costs, severance, integration and other expense, financing-related costs, and write-off of deferred financing costs on a tax-adjusted basis) and adjusted net income as earnings per diluted share, excluding the net of tax effect of the items set forth in the table below. These are non-GAAP measures that the Company believes provide useful information to both management and investors by excluding certain expenses and financial implications of foreign currency translations that management believes are not indicative of ISG’s core operations. These non-GAAP measures are used by the Company to evaluate the Company’s business strategies and management’s performance. These non-GAAP financial measures exclude non-cash and certain other special charges or credits that many investors believe may obscure the user’s overall understanding of the Company’s current financial performance and the Company’s prospects for the future. We believe that these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to investors because they improve the comparability of the financial results between periods and provide for greater transparency of key measures used to evaluate the Company’s performance.
________________________________________
(1)
Consists of expenses from acquisition-related costs and non-cash fair value adjustments on pre-acquisition contract liabilities.
(2)
Marginal tax rate of 32%, reflecting U.S. federal income tax rate of 21% plus 11% attributable to U.S. states and foreign jurisdictions.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity
Our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, existing cash and cash equivalents and borrowings under our revolving line of credit. Operating assets and liabilities consist primarily of accounts receivable and contract assets, prepaid expense and other assets, accounts payable, contract liabilities, accrued expenses, and accrued payroll and related benefits. The volume of billings and timing of collections and payments affect these account balances.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
As of December 31, 2021, our liquidity and capital resources included cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $47.6 million compared to $43.8 million as of December 31, 2020, a net increase of $3.8 million, which was primarily attributable to the following:
● our operating activities provided net cash of $41.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided from operations was primarily attributable to $14.4 million provided by working capital and our net income after adjustments for non-cash charges of approximately $27.6 million. The change in working capital was primarily attributable to a $4.5 million increase in accounts payable, $5.5 million increase in accrued expenses, $1.9 million increase in contract liabilities, $2.6 million decrease in accounts receivable and contract assets, and a $0.2 million increase in prepaid expense and other assets;
● treasury share repurchases of $16.3 million;
● payments related to tax withholding for stock-based compensation of $7.1 million;
● cash dividends paid to shareholders of $4.4 million;
● principal payments on borrowings of $4.3 million;
● payment of contingent consideration of $2.6 million;
● capital expenditures for property, plant and equipment of $2.3 million; and
● proceeds from issuance of employee stock purchase plan shares of $0.6 million.
Capital Resources
The Company’s current outstanding debt, may limit our ability to fund general corporate requirements and obtain additional financing, impact our flexibility in responding to business opportunities and competitive developments and increase our vulnerability to adverse economic and industry conditions.
On March 10, 2020, the Company amended and restated its senior secured credit facility to include a $86.0 million term facility and to increase the revolving commitments per the revolving facility (the “2020 Credit Agreement”) from $30.0 million to $54.0 million. The material terms under the 2020 Credit Agreement are as follows:
● Each of the term loan facility and revolving credit facility has a maturity date of March 10, 2025 (the “Maturity Date”).
● The credit facility is secured by all of the equity interests owned by the Company, and its direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries and, subject to agreed exceptions, the Company’s direct and indirect “first-tier” foreign subsidiaries and a perfected first priority security interest in all of the Company’s and its direct and indirect domestic subsidiaries’ tangible and intangible assets.
● The Company’s direct and indirect existing and future wholly owned domestic subsidiaries serve as guarantors to the Company’s obligations under the senior secured facility.
● At the Company’s option, the credit facility bears interest at a rate per annum equal to either (i) the “Base Rate” (which is the highest of (a) the rate publicly announced from time to time by the administrative agent as its “prime rate”, (b) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.5% per annum and (c) the Eurodollar Rate, plus 1.0%), plus the applicable margin (as defined below) or (ii) Eurodollar Rate (adjusted for maximum reserves) as determined by the Administrative Agent, plus the applicable margin. The applicable margin is adjusted quarterly based upon the Company’s quarterly leverage ratio.
● The term loan is repayable in nineteen consecutive quarterly installments of $1,075,000 each that commenced on June 30, 2020 and a final payment of the outstanding principal amount of the term loan on the Maturity Date.
● Mandatory repayments of term loans shall be required from (subject to agreed exceptions) (i) 100% of the proceeds from asset sales by the Company and its subsidiaries, (ii) 100% of the net proceeds from issuances of debt and equity by the Company and its subsidiaries and (iii) 100% of the net proceeds from insurance recovery and condemnation events of the Company and its subsidiaries.
● The senior secured credit facility contains a number of covenants that, among other things, place restrictions on matters customarily restricted in senior secured credit facilities, including restrictions on indebtedness (including guarantee obligations), liens, fundamental changes, sales or disposition of property or assets, investments (including loans, advances, guarantees and acquisitions), transactions with affiliates, dividends and other payments in respect of capital stock, optional payments and modifications of other material debt instruments, negative pledges and agreements restricting subsidiary distributions and changes in line of business. In addition, the Company is required to comply with a total leverage ratio and fixed charge coverage ratio.
● The senior secured credit facility contains customary events of default, including cross-default to other material agreements, judgment default and change of control.
The Company’s financial statements include outstanding borrowings of $74.5 million and $78.8 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, which are carried at amortized cost. The fair value of debt is classified within Level 3 of the fair value hierarchy. The fair value of the Company's outstanding borrowings is approximately $73.6 million and $77.7 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The fair values of debt have been estimated using a discounted cash flow analysis based on the Company's incremental borrowing rate for similar borrowing arrangements. The incremental borrowing rate used to discount future cash flows is 2.0% and 2.5% for December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company also considered recent transactions of peer group companies for similar instruments with comparable terms and maturities as well as an analysis of current market conditions and interest rates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no borrowings under the revolver.
We anticipate that our current cash and the ongoing cash flows from our operations will be adequate to meet our working capital, capital expenditure, and debt financing needs for at least the next twelve months. The anticipated cash needs of our business could change significantly if we pursue and complete additional business acquisitions, if our business plans change, if economic conditions change from those currently prevailing or from those now anticipated, or if other unexpected circumstances arise that may have a material effect on the cash flow or profitability of our business. If we require additional capital resources to grow our business, either internally or through acquisition, or maintain liquidity, we may seek to sell additional equity securities or to secure additional debt financing. The sale of additional equity securities or certain forms of debt financing could result in additional dilution to our stockholders. We may not be able to obtain financing arrangements in amounts or on terms acceptable to us in the future.
The Company has financial covenants underlying its debt which require a Debt to adjusted EBITDA ratio of 3.25. The Company is currently in compliance with its financial covenants.
Employee Retirement Plans
For the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we contributed $2.1 million and $0.9 million, respectively, to the 401(k) plan (the “Savings Plan”) on a fully discretionary basis. These amounts were invested by the participants in a variety of investment options under an arrangement with a third-party asset manager. All current and future financial risks associated with the gains and losses on investments are borne by Savings Plan participants.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires the appropriate application of certain accounting policies, many of which require management to make estimates and assumptions about future events and their impact on amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes. Since future events and their impact cannot be determined with certainty, the actual results may differ from estimates. Such differences may be material to the consolidated financial statements.
We believe the application of accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are periodically reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change. Historically, we have found the application of accounting policies to be appropriate, and actual results have not differed materially from those determined using necessary estimates.
Our accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the “Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.” We have identified revenue recognition as a critical accounting estimate:
Revenue Recognition
We recognize our revenues by applying the following five steps: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s); and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) the company satisfies the performance obligation(s).
We principally derive revenues from fees for services generated on a project by project basis. Prior to the commencement of a project, we reach agreement with the client on rates for services based upon the scope of the project, staffing requirements and the level of client involvement. It is our policy to obtain written agreements from clients prior to performing services or when evidence of enforceable rights and obligations is obtained. In these agreements, the clients acknowledge that they will pay based upon the amount of time spent on the project or an agreed upon fee structure.
Revenues for time and materials contracts, which may include capped fees or “not-to-exceed” clauses, are recognized based on the number of hours worked by our advisors at an agreed upon rate per hour and are recognized in the period in which services are performed. Revenues for time and materials contracts are billed monthly, semimonthly or in accordance with the specific contractual terms of each project. For contracts with capped fees or not-to-exceed clauses, we monitor our performance and fees billed to ensure that revenue is not recognized in excess of the contractually capped fee.
Revenues related to fixed fee contracts are recognized as value is delivered to the customer, consistent with the transfer of control to the customer over time. Revenue for these contracts is recognized proportionally over the term of the contract using an input method based on the proportion of labor hours incurred as compared to the total estimated labor hours for the fixed fee contract performance obligations, which we consider the best available indicator of the pattern and timing in which contract performance obligations are fulfilled and control transfers to the customer. This percentage is multiplied by the contracted dollar amount of the project to determine the amount of revenue to recognize in an accounting period. The contracted amount used in this calculation typically excludes the amount the client pays for reimbursable expenses. There are situations where the number of hours to complete projects may exceed our original estimate as a result of an increase in project scope or unforeseen events. The results of any revisions in these estimates are reflected in the period in which they become known.
For managed service implementation contracts, revenue is recognized over time as a percentage of hours incurred to date as compared to the total expected hours of the implementation, consistent with the transfer of control to the customer. For ongoing managed services contract, revenue is recognized over time, consistent with the weekly or monthly fee specified within such arrangements.
We also derive revenues based on negotiating reductions in network and software costs of companies with the entity’s related service providers and providing other services such as audits of network and communication expenses, and consultation for network architecture. These contracts can be fixed in fees or can be based on the level of savings achieved related to its communications costs. Additionally, these contracts can also have a fixed component and a contingent component that is based on the savings generated by the
Company. For network and software contingency contracts with termination for convenience clauses, revenue is recognized over time due to the existence of provisions for payment for progress incurred to date plus a reasonable profit margin. The contract periods range from a few months to in excess of a year.
We also enter into arrangements for the sale of automation software licenses and related delivery of consulting or implementation services at the same time or within close proximity to one another. Such software-related performance obligations include the sale of on-premise software and software-as-a-service licenses, as well as other software-related services. Revenue associated with the software performance obligation is primarily recognized at the point at which the software is installed or access is granted, while revenue associated with the implementation service performance obligation is recognized over the software implementation period as a percentage of hours incurred to date as compared to the total expected hours.
Revenue associated with events is recognized at the point of time at which the event occurs and is primarily comprised of sponsorships. Conversely, revenue associated with research subscriptions is recognized over time, as the customer accesses our data or related platforms. In addition, we sell research products for which the revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery to the client.
The agreements entered into in connection with a project typically allow our clients to terminate early due to breach or for convenience with 30 days’ notice. In the event of termination, the client is contractually required to pay for all time, materials and expenses incurred by us through the effective date of the termination. In addition, from time to time, we enter into agreements with clients that limit our right to enter into business relationships with specific competitors of that client for a specific time period. These provisions typically prohibit us from performing a defined range of services that we might otherwise be willing to perform for potential clients. These provisions are generally limited to six to twelve months and usually apply only to specific employees or the specific project team.
When we recognize revenues in advance of billing, those revenues are recorded as contract assets. When we invoice in advance of completing services or earning revenues, those amounts are recorded as contract liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.