Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those set forth as a result of general economic conditions and changes in the assumptions used in making such forward-looking statements. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with the audited financial statements and accompanying notes and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The analysis set forth below is provided pursuant to applicable Securities and Exchange Commission regulations and is not intended to serve as a basis for projections of future events.
Overview of Our Company
International Land Alliance, Inc. was incorporated pursuant to the laws of the State of Wyoming on September 26, 2013. We are based in San Diego, California. We are a residential land development company with target properties located primarily in the Baja California Northern region of Mexico and Southern California. Our principal activities are purchasing properties, obtaining zoning and other entitlements required to subdivide the properties into residential and commercial building lots, securing financing for the purchase of the lots, improving the properties’ infrastructure and amenities, and selling the lots to homebuyers, retirees, investors, and commercial developers. We offer the option of financing (i.e. taking a promissory note from the buyer for all or part of the purchase price) with a guaranteed acceptance on any purchase for every customer.
Overview
The real estate market in the Northern Baja California has continued to significantly improve and has fully recover from the negative impact of Covid-19. The housing prices has continued to rise in the Southwest U.S., and inventory has remained severely low, which
generated additional attraction from home buyers seeking second homes or vacation homes.
The Company’s current portfolio includes residential, resort and commercial properties comprising of the following projects:
■ Oasis Park Resort is a 497-acres master planned real estate community including 1,344 residential home sites, south of San Felipe, Baja California that offers180-degree sea and mountain views. In addition to the residential lots, there is a planned boutique hotel, a spacious commercial center, and a nautical center. The Company recently allowed prospective homeowners and existing lot holders to tour the property again, which resulted in multiple sales closings and commitments for new home construction. 75 of the 1,344 planned residential lots were pre-sold to initial stakeholders. The Company has made significant progress on the project, which included the completion of the two-mile access road and the community entrance structure. The Company also started construction of the waterfront clubhouse, and model homes. During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold 3 home sites and received a down payment on the first new home construction.
■ Valle Divino is a self-contained solar 650-home site project in Ensenada, Baja California, with test vineyard at the property. This resort includes 137 residential lots and 3 commercial lots on 20 acres of land. This represents an estimated $60 million in gross sales opportunity.
■ Plaza Bajamar Resort is an 80-unit project located at the internationally-renowned Bajamar Ocean front hotel and golf resort. The Bajamar oceanfront golf resort is a master planned golf community located 45 minutes south of the San Diego-Tijuana border along the scenic toll road to Ensenada. The first Phase will include 22 “Merlot” 1,150 square-foot single-family homes that features two bedrooms and two baths. The home includes two primary bedroom suites - one on the first floor and one upstairs, as well as fairway and ocean views from a rooftop terrace. The Merlot villas will come with the installation of solar packages.
■ Emerald Grove Estates is the Company’s newly renovated Southern California property, used for organized events at this 8,000 square foot event venue.
Equity-method investment:
■ Rancho Costa Verde (“RCVD”) is a 1,100-acre master planned second home, retirement home and vacation home real estate community located on the east coast of Baja California. RCV is a self-sustained solar powered green community that takes advantage of the advances in solar and other green technology. In May 2021, the Company acquired a 25% investment in RCV in exchange for $100,000 and 3,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, and such investment was recorded as an equity-method investment in the Company’s condensed consolidated financial statements.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021:
■ The Company executed residential plot sales agreements for its Valle Divino project and accepted several reservations for home sales to purchase twenty percent (20%) inventory for phase I project at its Plaza Bajamar. To avoid paying multiple title transfer fees and the extended time for each recording, the seller for both parcels, Valdeland, S.A. de C.V., an entity controlled by the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, is in the process of creating a master bank trust. This will provide the Company through its Mexican’s subsidiary, International Land Alliance, S.A. de C.V., the rights, and interest to each property, including buildings and improvements. As demonstrated from the Company’s Oasis Park Resort, this will also potentially allow the Company to record revenue from its Valle Divino and Plaza Bajamar projects, as sales are made, and individual trusts are established for each buyer, pending further review of Mexican trust law. The Company expects to have this trust established by the end of second fiscal quarter of 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the Company received approximately $102,164 from plot sales, which are currently reported as contract liability in the Company’s consolidated balance sheet until individual trusts are established and title transferred to the buyer. The Company broke ground on the Valle Divino development in July 2020 and completed its first stage of construction in January 2021 and started reservations of residential lots. The Company has a dedicated partner for solar-plus-storage power solutions at its properties, CleanSpark, Inc., which serves as the Company’s exclusive partner for the installation of solar solutions across its portfolio, including the model homes at Plaza Bajamar. The Company commenced construction of a model home, and a clubhouse for wine tasting.
■ The Company partnered with Clean Spark, Inc. to successfully deploy a microgrid on the Company’s model home at Plaza Bajamar, and established plan to outfit all units at the property, as well all units at Valle Divino with solar micro grid installations.
■ Resumed construction and service work at Oasis Park Resort for Phase I of the project.
■ Reopened the Company’s newly renovated event center at its Emerald Grove Estates property in Southern California. The Company entered into a contract to sell a vacant 20-acre parcel of the property for approximately $630,000. The property includes the main parcel of land with existing structures along with three additional parcels of land which are vacant plots.
■ Continued our research and marketing efforts to identify potential home buyers in the United States, Canada, Europe, and Asia. Through the formation of a partnership with a similar development company in the Baja California Norte Region of Mexico, we have been able to leverage additional resources with the use of their established and proven marketing plan which can help us with sophisticated execution and the desired results for residential plot sales and development.
■ Title of Oasis Park Resort in San Felipe was assumed during 2019. As progress continues on the development of the Oasis Park Resort, we are expecting the transfer of title on the Villas del Enologo in Rancho Tecate, Valle Divino in Ensenada, Baja California and Plaza Bajamar in Ensenada, Baja California during the Company second fiscal quarter of 2022, as we continue to follow the necessary steps to complete this legal process.
■ Continued efforts to secure financing and strengthen balance by closing a $2.0 million financing with accredited institutional investors and paid off a $500,000 bridge loan in full.
■ Completed the refinancing of our existing first and second mortgage loans on the 80 acres of land and existing structure of our Emerald Grove property for aggregate principal amount of $1,787,000, which provided a net funding of approximately $387,000.
Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Our total revenue reported for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $522,696, compared with $8,290 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $496,797 related to the sale of 20 acres of vacant land and associated improvements located at the Emerald Grove property in Hemet, California, and $25,899 in rental income activities related to IntegraGreen as the transaction was previously accounted for pursuant to ASC 842.
Cost of Revenues
Our total cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $67,806 compared with $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change is a result of the cost of associated with the cost of the 20 acres of land sold to IntegraGreen.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased to $4,657,818 for the year ended December 31, 2021, from to $2,146,047 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The detail by major category is reflected in the table below.
Sales and marketing costs increased by $1,659,274 for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to the fair value of options issued pursuant to a consulting and real estate sales agreement, which were granted during the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company also granted common shares with a fair value of approximately $447,000 with regards to consulting and advisory services on M&A, marketing & promotions of the Company real estate projects.
General and administrative costs increased by $852,497 for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to compensation expense resulting from new employment contracts for our President, investors relations, and stock-based compensation.
Other expense
Other expense increased by $330,093 to $859,134 for the year ended December 31, 2021, from $529,041 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Such increase is primarily due to interest expense which increased by $329,478 and by the loss from the Company’s share in the equity of its equity-method investee for $168,170, offset by the reversal of default penalties on promissory notes for $100,000 recorded in other income, interest income from the financing component of the lot sale to Integragreen for approximately $18,000.
Net Loss
We finished the year ended December 31, 2021, with a net loss of $5,062,062, as compared to a loss of $2,666,798 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is primarily the result of increased compensation to our officers, stock-based compensation, investors relations, interest expense incurred and the loss from our equity-method investment during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.
The factors that will most significantly affect future operating results will be:
■ The acquisition of land with lots for sale.
■ The sale price of future lots, compared to the sale price of lots in other resorts in Mexico.
■ The cost to construct a home on the lots to be transferred, and the quality of construction.
■ The quality of our amenities.
■ The effectiveness of our sales and marketing strategies.
■ The global economy and the demand for vacation homes.
■ The on-going effect of COVID-19 on the US and Global economy.
■ The access to capital financing to continue the development of our existing projects and acquire new projects.
Other than the foregoing we do not know of any trends, events or uncertainties that have had, or are reasonably expected to have, a material impact on our revenues or expenses.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Cash and cash equivalents were approximately $56,600 at December 31, 2021. As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial statements, we recorded a loss of $5,062,062 and $2,666,798 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Our working capital deficit at December 31, 2021 was approximately $2,118,600 and net cash flows used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, were approximately $1,036,000. These factors and our limited ability to raise additional capital to accomplish our objectives, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We expect our expenses will continue to increase during the foreseeable future as a result of increased operations and the development of our current business operations. We anticipate generating continued revenues over the next twelve months as we continue to market the sale of lots held for sale, now having assumed title of our Oasis Park Resort property and expect to assume title to our other properties; however, there can be no assurance that such revenue will be sufficient to cover our expenses. Consequently, we expect to be dependent on the proceeds from future debt or equity investments to sustain our operations and implement our business plan. If we are unable to raise sufficient capital, we will be required to delay or forego some portion of our business plan, which would have a material adverse effect on our anticipated results from operations and financial condition. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain necessary amounts of capital or that our estimates of our capital requirements will prove to be accurate.
We presently do not have any significant credit available, bank financing or other external sources of liquidity. Due to our operating losses, our operations have not been a significant source of liquidity. We will need to acquire other profitable properties or obtain additional capital in order to expand operations and become profitable. In order to obtain capital, we may need to sell additional shares of our common stock or borrow funds from private lenders. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining additional funding.
To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the issuance of such securities may result in dilution to existing stockholders. If additional funds are raised through the issuance of debt securities, these securities may have rights, preferences, and privileges senior to holders of common stock and the terms of such debt could impose restrictions on our operations. Regardless of whether our cash assets prove to be inadequate to meet our operational needs, we may seek to continue to compensate providers of services by issuance of stock in lieu of cash, which may also result in dilution to existing shareholders. Even if we are able to raise the funds required, it is possible that we could incur unexpected costs and expenses, fail to collect significant amounts owed to us, or experience unexpected cash requirements that would force us to seek alternative financing.
No assurance can be given that sources of financing will be available to us and/or that demand for our equity/debt instruments will be sufficient to meet our capital needs, or that financing will be available on terms favorable to us. If funding is insufficient at any time in the future, we may not be able to take advantage of business opportunities or respond to competitive pressures or may be required to reduce the scope of our planned development, any of which could have a negative impact on our business and operating results. In addition, insufficient funding may have a material adverse effect on our financial condition, which could require us to:
● Curtail our operations significantly, or
● Seek arrangements with strategic partners or other parties that may require us to relinquish significant rights to our development of resorts and correlated services, or
● Explore other strategic alternatives including a merger or sale of our Company.
Operating Activities
Net cash flows used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $1,035,678, which resulted primarily due to the loss of $5,062,062 offset by stock-based compensation of $2,129,266, fair value of shares issued as settlement of debt of $103,470, the fair value of commitment shares issued with convertible notes for $136,800, fair value of shares issued for service for $387,108, depreciation expense of $49,673, amortization of debt discount for $296,541, loss from equity-method investment of $168,170, and change in assets and liabilities of approximately $676,674.
Net cash flows used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $709,754, which resulted primarily due to the loss of $2,666,798 offset by debt discount amortization expense of $202,148, depreciation and amortization of $45,874, and stock-based compensation of $956,447
Investing Activities
Net cash flows used in investing activities was $722,050 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The funds were used for the development of the commercial agriculture at Emerald Grove resort for $100,000, cash consideration of $100,000 for the acquisition of 25% of RCV accounted for as its equity-method investment and approximately $522,050 for construction at the Company’s projects.
Net cash flows used in investing activities was $103,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The funds were used for the acquisition and development of the Emerald Grove property and Plaza Bajamar property.
Financing Activities
Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $1,801,147 primarily from cash proceeds from issuance of promissory notes for aggregate amount of $1,186,685, net funding from refinancing of approximately $368,736, sale of common stocks of $1,804,750, exercise of warrants and options for $100,000, and offset by repayment on a promissory note of $1,659,024.
Net cash flows provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $653,399 primarily from cash proceeds from sale of common stocks and warrants of $125,000, and cash proceeds from sale of common stock, warrants and plots of land promised to investors, net of expenses of $228,395, cash proceeds from warrant and option exercise of $81,308 and cash proceeds from note payable of $406,317.
As a result of these activities, we experienced an increase in cash and cash equivalents of approximately $43,400 for the years ended December 31, 2021, and a decrease in cash and cash equivalents of $159,355 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our ability to continue as a going concern is still dependent on our success in obtaining additional financing from investors.
Critical Accounting Polices
In December 2001, the SEC requested that all registrants list their “critical accounting polices” in the Management Discussion and Analysis. The SEC indicated that a “critical accounting policy” is one which is both important to the portrayal of a company’s financial condition and results, and requires management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included herein. We consider the following accounting policies critical to the understanding of the results of our operations:
■ Going concern. It requires to rely on management’s representation on financial forecast.
■ Revenue recognition. It requires judgement to determine when a contract exists, when performance obligations are met and the estimated variable consideration if any.
■ Issuance of debt with attached financial instruments. Some instruments carry embedded features that require bifurcation from host instrument and accounting as derivative liability.
■ Accounting of the Company’s equity-method investment. Indeed, it requires judgement by management to determine whether these is significant influence or control over the Company’s investee. Significant influence is the power to participate in the financial and operating policy decisions of the investee but is not control or joint control over these policies.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
Since our inception through December 31, 2021, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The recent accounting pronouncements that are material to our financial statements are disclosed in Note 1 of our consolidated audited financial statements included herein.