ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth previously under the caption “Risk Factors.” This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report.
The results of operations for the periods reflected herein are not necessarily indicative of results that may be expected for future periods.
References in this MD&A to “we,” “us,” “our,” “our company,” “our business” and “IMAC Holdings” are to IMAC Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and prior to the Corporate Conversion (defined below), IMAC Holdings, LLC, a Kentucky limited liability company, and the following entities which are consolidated due to direct ownership of a controlling voting interest or other rights granted to us as the sole general partner or managing member of the entity: IMAC Regeneration Center of St. Louis, LLC (“IMAC St. Louis”), IMAC Management Services, LLC (“IMAC Management”), IMAC Regeneration Management, LLC (“IMAC Texas”) IMAC Regeneration Management of Nashville, LLC (“IMAC Nashville”) IMAC Management of Illinois, LLC (“IMAC Illinois”), Advantage Hand Therapy and Orthopedic Rehabilitation, LLC (“Advantage Therapy”), IMAC Management of Florida, LLC (“IMAC Florida”), Louisiana Orthopaedic & Sports Rehab (“IMAC Louisiana”) and The Back Space, LLC (“BackSpace”); the following entity which is consolidated with IMAC Regeneration Management of Nashville, LLC due to control by contract: IMAC Regeneration Center of Nashville, PC (“IMAC Nashville PC”); the following entities which are consolidated with IMAC Management of Illinois, LLC due to control by contract: Progressive Health and Rehabilitation, Ltd., Illinois Spine and Disc Institute, Ltd. and Ricardo Knight, P.C.; the following entity which is consolidated with IMAC Management Services, LLC due to control by contract: Integrated Medicine and Chiropractic Regeneration Center PSC (Kentucky PC); the following entities which are consolidated with IMAC Florida due to control by contract: Willmitch Chiropractic, P.A. and IMAC Medical of Florida, P.A.; the following entity which is consolidated with Louisiana Orthopaedic & Sports Rehab due to control by contract: IMAC Medical of Louisiana, a Medical Corporation; and the following entities which are consolidated with BackSpace due to control by contract: ChiroMart LLC, ChiroMart Florida LLC, and ChiroMart Missouri LLC.
Overview
We are a provider of movement and orthopedic therapies and minimally invasive procedures performed through our regenerative and rehabilitative medical treatments to improve the physical health of our patients at our chain of IMAC Regeneration Centers and BackSpace clinics which we own or manage. Our outpatient medical clinics provide conservative, minimally invasive medical treatments to help patients with back pain, knee pain, joint pain, ligament and tendon damage, and other related soft tissue conditions. Our licensed healthcare professionals evaluate each patient and provide a custom treatment plan that integrates traditional medical procedures and innovative regenerative medicine procedures in combination with physical medicine. We do not use or offer opioid-based prescriptions as part of our treatment options in order to help our patients avoid the dangers of opioid abuse and addiction. The original IMAC Regeneration Center opened in Kentucky in August 2000 and remains the flagship location of our current business, which was formally organized in March 2015. To date, we have seventeen outpatient medical clinics in Florida, Illinois, Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri and Tennessee, and plan to further expand the reach of our facilities to other strategic locations throughout the United States. We have four BackSpace locations opened in Tennessee and Missouri with 6 more clinics scheduled to open during the first quarter of 2022 in Tennessee and Florida. We have partnered with several active and former professional athletes, including Ozzie Smith, David Price, Tony Delk and Mike Ditka, in the branding of our IMAC Regeneration Centers. Our outpatient medical clinics emphasize our focus around treating sports and orthopedic injuries as an alternative to traditional surgeries for repair or joint replacement.
We own our medical clinics directly or have entered into long-term management services agreements to operate and control certain of our medical clinics by contract. Our preference is to own the clinics; however, some state laws restrict the corporate practice of medicine and require a licensed medical practitioner to own the clinic. Accordingly, our managed clinics are owned exclusively by a medical professional within a professional service corporation (formed as a limited liability company or corporation) and are under common control with us in order to comply with state laws regulating the ownership of medical practices. We are compensated under management services agreements through service fees based on the cost of the services provided, plus a specified markup percentage, and a discretionary annual bonus determined in the sole discretion of each professional service corporation.
Corporate Conversion
Prior to June 1, 2018, we were a Kentucky limited liability company named IMAC Holdings, LLC. Effective June 1, 2018, we converted into a Delaware corporation pursuant to a statutory merger (the “Corporate Conversion”) and changed our name to IMAC Holdings, Inc. All of our outstanding membership interests were exchanged on a proportional basis into shares of common stock of IMAC Holdings, Inc.
Following the Corporate Conversion, IMAC Holdings, Inc. continues to hold all of the property and assets of IMAC Holdings, LLC and all of the debts and obligations of IMAC Holdings, LLC continue as the debts and obligations of IMAC Holdings, Inc. The purpose of the Corporate Conversion was to reorganize our corporate structure so that the top tier entity in our corporate structure is a corporation rather than a limited liability company and so that our existing owners own shares of our common stock rather than membership interests in a limited liability company. Except as otherwise noted herein, the consolidated financial statements included herein are those of IMAC Holdings, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Significant financial metrics
Our significant financial metrics of the Company for the year ended December 31, 2021 are set forth in the bullets below.
● Net loss of $10.5 million in the year ended 2021 compared to a net loss of $5.5 million in the year ended 2020.
● Adjusted EBITDA1 of ($7.7 million) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to ($4.4) for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● The Company incurred $593,000 in FDA related expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $209,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
● The Company paid $4.4 million of principal and interest in 2021.
● Operating expenses increased $2.2 million related to the five IMAC clinics acquired in 2021.
● The BackSpace incurred initial opening expenses of $69,000
● The Company had one-time expenses of $441,000, consisting of: $108,000 in earnout post-acquisition, $90,000 in share based compensation due to a change in the vesting schedule, $97,000 in one-time consulting fees, $63,000 in legal and $51,000 in recruiting.
(1) Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure most closely comparable to the GAAP measure of net loss. See “Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Matters” below for a full reconciliation of the GAAP and non-GAAP measures.
Impacts of and Response to COVID-19 Outbreak
In March 2020, federal, state and local government authorities issued orders and guidance in order to combat the spread of the COVID-19 outbreak. These actions have required or encouraged our patients to remain at home except for essential activities and may reduce patient visits to our clinics. For example, the governor of Kentucky ordered all chiropractic facilities in the state of Kentucky to close effective March 20, 2020, which caused us to close our Kentucky chiropractic facilities until such order was lifted on May 4, 2020. The full extent and duration of such actions and their impacts over the longer term remain uncertain and dependent on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the severity and transmission rate of the COVID-19 outbreak and the extent and effectiveness of containment actions taken.
Our response plan has multiple facets and continues to evolve as the pandemic unfolds. As a precautionary measure, we have taken steps to enhance our operational and financial flexibility to react to the risks the COVID-19 outbreak presents to our business, including the following:
● Launched telemedicine communications for remote patient engagement;
● Suspended operations in three Kentucky clinics to comply with government orders until we were allowed to resume operations on May 4, 2020; and
● Suspended operations at one clinic located in Cook County, Illinois to comply with government orders until such order is lifted. The lease for this clinic expired June 30, 2020 and was not renewed.
The COVID-19 outbreak appears likely to cause significant economic harm across the United States, and the negative economic conditions that may result in reduced patient demand in our industry. We may experience a material loss of patients, revenue and market share as a result of the suspension of any operations. Initiatives to implement telehealth engagement with patients may not be adopted by existing and new patients. Patient habits may also be altered in the medium to long term. Negative economic conditions, a decrease in our revenue and consequent longer term trends harmful to our business may all exert pressure on our company during the pendency of emergency restrictions on our operations and beyond. Due to such conditions, beginning in the month of March 2020 we began to terminate or furlough employees to reduce costs associated with non-essential personnel, which resulted in a 27% reduction in workforce.
We cannot predict with certainty when public health and economic conditions will return to normal. A decline in patient visits and/or the possible suspension of operations mandated in response to the COVID-19 outbreak, and the consequent loss of revenue and cash flow during this period may make it difficult for us to obtain capital necessary to fund our operations. Due to the impacts of COVID-19 we have seen an increase in recruiting and labor costs as well as delays in supply chain.
Matters that May or Are Currently Affecting Our Business
We believe that the growth of our business and our future success depend on various opportunities, challenges, trends and other factors, including the following:
● Our ability to identify, contract with, install equipment and operate a large number of outpatient medical clinics and attract new patients to them;
● Our need to hire additional healthcare professionals in order to operate the large number of clinics we intend to open;
● Our ability to enhance revenue at each facility on an ongoing basis through additional patient volume and new services;
● Our ability to obtain additional financing for the projected costs associated with the acquisition, management and development of new clinics, and the personnel involved, if and when needed;
● Our ability to attract competent, skilled medical and sales personnel for our operations at acceptable prices to manage our overhead; and
● Our ability to control our operating expenses as we expand our organization into neighboring states.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses at the date and for the periods that the consolidated financial statements are prepared. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to insurance adjustments and provisions for doubtful accounts, useful lives of intangibles, property and equipment, and valuation of goodwill. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
We believe that, of the significant accounting policies discussed in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, the following accounting policies require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments in the preparation of our financial statements.
Intangible Assets
The Company capitalizes the fair value of intangible assets acquired in business combinations. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated economic useful lives, generally the contract term. The Company performs valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed on each acquisition accounted for as a business combination and allocates the purchase price of each acquired business to its respective net tangible and intangible assets. Acquired intangible assets include trade names, non-compete agreements, customer relationships and contractual agreements. Intangible assets are subject to annual impairment tests and no impairments were recorded for the years presented.
Goodwill
Our goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the net identifiable assets acquired in business combinations. The goodwill generated from the business combinations is primarily related to the value placed on the employee workforce and expected synergies. Judgment is involved in determining if an indicator or change in circumstances relating to impairment has occurred. Such changes may include, among others, a significant decline in expected future cash flows, a significant adverse change in the business climate, and unforeseen competition.
The goodwill test is performed at least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. The annual impairment test includes an option to perform a qualitative assessment of whether it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying value; the qualitative test may be performed prior to, or as an alternative to, performing a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, the Company determines that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, then the Company is required to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. Otherwise, no further analysis is required. There was no goodwill impairment for the years presented.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s patient service revenue is derived from non-surgical procedures performed at our outpatient medical clinics. The fees for such services are billed either to the patient or a third-party payer, including Medicare.
The Company recognizes service revenues based upon the estimated amounts the Company expects to be entitled to receive from patients and third-party payers. Estimates of contractual adjustments are based upon the payment terms specified in the related contractual agreements. The Company also records estimated implicit price concessions (based primarily on historical collection experience) related to uninsured accounts to record these revenues at the estimated amounts expected to be collected. Such estimates are subject to revisions which may be material.
Starting in January 2020, the Company implemented wellness maintenance programs on a subscription basis. There are five membership plans offered with different levels of service for each plan. The Company recognizes membership revenue on a monthly basis. Enrollment in the wellness maintenance program can occur at any time during the month and can be cancelled at any time.
Other management service fees are derived from management services where the Company provides billings and collections support to the clinics and where management services are provided based on state specific regulations known as the corporate practice of medicine (“CPM”). Under the CPM, a business corporation is precluded from practicing medicine or employing a physician to provide professional medical services. In these circumstances, the Company provides all administrative support to the physician-owned PC through an LLC. The PC is consolidated due to control by contract (an “MSA” - Management Services Agreement). The fees we derive from these management arrangements are either based on a predetermined percentage of the revenue of each clinic or a percentage mark up on the costs of the LLC. The company recognizes other management service revenue in the period in which services are rendered. These revenues are earned by IMAC Nashville, IMAC Management, IMAC Illinois, IMAC Florida and IMAC Louisiana and are eliminated in consolidation to the extent owned.
Starting in June 2021, the Company began offering outpatient chiropractic and spinal care services as well as memberships services in Walmart retail locations as part of Back Space. The fees for such services are paid and recognized as incurred.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable primarily consists of amounts due from third-party payers (non-governmental), governmental payers and private pay patients and is recorded net of allowances for doubtful accounts and contractual discounts. Our ability to collect outstanding receivables is critical to our results of operations and cash flows. Accordingly, accounts receivable reported in our consolidated financial statements are recorded at the net amount expected to be received. Our primary collection risks are (i) the risk of overestimation of net revenues at the time of billing that may result in our receiving less than the recorded receivable, (ii) the risk of non-payment as a result of commercial insurance companies’ denial of claims, (iii) the risk that patients will fail to remit insurance payments to us when the commercial insurance company pays out-of-network claims directly to the patient, (iv) resource and capacity constraints that may prevent us from handling the volume of billing and collection issues in a timely manner, (v) the risk that patients do not pay us for their self-pay balances (including co-pays, deductibles and any portion of the claim not covered by insurance), and (vi) the risk of non-payment from uninsured patients.
Our accounts receivable from third-party payers are recorded net of estimated contractual adjustments and allowances from third-party payers, which are estimated based on the historical trend of our facilities’ cash collections and contractual write-offs, accounts receivable aging, established fee schedules, relationships with payers and procedure statistics. While changes in estimated reimbursement from third-party payers remain a possibility, we expect that any such changes would be minimal and, therefore, would not have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations. Our collection policies and procedures are based on the type of payor, size of claim and estimated collection percentage for each patient account. The operating systems used to manage our patient accounts provide for an aging schedule in 30-day increments, by payer, physician and patient. We analyze accounts receivable at each of the facilities to ensure the proper collection and aged category. The operating systems generate reports that assist in the collection efforts by prioritizing patient accounts. Collection efforts include direct contact with insurance carriers or patients and written correspondence.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
Deferred tax assets are required to be reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent that, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. These are based on estimates of future taxable income which are highly subjective and subject to changes.
Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020
We own our medical clinics directly or have entered into long-term management services agreements to operate and control these medical clinics by contract. Our preference is to own the clinics; however, some state laws restrict the corporate practice of medicine and require a licensed medical practitioner to own the clinic. Accordingly, our managed clinics are owned exclusively by a medical professional within a professional service corporation (formed as a limited liability company or corporation) under common control with us or eligible members of our company in order to comply with state laws regulating the ownership of medical practices. We are compensated under management services agreements through service fees based on the cost of the services provided, plus a specified markup percentage, and a discretionary annual bonus determined in the sole discretion of each professional service corporation.See Note 15 for previously reported financial information that has been revised.
Revenues
Our revenue mix is diversified between medical treatments and physiological treatments. Our medical treatments are further segmented into traditional medical and regenerative medicine practices. We are an in-network provider for traditional physical medical treatments, such as physical therapy, chiropractic services and medical evaluations, with most private health insurance carriers. Regenerative medical treatments are typically not covered by insurance, but paid by the patient. For more information on our revenue recognition policies, see “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Revenue Recognition.”
Revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
See the table below for more information regarding our revenue breakdown by service type.
Visits to our clinics are an indication of business activity. The following table is a breakdown of visits by type for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Consolidated Results
Total revenues increased $1.3 million due to acquisitions, continued same-store growth, opening of retail clinics and improvements from the negative impact of COVID-19 on 2020.
IMAC Clinics
The total revenue increase of $1.3 million is attributed to the increase of revenues for IMAC Clinics. Same-store revenues decreased $202,000 overall from 2020 to 2021. This decrease was driven by the closure of two clinics in Illinois and Tennessee resulting in a decrease of $595,000 however the remaining same stores increased $393,000. New clinics attributed to $1.5 million of the overall increase.
Retail Clinics
The Company began opening retail clinics in Walmart in June 2021 and as of December 31, 2021 had four clinics opened in Tennessee and Missouri. The company has scheduled 6 additional locations to open during the first quarter of 2022. The retail clinics provides outpatient chiropractic and spinal care services. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the retail clinics had 1,038 visits.
Memberships
A wellness membership program was implemented at IMAC Clinics in January 2020 and this wellness program has different plan levels that include services for chiropractic care and medical treatments on a monthly subscription basis. Therefore, memberships could have multiple visits in one month, however only one payment is received for these visits. IMAC Clinics had 1,189 and 849 active members for the years ended in December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. BackSpace also has a membership plan for chiropractic care on a monthly subscription basis. As of December 31, 2021, 76% of the BackSpace revenue was related to memberships.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of patient expenses, salaries and benefits, share based compensation, advertising and marketing, general and administrative expenses and depreciation expenses.
Patient expenses consist of medical supplies for services rendered.
Cost of revenues (patient expense) stayed relatively consistent for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 although patient revenue increased 10%. This is attributed to improvements in supply management as the Company centralized medical ordering for all clinics and the implementation of supply discounts related to volume purchases. The rotation of service mix also reduced supply costs, for example cell therapy visits decreased 20% which is a higher cost procedure.
Salaries and benefits consist of payroll, benefits and related party contracts.
Salaries and benefits expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, increased by 21%. An increase would have been expected considering the Company added five IMAC locations in 2021, one clinic opened at the end of 2020 with a full year in 2021 and opened four BackSpace locations during 2021. These new clinics attributed to $1.6 million of the increase. $320,000 of the increase is a result of the executive compensation adjustments approved by the compensation committee in 2021.
Share-based compensation consists of the value of equity incentive grants issued to employees, directors and board members which have vested during the period.
Share-based compensation increased due to the amended vesting schedule of the RSUs awarded to the board in 2020. This change reflected an increase of $90,000 in share-based compensation compared to what was expected with the original schedule. The Company also awarded RSUs in January 2021 that vest in January 2022 as well as RSUs awarded in December 2021 that vested immediately, this attributed to $40,000 of the increase.
Advertising and marketing consist of marketing, business promotion and brand recognition.
Advertising and marketing expenses increased $392,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2020 the Company reduced marketing spending as a result of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak however marketing efforts were fully implemented for 2021 along with marketing for new clinics. There was a similar increase in online and website advertising for 2021 as compared to 2020. $256,000 of the total increase was attributed to online and website advertising. Patient visits increased in 2021 that coincides with our increase in marketing in all of our locations as well as adding advertising for new locations.
General and administrative expense (“G&A”) consist of all other costs than advertising and marketing, salaries and benefits, patient expenses and depreciation.
G&A increased in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The opening of the five IMAC clinics and the BackSpace clinics in 2021 attributed $745,000 of the increase for 2021. There was an additional of $122,000 in billing services due to the increase in collections from same-store clinics in 2021. $50,000 of the increase is attributed to an increase in travel as 2020 was impacted by pandemic. See FDA impact below.
FDA Clinical Trial
In August 2020, the United States Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”) approved the Company’s investigational new drug application. The Company has begun Phase 1 of the clinical trial, which will be conducted over a 12-month period. The Company incurred $574,000 in expenses related to consultants, supplies, software and travel for the clinical trial during 2021, which is included in the G&A totals above. This is compared to $209,000 that was incurred for the trial in 2020.
Depreciation is related to our property and equipment purchases to use in the course of our business activities. Amortization is related to our business acquisitions.
Depreciation and amortization decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is attributed to non-competes and fixed assets that were fully amortized and depreciated during 2021.
Analysis of Cash Flows
The primary source of our operating cash flow is the collection of accounts receivable from patients, private insurance companies, government programs, self-insured employers and other payers.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operations increased to $7.6 million compared to $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to our net loss and the $1.5 million gain on extinguishment of debt in 2020 from the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness.
Net cash used in investing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2.5 million and $0.6 million, respectively. This was primarily driven by the acquisitions made in 2021, which attributed to $3.2 million of the change.
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $14.5 million, including proceeds from the sale of common stock, net of related fees, which totaled $20.2 million, reduced by principal repayments of $4.4 million. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $8.8 million, including proceeds from the sale of common stock, net of related fees, which totaled $5.2 million and issuances of notes payable of $5.4 million, reduced by principal repayments of $1.5 million.
Reconciliation of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This report contains certain non-GAAP financial measures, including non-GAAP net income and adjusted EBITDA, which are used by management in analyzing our financial results and ongoing operational performance.
In order to better assess the Company’s financial results, management believes that net income before interest, income taxes, stock based compensation, and depreciation and amortization (“adjusted EBITDA”) is a useful measure for evaluating the operating performance of the Company because adjusted EBITDA reflects net income adjusted for certain non-cash and/or non-operating items. We also believe that adjusted EBITDA is useful to many investors to assess the Company’s ongoing results from current operations. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered a measure of financial performance under GAAP. Because adjusted EBITDA is not a measurement determined in accordance with GAAP, such non-GAAP financial measures are susceptible to varying calculations. Accordingly, adjusted EBITDA, as presented, may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
This non-GAAP financial measure should not be considered as a substitute for, or superior to, measures of financial performance which are prepared in accordance with US GAAP and may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies and have limitations as analytical tools.
A reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measures is set forth below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $7.1 million in cash and working capital of $4.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash of $2.6 million and deficiency in working capital of $1.2 million. The decrease in working capital deficiency was primarily due to the increase in current assets as cash increased by $4.5 million.
We believe our cash at December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our cash, operational and liquidity requirements for at least 12 months after the filing of this Annual Report.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $4.9 million in current liabilities. Approximately $2.5 million of our current liabilities outstanding were to our vendors, which we have historically paid down in the normal course of our business, and accrued payroll. Patient deposits accounted for approximately $321,000 of our current liabilities. The current portion of notes payable by us accounted for approximately $254,000 of our current liabilities. The current portion of our finance lease obligations accounted for approximately $19,000 of our current liabilities. The current portion of our liability to issue common stock accounted for approximately $338,000 of our current liabilities. The current portion of our operating lease liability accounted for approximately $1.5 million of our current liabilities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $28.2 million. We anticipate that we will need to raise additional capital to fund future operations. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such arrangements when needed or favorable terms, or at all, which would have a negative impact on our financial condition and could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our development or acquisition activity. Failure to receive additional funding could also cause us to cease operations, in part or in full. Furthermore, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current of future operating plans, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations. Our management team has determined that our financial condition raises substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern.
Registered Direct Offering
On June 18, 2020, the Company entered into the Securities Purchase Agreement with institutional accredited investors pursuant to which the Company offered for sale to the Purchasers an aggregate of 1,764,000 shares of its common stock in a registered direct offering. The Shares were offered by the Company pursuant to its shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237455) originally filed with the SEC on March 27, 2020 and declared effective on April 3, 2020. The purchase price for one Share in the Registered Direct Offering was $1.50, and closing of the Registered Direct Offering occurred on June 22, 2020. The Company received $2.644 million in gross proceeds from the Registered Direct Offering. The Company used approximately $0.5 million of the gross proceeds for the repayment of certain indebtedness, and the remaining proceeds to the Company will be used to finance the costs of developing and acquiring additional outpatient medical clinics as part of the Company’s growth and expansion strategy and for working capital.
At-the-Market Offering
On October 5, 2020, the Company launched an at-the-market offering (the “Offering”) of up to $5,000,000 worth of shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.001 per share, pursuant to an At-The-Market Issuance Sales Agreement, dated October 5, 2020, by and between the Company and Ascendiant Capital Markets, LLC. Since the launch and as of December 31, 2021, pursuant to the Agreement, the Company had sold 1,541,758 shares of common stock through Ascendiant Capital Markets for aggregate proceeds to the Company of $2.9 million.
Iliad Note
On October 29, 2020, the Company entered into the Note Purchase Agreement with Iliad pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell to Iliad a secured promissory note in an initial principal amount of $2,690,000, which is payable on or before April 29, 2022. The October Principal Amount includes an original discount of $175,000 and $15,000 that the Company agreed to pay to Iliad to cover legal fees, accounting costs, due diligence and other transaction costs. In exchange for the October Note, Iliad paid a purchase price of $2,500,000. The October Purchase Agreement also provides for indemnification of Iliad and its affiliates in the event that they incur loss or damage related to, amount other things, breach by the Company of any of its representations, warranties or covenants under the October Purchase Agreement. In connection with the October Purchase Agreement and the October Note, the Company entered into a Security Agreement with Iliad, pursuant to which the obligations of the Company is secured by all of the assets of the Company, excluding the Company’s accounts receivable and intellectual property. Upon an event of default under the October Note, the October Security Agreement entitles the Holder to take possession of such collateral; provided that Iliad’s security interest and remedies with respect to the collateral are junior in priority to the security interest previously granted by the Company to Iliad in connection with a separate financing entered into by them on March 25, 2020, for which Iliad holds a senior, first-priority security interest in the same collateral. The Company repaid the note in January 2022.
Public Offering
On March 26, 2021, the Company completed a public offering by issuing 10,625,000 shares of common stock for gross proceeds of $17 million. The Company used approximately $1.8 million for the repayment of certain indebtedness and is using the remaining proceeds for the repayment of certain other indebtedness, to finance the costs of developing and acquiring additional outpatient medical clinics and healthcare centers as part of the Company’s growth and expansion strategy and for working capital.
On April 7, 2021 the Company closed on the sale of an additional 1,193,750 shares of common stock at the then public offering price of $1.60 per share, pursuant to the 15% over-allotment option exercised in full by the underwriters in connection with its public offering that closed March 2021.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations by period as of December 31, 2021:
Impact of Inflation
We believe that inflation has not had a material impact on our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We cannot assure you that future inflation will not have an adverse impact on our operating results and financial condition.