ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 15, 2021 in Delaware and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Quarterly Report as our “initial business combination”. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) and the private placement of the Private Units (as defined below), the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of our investors who would not have pre-emption rights in respect of any such issuance;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of common stock if we issue shares of preferred stock with rights senior to those afforded to our shares of common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common stock, rights and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our initial business combination plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,882,406, which resulted from stock-based compensation expense of $1,351,448, franchise tax expense of $131,293, formation and operating costs of $600,741, and expensed offering costs of $4,926, offset in part by a change in the fair value of our warrant liability of $199,225 and interest and dividend income on investments held in the trust account of $6,777.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $576,908.
For the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $230,801,615, which was due to proceeds from initial public offering, net of underwriting discount paid of $225,400,000, proceeds from sale of private units of $7,240,463, proceeds from promissory note - related party of $365,000 and advance from sponsor of $94,537, offset in part by offering costs paid of $2,153,848, repayment of advance from sponsor of $94,537 and repayment of the promissory note - related party of $50,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $224,707 in our operating bank account.
On August 2, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 units (the “Units”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Each Unit consists of one share of common stock (“Public Share”), one right (“Public Right”) and one redeemable warrant (“Public Warrant”). Each Public Right entitles the holder to receive one-twentieth of one share of common stock at the closing of our initial business combination. Each Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase three-fourths of one share of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole share.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 714,400 units (the “Private Units”), at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit ($7,144,000 in the aggregate). Each Private Unit consists of one share of common stock (“Private Share”), one right (“Private Right”) and one warrant (“Private Warrant”). Each Private Right entitles the holder to receive one-twentieth of one share of common stock at the closing of our initial business combination. Each Private Warrant entitles the holder to purchase three-fourths of one share of common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per whole share.
The proceeds from the Private Units was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering to be held in the trust account. If we do not complete our initial business combination within 12 months (or up to 18 months if our time to complete a business
combination is extended), the proceeds of the sale of the Private Units will be used to fund the redemption of the Public Shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the Private Units and all underlying securities will be worthless. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to the rights and warrants included in the Private Units.
On August 6, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,000,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $30,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the exercise of the over-allotment option, we consummated the sale of an additional 82,500 Private Units, at a price of $10.00 per Private Unit, in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $825,000.
We intend to use substantially all of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement, including the funds held in the trust account, in connection with our initial business combination and to pay our expenses relating thereto, including deferred underwriting commissions payable to the underwriters in an amount equal to 3.5% ($8,050,000) of the total gross proceeds raised in the Initial Public Offering upon consummation of our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to effect our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business. Such working capital funds could be used in a variety of ways including continuing or expanding the target business’ operations, for strategic acquisitions and for marketing, research and development of existing or new products. Such funds could also be used to repay any operating expenses or finders’ fees which we had incurred prior to the completion of our initial business combination if the funds available to us outside of the trust account were insufficient to cover such expenses.
We believe that, upon consummation of this offering, the $800,000 of net proceeds not held in the trust account, will be sufficient to allow us to operate for at least the next 12 months, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for identifying and evaluating prospective business combination candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to consummate our initial business combination with and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during that period to include approximately $272,673 for accounting, audit and other third-party expenses attendant to the structuring and negotiation of a business combination; $492,110 for due diligence, consulting, travel and miscellaneous expenses incurred during search for initial business combination target; $131,000 for franchise taxes; $59,500 for Nasdaq fees and approximately $19,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the Initial Public Offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition,
following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Promissory Notes - Related Party
On February 1, 2021, we issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor (the “Initial Promissory Note”), pursuant to which we could borrow up to an aggregate of $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering. On April 6, 2021 and June 17, 2021, we issued additional unsecured promissory notes to the Sponsor (the “Additional Promissory Notes” and, together with the “Initial Promissory Note”, the “IPO Promissory Notes”), pursuant to which we may borrow up to an additional aggregate principal amount of $200,000. The IPO Promissory Notes were non-interest bearing and payable on the earlier of (i) December 31, 2021 or (ii) the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The outstanding balance under the Promissory Notes was repaid on August 6, 2021.
On January 14, 2022, we issued an unsecured promissory note to the Sponsor (the “Post-IPO Promissory Note”), pursuant to which we could borrow up to an aggregate of $500,000 in two installments of (i) up to $300,000 during the month of March 2022, and (ii) up to $200,000 during the month of June 2022. The Post-IPO Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and payable promptly after the date on which we consummate an initial business combination.
On March 29, 2022, we amended and restated the Post-IPO Promissory Note, such that the aggregate amount we can borrow under the note increased from $500,000 in two installments as described above, to up to $750,000 in three installments of (i) up to $195,000 no later than February 28, 2022, (ii) up to 355,000 no later than April 30, 2022, and (iii) up to $200,000 no later than June 30, 2022. No other terms were amended pursuant to this amendment and restatement.
Underwriting Agreement
On July 28, 2021, in connection with the Initial Public Offering, we entered into an underwriting agreement with Chardan Capital Markets, LLC, as representative of the underwriters named therein.
Pursuant to the underwriting agreement, the underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit sold in the Initial Public Offering, or $4,600,000 in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and full exercise of the over-allotment option. In addition, $0.35 per Unit sold in the Initial Public Offering, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Right of First Refusal
Subject to certain conditions, we granted Chardan, the representative of the underwriters in the Initial Public Offering, for a period of 18 months after the date of the consummation of our business combination, a right of first refusal to act as book-running manager, with at least 30% of the economics, for any and all future public and private equity and debt offerings. In accordance with FINRA Rule 5110(f)(2)(E)(i), such right of first refusal shall not have a duration of more than three years from the effective date of the registration statement for the Initial Public Offering.
Chief Financial Officer Agreement
On February 8, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Vishwas Joshi to act as our Chief Financial Officer for a period of twenty-four months from the date of listing of the Company on NASDAQ. We have agreed to pay Mr. Joshi up to $400,000, subject to successfully completing our initial business combination. If we do not complete a business combination, we have agreed to pay Mr. Joshi $40,000.
Consulting Agreements
We have engaged Ontogeny Capital L T D (“Ontogeny”) to act as a management consulting and corporate advisor in the preparation of corporate strategies, management support and business plans for us. We paid Ontogeny $40,000 at the time of signing the engagement agreement and $35,000 upon the filing of the registration statement relating to the Initial Public Offering. We paid Ontogeny an aggregate of $1,650,000 upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. In addition, upon the consummation of our initial business combination, we have agreed to pay Ontogeny $2,875,000 for certain management consulting and corporate advisory services.
On September 17, 2021, we entered into a consulting agreement, effective as of September 1, 2021, with F. Jacob Cherian, pursuant to which we engaged Mr. Cherian to provide financial advisory services to us for a period of 12 months. In consideration for his services, we agreed to pay Mr. Cherian a monthly consulting fee of $12,000 per month.
On October 29, 2021, we entered into a letter of engagement and terms of business (the “Letter of Engagement”) with Sterling Media Ltd (“Sterling Media”), pursuant to which we engaged Sterling Media to provide strategic media coverage for us commencing on October 29, 2021 and ending on June 30, 2022 (the “Term of Engagement Letter”). In consideration for the services Sterling Media provides to us, we agreed to pay Sterling Media a total fee of £20,000 during the Term of Engagement Letter in accordance with the terms of the Letter of Engagement. An additional mutually agreed financial fee may be awarded to Sterling Media for deals secured by Sterling Media that may result in clearly significant brand enhancement and/or potential future income for us.
On October 29, 2021, we also entered into a consulting agreement with Priyanka Agarwal, pursuant to which we engaged Ms. Agarwal to provide strategy, management and financial advisory services to us, as specified in the consulting agreement, commencing on October 29, 2021 and ending on October 28, 2022 (the “Term of Consulting Agreement”). In consideration for the services Ms. Agarwal provides to us, we agreed to pay Ms. Agarwal a monthly consulting fee of $11,250 per month for the duration of the Term of Consulting Agreement in accordance with the payment schedule provided in the consulting agreement. In addition, we shall reimburse Ms. Agarwal for her reasonable and documented travel expenses incurred at our request.
On January 12, 2022, we entered into a letter of engagement with Chardan Capital Markets, LLC (“Chardan”), pursuant to which we engaged Chardan to provide capital markets advisory services commencing from January 12, 2022 and ending on the close of a potential placement related to our initial business combination. In consideration for the services Chardan will provide to us, we agreed to pay Chardan a total fee of 5% of the aggregate sales price of securities sold in the financing transaction plus reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses capped at $25,000.
On January 12, 2022, we also entered into a letter of engagement with Chardan, pursuant to which we engaged Chardan to provide merger and acquisition advisory services commencing from January 12, 2022 and ending on close of our initial business combination. In consideration for the services Chardan provides to us, we agreed to pay Chardan a total fee equal to: (i) if we enter into a business combination involving a party other than a target introduced by Chardan, one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the aggregate value of the business combination; and (ii) if we consummate a business combination with a target introduced by Chardan, three percent (3%) of the first $100 million aggregate value of the target, two percent (2.0%) of the aggregate value of the target greater than $100 million but less than $200 million, and one percent (1.0%) of the aggregate value of the target greater than $200 million but less than $300 million, paid at the close of the business combination plus reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses capped at $25,000.
On March 18, 2022, we entered into an engagement letter with Ontogeny Capital relating to corporate advisory & management consultancy services for the purpose of raising capital in form of a private investment in public equity (“PIPE”) financing. Ontogeny Capital will receive a contingent fee equal to 5% of the gross proceeds of securities sold in the PIPE up to $75 million in gross proceeds and 5.5% of the gross proceeds of securities sold in the PIPE from $75 million up to $150 million in gross proceeds. The engagement letter also provides for an additional incremental discretionary fee of 0.5% of gross proceeds if the gross proceeds of securities sold in a PIPE are above $150 million.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Net Loss Per Share of Common Stock
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. As the Public Shares are considered to be redeemable at fair value, and a redemption at fair value does not amount to a distribution different than other stockholders, redeemable and non-redeemable common stock are presented as one class of stock in calculating net loss per share. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 17,847,675 shares in the calculation of diluted income per share, since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events.
Warrant Liability
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our common stock, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 23,000,000 Public Shares sold as part of the Units in the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with the our liquidation, if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the initial business combination and in connection with certain amendments to our Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within our control require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all redeemable Public Shares have been classified outside of permanent equity.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Share Based Payment Arrangements
On July 22, 2021, the Sponsor sold 30,000 of its Founder Shares to each of its five independent directors (the “Directors”) (or 150,000 Founder Shares in total) for cash consideration of approximately $0.004 per share. These awards are subject to ASC 718. In accordance with ASC 718, the Company recognized compensation expense in an amount equal to the number of Founders Shares sold times the grant date fair value per share less the amount initially received for the purchase of the Founders Shares. The value of the Founder Shares sold to the Directors was determined to be $787,500 as of July 22, 2021. As such, the Company recognized compensation expense of $786,848 within stock-based compensation expense in the Company’s Statements of Operations for the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
On September 17, 2021, the Sponsor sold 25,000 of its Founder Shares to an additional independent director (the “Additional Director”) for consideration of approximately $0.004 per share. These awards are subject to ASC 718. In accordance with ASC 718, the Company recognized compensation expense in an amount equal to the number of Founders Shares sold times the grant date fair value per share less the amount initially received for the purchase of the Founders Shares. The value of the Founder Shares sold to the
Additional Director was determined to be $141,250 as of September 17, 2021. As such, the Company recognized compensation expense of $141,150 within stock-based compensation expense in the Company’s Statements of Operations for the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
On September 17, 2021, the Sponsor sold 75,000 of its Founder Shares to an independent consultant (the “Consultant”) for consideration of approximately $0.004 per share. These awards are subject to ASC 718. In accordance with ASC 718, the Company recognized compensation expense in an amount equal to the number of Founders Shares sold times the grant date fair value per share less the amount initially received for the purchase of the Founders Shares. The value of the Founder Shares sold to the Consultant was determined to be $423,750 as of September 17, 2021. As such, the Company recognized compensation expense of $423,450 within stock-based compensation expense in the Company’s Statements of Operations for the period from January 15, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.