Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company focused on developing the next generation of ADCs to improve outcomes for cancer patients. By generating targeted therapies with enhanced anti-tumor activity and favorable tolerability profiles, we aim to disrupt the progression of cancer and offer patients more good days. We call this our commitment to “target a better now.”
An ADC with our proprietary technology comprises an antibody that binds to a target found on tumor cells and is conjugated to one of our potent anti-cancer agents as a “payload” to kill the tumor cell once the ADC has bound to its target. ADCs are an expanding class of anti-cancer therapeutics, with twelve approved products and the number of agents in development growing significantly in recent years.
We have established a leadership position in ADCs with a portfolio of differentiated product candidates addressing both solid tumors and hematologic malignancies.
Our Business
Our lead program is mirvetuximab, a first-in-class investigational ADC targeting FRα, a cell-surface protein over-expressed in a number of epithelial tumors, including ovarian, endometrial, and non-small-cell lung cancers. Following consultation with the FDA, we initiated two trials of mirvetuximab in patients with platinum-resistant ovarian cancer whose tumors express FRα-high: SORAYA, a single-arm clinical trial that could lead to accelerated approval, pending FDA review; and MIRASOL, a randomized Phase 3 clinical trial that, if successful, could lead to full approval in this setting.
Beyond FRα-high, platinum-resistant ovarian cancer in patients who had one or more prior lines of therapy, our strategy is to move mirvetuximab into platinum-sensitive disease and become the combination agent of choice in ovarian cancer. To this end, we initiated PICCOLO, a single-arm study of mirvetuximab monotherapy in later-line platinum-sensitive patients. We have also generated encouraging data in recurrent platinum-sensitive disease with the combination of mirvetuximab plus carboplatin and are supporting ISTs with this combination in a single-arm study in the neoadjuvant setting and in a randomized study comparing mirvetuximab combined with carboplatin to standard of care in patients with recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. We also intend to initiate a single-arm Phase 2 study (0420) of this combination followed by mirvetuximab continuation in FRα-low, medium, and high patients with platinum-sensitive disease. Results from this study and our ongoing ISTs will inform a path to the potential registration for mirvetuximab plus carboplatin and, in parallel, could support compendia listing for this combination.
In addition, we presented mature data from our Phase 1b FORWARD II trial of mirvetuximab plus Avastin® (bevacizumab) in recurrent ovarian cancer in an oral presentation at the American Society for Clinical Oncology Annual Meeting in June 2021 and believe the data could support compendia listing for this combination in close proximity to the initial monotherapy approval of mirvetuximab. Furthermore, we recently aligned with FDA on GLORIOSA, a potential randomized Phase 3 study of mirvetuximab plus bevacizumab maintenance in FRα-high recurrent platinum-sensitive disease. We expect to initiate this potential label-enabling study in the second quarter of 2022.
Pivekimab, formerly known as IMGN632, is an ADC comprised of a high-affinity antibody designed to target CD123 with site-specific conjugation to a DNA-alkylating payload of the novel IGN class. Our IGNs are designed to alkylate DNA without cross-linking, which has provided a broad therapeutic index in preclinical models. We are advancing pivekimab in clinical trials for patients with BPDCN and AML.
BPDCN is a rare form of blood cancer, with an annual incidence of between 500 and 1,000 patients in the US. In October 2020, the FDA granted Breakthrough Therapy designation for pivekimab for the treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory BPDCN. Based on feedback from the FDA, we amended our ongoing 801 Phase 2 study, known as CADENZA, to include a new cohort of up to 20 frontline BPDCN patients. We now expect to generate top-line data for this frontline cohort in the second half of 2022.
We are also conducting our 802 study for pivekimab, which is a Phase 1b/2 study designed to determine the safety, tolerability, and preliminary antileukemia activity of pivekimab when administered in combination with azacytidine and venetoclax to patients with relapsed and frontline CD123-positive AML. This study is in dose-escalation, enrolling relapsed and refractory patients to determine the recommended Phase 2 dose of pivekimab for the triplet combination regimen. We are in the final stages of determining the recommended Phase 2 dose for this triplet
combination and expect to initiate expansion cohorts in relapsed and frontline patients this year.
In addition, we are advancing our earlier-stage pipeline programs. IMGC936 is an ADC in co-development with MacroGenics, Inc. that is designed to target ADAM9, an enzyme over-expressed in a range of solid tumors and implicated in tumor progression and metastasis. IMGC936 incorporates a number of innovations, including antibody engineering to extend half-life, site-specific conjugation with a fixed drug-antibody ratio to enable higher dosing, and a next-generation linker and payload designed for improved stability and bystander activity. We continue to enroll patients in the Phase 1 study for this program and expect initial data in 2022.
IMGN151 is our next generation anti-FRα product candidate in preclinical development. This ADC integrates innovation in each of its components, which we believe may enable IMGN151 to address patient populations with lower levels of FRα expression, including tumor types outside of ovarian cancer. In January 2022, we submitted an IND application to evaluate IMGN151 in a planned Phase 1 clinical trial in patients with recurrent endometrial cancer and recurrent, high-grade serous epithelial ovarian, primary peritoneal, or fallopian tube cancers. In February 2022, the FDA placed a clinical hold on our IND application pending the resolution of certain chemistry, manufacturing, and controls, or CMC, information requests. We are generating data responsive to the requests and anticipate filing these responses mid-year, which we believe will enable us to proceed with the study in due course thereafter.
We have selectively licensed restricted access to our ADC platform technology to other companies to expand the use of our technology and to provide us with cash to fund our own product programs. These agreements typically provide the licensee with rights to use our ADC platform technology with its antibodies or related targeting vehicles to a defined target to develop products. The licensee is generally responsible for the development, clinical testing, manufacturing, registration, and commercialization of any resulting product candidate. As part of these agreements, we are generally entitled to receive upfront fees, potential milestone payments, and royalties on the sales of any resulting products. For more information concerning these relationships, including their ongoing financial and accounting impact on our business, please read Note C, “Significant Collaborative Agreements,” to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.
To date, we have not generated revenues from commercial sales of internal products, and we expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses for at least the near term as we incur significant operating expenses related to research and development and the potential commercialization of our portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, we had $478.8 million in cash and cash equivalents compared to $293.9 million as of December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make certain estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reported periods. These items are monitored and analyzed by management for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which the change occurs. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates if past experience or other assumptions do not turn out to be substantially accurate.
We believe that our application of the following accounting policies, each of which requires significant judgments and estimates on the part of management, are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results:
● revenue recognition;
● clinical trial accruals; and
● stock-based compensation.
Our accounting policies are more fully described in the Notes to our consolidated financial statements, including Note B, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Managing the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Since the first quarter of 2020, we have continued to move our clinical studies forward while adapting to meet the evolving challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. We implemented business continuity plans in March 2020 that enabled our workforce to remain productive while working from home until mid-September 2021, at which time our workforce returned to the office. From a manufacturing and supply chain perspective, we believe we have sufficient
inventory on hand for all of our ongoing and near-term studies and to support the launch of mirvetuximab, if approved. From a regulatory perspective, since the beginning of the pandemic, we have received timely reviews of our submissions to the FDA and other health authorities covering our clinical trial applications.
The impact of COVID-19 slowed site activation and patient enrollment for both SORAYA and MIRASOL, which resulted in a limited delay in patient accrual for each of these studies.
Results of Operations
For a discussion related to the results of operations for 2020 compared to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Revenues
For 2021, our total revenues decreased to $69.9 million compared to $132.3 million for 2020, driven by decreases in license and milestone fees and non-cash royalty revenue, both of which are discussed further below.
License and milestone fees
The amount of license and milestone fees we earn is directly related to the number of our collaborators, the collaborators’ advancement of the product candidates, and the overall success in clinical trials of the product candidates. As such, the amount of license and milestone fees may vary widely from quarter to quarter and year to year. Total revenue recognized from license and milestone fees for the years ended 2021 and 2020 was $22.7 million and $63.7 million, respectively. In 2020, we recognized $60.5 million of previously deferred license revenue upon Jazz’s opt-out of its right to the last remaining license under its collaboration and option agreement, which drove the decrease in license and milestone fee revenue in 2021 compared to 2020. Partially offsetting this decrease, we recorded $7.4 million of revenue related to partner milestones achieved in 2021 and, pursuant to our license agreement with Huadong executed in October 2020, upon delivery of initial clinical supply in 2021, we recorded $14.6 million of the $40.0 million upfront payment previously deferred.
Deferred revenue of $92.1 million as of December 31, 2021 includes $28.5 million related to the collaboration with Huadong and $57.6 million related to the sale of our residual rights to receive royalty payments on commercial sales of KADCYLA in 2019, with the remainder of the balance primarily representing consideration received from our other collaborators pursuant to our license agreements that we have yet to earn pursuant to our revenue recognition policy.
Non-cash royalty revenue related to the sale of future royalties
KADCYLA is a marketed ADC resulting from one of our development and commercialization licenses with Roche, through its Genentech unit. We receive royalty reports and payments related to sales of KADCYLA from Roche one quarter in arrears. We sold our rights to receive royalty payments on the net sales of KADCYLA through two separate transactions in 2015 and 2019. In accordance with our revenue recognition policy, $46.8 million and $68.5 million of non-cash royalties on net sales of KADCYLA were recorded and included in royalty revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in non-cash royalty revenue in 2021 compared to 2020 is a result of the aggregate royalty threshold, as outlined in the 2015 royalty purchase agreement, being met in the second quarter of 2021, effectively reducing the royalty payments under the 2015 transaction from 100% to 15% of KADCYLA royalty payments received over the remaining royalty term. Pursuant to the terms of these agreements, we expect to recognize less non-cash royalty revenue in 2022 and subsequent years as compared to 2021 and prior years. See further details regarding these agreements in Note F, “Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties,” of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses relate to (i) research to evaluate new targets and to develop and evaluate new antibodies, linkers, and cytotoxic agents, (ii) preclinical testing of our own and, in certain instances, our collaborators’ product candidates, and the cost of our own clinical trials, (iii) development related to clinical and commercial manufacturing processes, (iv) regulatory activities, and (v) external manufacturing operations.
Clinical trial and regulatory approval processes for our product candidates that have advanced or that we intend to advance to clinical testing are lengthy, expensive, and uncertain in both timing and outcome. As a result, the pace and timing of the clinical development of our product candidates is highly uncertain and may never result in approved products. Completion dates and development costs will vary significantly for each product candidate and are difficult to predict. A variety of factors, many of which are outside our control, could cause or contribute to the prevention or delay
of the successful completion of our clinical trials, or delay or prevent our obtaining necessary regulatory approvals. The costs to take a product through clinical trials are dependent upon, among other factors, the clinical indications, the timing, size, and design of each clinical trial, the number of patients enrolled in each trial, and the speed at which patients are enrolled and treated. Product candidates may be found to be ineffective or to cause unacceptable side effects during clinical trials, may take longer to progress through clinical trials than anticipated, may fail to receive necessary regulatory approvals, or may prove impractical to manufacture in commercial quantities at reasonable cost or with acceptable quality.
The lengthy process of securing FDA approvals for new drugs requires the expenditure of substantial resources. Any failure by us to obtain, or any delay in obtaining, regulatory approvals, could materially adversely affect our product development efforts and our business overall. Accordingly, we cannot currently estimate, with any degree of certainty, the amount of time or money that we will be required to expend in the future on our product candidates prior to their regulatory approval, if such approval is ever granted.
Research and development expense was $151.1 million and $114.6 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, with increased expenses related to personnel, third-party staffing costs, contract services, external manufacturing costs, and clinical trial costs, which are discussed further below.
We do not track our research and development costs by project. Since we use our research and development resources across multiple research and development projects, we manage our research and development expenses within each of the categories listed in the following table and described in more detail below (in thousands):
Preclinical and clinical testing
Preclinical and clinical testing includes expenses related to preclinical testing of our own, and, in certain instances, our collaborators’ product candidates, regulatory activities, and the cost of clinical trials. Such expenses include those related to personnel, third-party staffing, patient enrollment at our clinical testing sites, consultant fees, contract services, and facilities. Preclinical and clinical testing expenses increased to $100.0 million for 2021 compared to $75.4 million for 2020. This increase is primarily the result of increased clinical trial, personnel, and third-party staffing costs related to advancing the MIRASOL, SORAYA, PICCOLO, and IMGC936 studies and increased third-party service fees in support of commercial readiness.
Process and product development
Process and product development expenses include costs for development of clinical and commercial manufacturing processes for our own and collaborator compounds. Such expenses include the costs of personnel, third-party staffing, contract services, and facility expenses. Process and product development expenses increased to $7.0 million for 2021 compared to $5.4 million for 2020, due primarily to increased personnel and third-party staffing costs.
Manufacturing operations
Manufacturing operations expense includes costs to have preclinical and clinical materials manufactured for our product candidates and quality control and quality assurance activities. Such expenses include personnel, third-party staffing, raw materials for our preclinical studies and clinical trials, non-pivotal and pivotal development costs with contract manufacturing organizations, and facility expenses. Manufacturing operations expense increased $10.4 million to $44.1 million for 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in 2021 is principally due to increases in external manufacturing activity across our programs, and to a lesser extent, increases in personnel and third-party staffing costs.
Manufacturing operations expense also includes antibody development and supply expense in support of commercial validation and in anticipation of potential future clinical trials, as well as our ongoing trials, was $20.6 million and $20.2 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The process of antibody production is lengthy due in part to the lead time to establish a satisfactory production process at a vendor. Accordingly, costs incurred related to antibody production and development have fluctuated from period to period and we expect these cost fluctuations to continue in the future.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $5.2 million to $43.8 million for 2021 due primarily to increases in professional services and personnel expenses, including $2.0 million of greater stock-based compensation driven largely by expense recorded in 2021 related to certain performance stock options becoming probable of vesting.
Restructuring Charges
During 2020, we recorded $1.5 million of restructuring charges, primarily incremental retention benefits, related to the restructuring of the business in 2019. No similar expense was recorded in 2021.
Investment Income, net
Investment income for 2021 and 2020 was $0.1 million and $0.7 million, respectively. The decrease in 2021 was driven by a decrease in interest rates.
Non-Cash Interest Expense on Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalty
In 2015, IRH purchased our right to receive 100% of the royalty payments on commercial sales of KADCYLA arising under our development and commercialization license with Genentech, subject to a residual cap. In January 2019, OMERS purchased IRH’s right to the royalties the Company previously sold in 2015. As described in Note F, “Liability Related to Sale of Future Royalties,” to our Consolidated Financial Statements, this royalty sale transaction has been recorded as a liability that amortizes over the estimated royalty payment period as KADCYLA royalties are remitted directly to the purchaser. During 2021 and 2020, we recorded $13.1 million and $23.1 million, respectively, of non-cash interest expense, which includes amortization of deferred financing costs. The decrease in 2021 was a result of a lower average royalty liability balance for the year and the KADCYLA royalty threshold being met in the second quarter of 2021, effectively reducing the royalty payments under the 2015 transaction from 100% to 15% of KADCYLA royalty payments received over the remaining royalty term.
We record interest expense at the imputed interest rate, which we currently estimate to be 19.5%. There are a number of factors that could materially affect the estimated interest rate in the future, in particular, the estimated amount and timing of royalty payments from future net sales of KADCYLA. We assess this estimate on a periodic basis and any resulting change in interest rate will be adjusted prospectively.
Other (Expense) Income, net
Other (expense) income, net for 2021 and 2020 was $(1.1) million and $0.5 million, respectively, consisting of foreign currency exchange (losses) gains related to obligations with non-U.S. dollar-based suppliers and Euro cash balances maintained to fulfill them during the respective periods.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For a discussion related to our cash flows for 2020 compared to 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
The following tables show certain balance sheet and cash flow information as of and for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows
We require cash to fund our operating expenses, including the advancement of our clinical programs, and to make capital expenditures. Historically, we have funded our cash requirements primarily through equity and convertible debt financings in private and public markets and payments from our collaborators, including license fees, milestones, research funding, and royalties. We also monetized our rights to receive royalties on KADCYLA for upfront consideration. As of December 31, 2021, we had $478.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. Net cash used for operating activities was $169.4 million and $78.6 million during 2021 and 2020, respectively. The principal use of cash in operating activities for these periods was to fund our net loss, adjusted for non-cash items, with 2020 benefiting from a $40.0 million upfront payment from Huadong pursuant to a collaboration and license agreement.
Net cash (used for) provided by investing activities was $(1.4) million and $0.5 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively, and represent cash outflows from capital expenditures, net of proceeds generated from the sale of capital assets. Capital expenditures for all periods presented consisted primarily of furniture and improvements related to COVID-19 safety measures, computer and office equipment, and dedicated equipment at third-party manufacturing vendors. During 2020, as a result of our restructuring of the business in 2019, we sold excess equipment generating proceeds of $1.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $355.7 million and $195.7 million for 2021 and 2020, respectively. In December 2021, pursuant to a public offering, we issued and sold 17.5 million shares of common stock and issued pre-funded warrants to purchase 27.4 million shares of common stock, resulting in aggregate net proceeds of $277.6 million. In August 2021, pursuant to a Securities Purchase Agreement with RA Capital Healthcare Fund, L.P., we issued a pre-funded warrant to purchase up to approximately 5.4 million shares of common stock, resulting in net proceeds of $29.8 million. Additionally, during 2021, we sold 6.7 million shares of our common stock under our Open Market Sale AgreementSM (Sale Agreement) with Jefferies, LLC as sales agent, dated December 18, 2020, generating net proceeds of $45.8 million. Pursuant to the Sale Agreement, we may offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $150.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, $102.7 million remains available under the Sale Agreement. In connection with entering into the Sale Agreement, we filed a prospectus supplement to the prospectus included in our registration statement on Form S-3 (No. 333-251502), which became effective upon filing on December 18, 2020, with the SEC relating to the offer and sale of the up to $150.0 million of our common stock under the Sale Agreement.
In January 2020, pursuant to a public offering, we issued and sold 24.5 million shares of common stock, resulting in net proceeds of $97.7 million. Additionally in September 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale AgreementSM with Jefferies, LLC as sales agent, pursuant to which we could offer and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock in 2020 having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million. Under the September Sale Agreement, we offered and sold approximately 20.0 million shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $96.5 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 and 2020 also include proceeds from the exercise of stock options and sale of shares through our ESPP.
Future Capital Requirements
We have significant future capital requirements including:
● significant expected operating expenses to conduct research and development activities and to potentially commercialize our portfolio;
● noncancelable in-process and future manufacturing obligations; and
● substantial facility lease obligations as described in Note J, “Leases,” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We anticipate that our current capital resources will enable us to meet our operational expenses and capital requirements for more than twelve months after the date of this report. We may raise additional funds through equity, debt, and other financings or generate revenues from collaborators through a combination of upfront license payments,
milestone payments, royalty payments, and research funding. We cannot provide assurance that we will be able to obtain additional debt, equity, or other financing or generate revenues from collaborators on terms acceptable to us or at all. Should we or our partners not meet some or all of the terms and conditions of our various collaboration agreements or if we are not successful in securing future collaboration agreements, we may elect or be required to secure alternative financing arrangements, and/or defer or limit some or all of our research, development, and/or clinical projects.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
The information set forth under Note B to the consolidated financial statements under the caption “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” is incorporated herein by reference.