Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, beliefs, and expectations, and involve risks and uncertainties. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the sections titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company discovering and developing small molecule product candidates that target lysine-specific demethylase 1, or LSD1, an enzyme that plays a central role in the production of blood cells in the bone marrow. We are focused on improving the quality of life of patients with cancer and bone marrow diseases in addition to prolonging their lives. Our lead product candidate is bomedemstat for the treatment of certain myeloproliferative neoplasms, or MPNs, a family of related, chronic cancers of the bone marrow. The three most common MPNs are myelofibrosis, or MF, essential thrombocythemia, or ET, and polycythemia vera, or PV. We are currently enrolling patients in a Phase 2 clinical trial of bomedemstat for the treatment of ET and have completed enrollment for a Phase 2 clinical trial of bomedemstat for the treatment of MF. To enable the collection of long-term safety and pharmacodynamic data, Imago initiated a Phase 2 Extension Study in 2021 into which patients from our Phase 2 clinical trials in MF and ET will transition. In our Phase 2 clinical trial in ET through November 1, 2021, interim and unaudited data from 37 patients demonstrates that bomedemstat has been generally well tolerated with an encouraging safety profile and a significant proportion of patients achieved a platelet count ≤400 x 109/L following more than six weeks of treatment. In our Phase 2 clinical trial in MF through October 31, 2021, interim and unaudited data from 89 patients demonstrates that bomedemstat has also been generally well tolerated with an encouraging safety profile in this patient population and has resulted in improvements in patient symptoms, reductions in spleen volume and reduction in mutant allele frequency, or MAF, the proportion of blood cells with mutations that drive this disease. We believe bomedemstat has the potential to address unmet medical need in MF as a monotherapy as well as in combination with inhibitors of Janus-associated kinase. Bomedemstat has been generally well-tolerated in both ET and MF patients in these trials. We are pursuing the development of bomedemstat as a potentially disease-modifying therapy in ET and MF to address the limitations of currently approved therapies. We expect alignment with the FDA on a protocol for a Phase 3 registrational trial for the treatment of ET in the second half of 2022. In addition, we expect to continue to enroll patients in the investigator initiated studies, or IIS for the treatment of PV in 2022, and we expect to support an investigator-sponsored Phase 2 clinical trial of bomedemstat in combination with ruxolitinib for the treatment of patients with MF.
Since our inception in 2012, we have devoted the majority of our efforts to business planning, research and development of our lead product candidate bomedemstat, including by conducting clinical trials and preclinical studies, raising capital and recruiting management and technical staff to support these operations. To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales as our lead product candidate has not been approved for commercialization. We have historically financed our operations primarily through the sale of convertible preferred stock, and more recently, through our initial public offering, or IPO, of common stock which is discussed below.
We have incurred recurring losses since our inception, including net losses of $42.3 million and $17.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $112.7 million and cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $217.4 million.
Recent Developments
Initial Public Offering
In July 2021, we completed an IPO of our common stock, where we issued and sold 9,660,000 shares of our common stock, including full exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option, at a public offering price of $16.00 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions. We received net proceeds of approximately $140.5 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 1,250,000 shares of common stock in a private placement (the “Private Placement”) for net proceeds of $20.0 million.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 global pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures. Extraordinary actions have been taken by international, federal, state, and local public health and governmental authorities to contain
and combat the outbreak and spread of COVID-19 in regions throughout the world. These actions include travel bans, quarantines, “stay-at-home” orders and similar mandates for many individuals to substantially restrict daily activities and for many businesses to curtail or cease normal operations. In order to operate in a safe manner, we have taken what we believe to be appropriate precautionary measures to minimize the risk of the virus to our employees and the communities in which we operate. The majority of our workforce worked remotely before the COVID-19 pandemic, thus there has been minimal disruption in our ability to ensure the effective operation of our business.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and policy responses to it, in the months between March and May 2020 we observed a measurable decrease in patient screening and patient enrollment in certain of our ongoing clinical trials. Since October 2020, patient screening and the number of patients eligible for enrollment in our clinical trials has returned to expected levels. In an effort to mitigate this risk, in October 2020, we initiated a site in Hong Kong, an area that was not then significantly impacted by COVID-19. Together with our investigators and clinical sites, we continue to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on enrollment and the ability to maintain patients enrolled in our clinical trials and the corresponding impact on the timing of the completion of our ongoing clinical trials, including the recent resurgence of COVID-19. We have assessed both capacity and the current clinical supply chain associated with the production of bomedemstat and have observed no disruptions to date in our clinical supply chain and our ability to provide supply for our ongoing clinical trials. We will continue to monitor and assess the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our clinical trial supply chain.
There are many uncertainties regarding the COVID-19 pandemic, and we are closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it will impact our clinical trials, employees, suppliers, vendors, and business partners. While the pandemic did not materially affect our financial results and business operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial results, business operations or financial position in future periods.
See the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” for a further discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the discovery and clinical development of our drug candidates, which include:
▪employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel and non-cash stock-based compensation expenses for employees engaged in research and development functions;
▪expenses incurred in connection with research, laboratory consumables and preclinical studies;
▪expense incurred in connection with conducting clinical trials including investigator grants and site payments for time and pass-through expenses and expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, other vendors or central laboratories and service providers engaged to conduct our trials; and
▪the cost of consultants engaged in research and development related services and the cost to manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
Our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were primarily incurred in connection with the development of our most advanced product candidate, bomedemstat. However, we have not historically tracked research and development expenses by program other than direct external expenses in conducting Phase 2 clinical trials for ET and MF. We typically have various early-stage research and drug discovery projects as well as potentially various product candidates undergoing clinical trials. Our internal resources, employees and infrastructure are not directly tied to any one research or drug discovery project and are typically deployed across multiple projects. As such, we do not maintain information regarding these costs incurred for these early-stage research and drug discovery programs on a project-specific basis.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors and third-party service providers. Nonrefundable advance payments we make for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of and obtain regulatory approval for bomedemstat.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The external research and development costs are attributable to our clinical development candidates and preclinical candidates selected for further development. Such expenses consist primarily of:
▪expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials and a substantial portion of our preclinical activities;
▪the cost of acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial and other materials; and
▪other costs associated with development activities.
The internal research and development costs consist primarily of personnel, facility costs, laboratory consumables and discovery and research related activities associated with our pipeline. Included within personnel-related costs in the table below is non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $0.8 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. In addition, future regulatory factors beyond our control may impact our clinical development programs. Drug candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the preclinical and clinical development of any of our product candidates. However, we expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in connection with our planned preclinical and clinical development activities in the near term and in the future.
The successful development of our most advanced product candidate and any future product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
▪successful completion of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
▪seeking regulatory approval for bomedemstat;
▪the number of clinical sites included in the trials;
▪the number of competitive trials in these rare diseases;
▪raising additional funds necessary to complete clinical development of such product candidates;
▪establishing manufacturing capabilities, for clinical supplies of such product candidates;
▪the results of our clinical trials; and
▪maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates may significantly impact the costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of compensation and personnel-related expenses, including non-cash stock-based compensation, for our personnel in executive, finance, and other administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees paid for accounting, audit, legal and tax services, allocated expenses for insurance and other general and administrative costs.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to support our research and development activities, grow our business and, if our lead product candidate receives marketing approval, engage in commercialization activities. Moreover, we expect to incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including legal, accounting, insurance, exchange listing, SEC compliance related expenses and investor relations costs. We also expect to increase the size of our administrative function to support the growth of our business.
Interest Income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investment balances.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
In 2019, we completed the initial closings for the sale of our Series B convertible preferred stock. In accordance with the terms of the Series B convertible preferred stock financing, we also committed to sell 4,529,931 shares of Series B convertible preferred stock at a fixed price per share of $5.712 in a second closing on or after March 1, 2020. On issuance, we determined that our obligation to issue additional shares of Series B convertible preferred stock in a second closing is a freestanding financial instrument that should be classified as a liability on the Company’s consolidated balance sheets. The freestanding financial instrument, or convertible preferred stock tranche liability, was recorded at fair value on issuance of $2.2 million with the remaining proceeds being allocated to the Series B convertible preferred stock. The convertible preferred stock tranche liability is remeasured to fair value during the reporting period with any changes in fair value being recognized as a component of other income (expense), net in the consolidated statements of operations. Thus until settlement, the fair value of our convertible preferred stock tranche liability fluctuates based on remeasurements at each reporting period. The convertible preferred stock tranche liability was settled on the closing of our Series B convertible preferred stock financing in July 2020. Immediately prior to the second closing, we measured the convertible preferred stock tranche liability to its then fair value and the convertible preferred stock tranche liability balance was reclassified to Series B convertible preferred stock. Immediately prior to the IPO, all outstanding shares of our convertible preferred stock were converted into shares of our common stock.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of amortization of premiums and discounts on our investment balances.
Income Tax Provision
Income tax provision primarily consists of income taxes in certain states in which we conduct business. We have a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits related primarily to research and development.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
* Not meaningful
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $32.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $17.4 million was primarily due to:
▪an increase of $7.1 million in manufacturing drug supplies for our planned clinical trials, as we advanced our current clinical programs with our lead drug candidate, bomedemstat. The manufacturing cost was primarily driven by the formulation development work for P3/commercial use and material to support the ongoing and new clinical trials,
▪an increase of $2.5 million in clinical activities due, in part, to increased consulting expenses added to support clinical operations team for the ongoing clinical trial in MF and ET,
▪an increase of $2.3 million in clinical pharmacology studies due to the commencement of these assessments,
▪startup costs of $1.4 million related to the commencement of a Phase 2 extension study for the continued treatment of patients currently enrolled in the ongoing ET and MF clinical trials, and
▪an increase of $3.1 million in personnel-related costs primarily due to growth in the number of research and development employees, including stock-based compensation expense, as we ramped up our operations.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $10.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $7.1 million was primarily due to an increase of $2.8 million in compensation and personnel-related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, as a result of increased headcount, $2.4 million in professional fees attributable to accounting, legal and audit costs, $1.2 million in insurance expense associated with operating as a public company, and $0.2 million in business licenses and taxes.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $48,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $0.3 million was due to the higher average investments balances as of December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, due to the proceeds received from our IPO and Private Placement in July 2021.
Change in Fair Value of Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
The $0.2 million change in fair value of our convertible preferred stock tranche liability for the year ended December 31, 2020 was attributable to changes in the fair value of the underlying preferred stock. The convertible preferred stock tranche liability was settled in July 2020.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net was $99,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $20,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $79,000 was due to the amortization of discounts on our investments balance as of December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from the sale and issuance of our convertible preferred stock, including proceeds from our issuance and sale of convertible promissory notes. From our inception through December 31, 2021, we have raised aggregate net cash proceeds of $164.8 million from the sale and issuance of our convertible preferred stock, including convertible promissory notes. As of December 31, 2021, we had available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments of $217.4 million. In connection with our IPO, we issued and sold 9,660,000 shares of our common stock including 1,260,000 shares of our common stock upon full exercise of the underwriters' overallotment option, at a public offering price of $16.00 per share, less underwriting discounts and commissions. We received net proceeds of approximately $140.5 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs. Concurrent with the IPO, we issued 1,250,000 shares of common stock in a Private Placement for net proceeds of $20.0 million.
Future Funding Requirements
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities, particularly as we advance bomedemstat into later stages of development and conduct larger clinical trials, seek regulatory approvals for and commercialize any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials, hire additional personnel and invest in and grow our business, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio, and operate as a public company. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend on many factors, including:
▪the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing bomedemstat, our other product candidates or any other future product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, including our ongoing Phase 2 clinical trials and any delays related to the COVID-19 or another pandemic;
▪the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for bomedemstat, our other product candidates or any other future product candidates;
▪the number and characteristics of any additional product candidates we develop or acquire;
▪the cost of manufacturing bomedemstat, our other product candidates and any future products, including supply for clinical development as well as potential commercial use;
▪the cost of building a sales force in anticipation of product commercialization;
▪the cost of commercialization activities, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
▪our ability to establish new, strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements, including the timing and amount of any future milestone, royalty or other payments due under any such agreement;
▪any product liability or other lawsuits related to our products or product candidates;
▪the expenses needed to attract, hire and retain skilled personnel;
▪the costs associated with being a public company;
▪the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing our intellectual property portfolio;
▪the timing, receipt and amount of sales of any future approved products, if any; and
▪the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may exacerbate the magnitude of the factors discussed above.
Based upon our current operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into 2025. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We expect to continue to expend significant resources for the foreseeable future.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from sales of our lead product candidate or any future product candidates, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through public or private equity offerings or debt financings or other capital sources, which may include strategic collaborations or other arrangements with third parties. Additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our stockholders will suffer dilution and the terms of any financing may adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. In addition, as a condition to providing additional funds to us, future investors may demand, and may be granted, rights superior to those of existing stockholders. Debt financing can involve restrictive covenants limiting our flexibility in conducting future business activities, and, in the event of insolvency, debt holders would be repaid before holders of our equity securities received any distribution of our corporate assets. Insufficient liquidity may also
require us to relinquish rights to product candidates at an earlier stage of development or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the recent invasion of Ukraine by Russia and related sanctions imposed by various governments. If we fail to obtain necessary capital when needed on acceptable terms, or at all, it could force us to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development programs, commercialization efforts or other operations. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for each of the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $39.8 million, which consisted of a net loss of $42.3 million, partially offset by $2.3 million in non-cash charges related primarily to stock-based compensation and a $0.2 million net change in our net operating assets and liabilities. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $2.9 million in accrued and other current liabilities and an increase of $2.1 million in accounts payable due to timing difference of processing invoices, partially offset by an increase of $2.7 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets related to an increase in prepaid insurance and deposits for clinical studies, due to the timing of payments and an increase of $2.1 million in other long-term assets.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $16.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $17.8 million, partially offset by $0.2 million in non-cash charges and a net change of $0.7 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of stock-based compensation of $0.4 million, partially offset by the change in fair value of our convertible preferred stock tranche liability of $0.2 million. The net change in our operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $2.5 million in accrued and other current liabilities as we expanded our operations, partially offset by an increase of $0.4 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase of $1.4 million in other long-term assets related to long-term deposits for clinical studies, due to the timing of payments.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $129.3 million, which consisted of $208.4 million related to purchases of available-for-sale investments, partially offset by $79.2 million from maturities of available-for-sale investments.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $74.3 million, which consisted of $81.1 million related to purchases of available-for-sale investments, partially offset by $6.8 million from maturities of available-for-sale investments.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $161.0 million, which consisted of proceeds from our IPO of $140.5 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs, proceeds of $20.0 million from our Private Placement and net proceeds of $0.5 million from stock option exercises.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $105.6 million and primarily related to net proceeds from the issuance of shares of our Series B and Series C convertible preferred stock.
Other Commitments and Obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with contract research organizations for preclinical studies, clinical trials and other services, which are generally cancellable upon written notice. As of December 31, 2021, we had no material
non-cancelable purchase commitments as we have generally contracted on a purchase order basis, and we were unable to estimate all payments under our existing contracts. Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we may delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (a) no longer an emerging growth company or (b) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (1) December 31, 2026, (2) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (3) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, which would occur as of the end of a fiscal year if, among others, the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year or (4) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
Critical Accounting Polices and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of the financial condition and consolidated results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Research and Development Expenses
We estimate preclinical and clinical study research expenses based on the services performed, pursuant to contracts with research institutions and clinical research organizations that conduct and manage preclinical and clinical studies and research services on our behalf. We record the costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and include these costs in accrued liabilities. We accrue for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with our third-party service providers under the service agreements as well as communications with and information provided by our third-party service providers at each balance sheet date. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued expenses. We have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred.
However, the status and timing of actual services performed may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expense in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accrued costs could materially affect our results of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain an equity incentive plan as a long-term incentive for our employees, consultants or directors. The plan allows for the issuance of stock options, stock appreciation rights, restricted stock awards, restricted stock unit awards, performance bonus awards, performance stock unit awards, dividend equivalents awards or other stock or cash based awards to employees and to nonemployees.
We measure stock-based compensation at the date of grant, for all equity awards granted to employees and non-employees based on the fair value of the awards, including stock options and restricted shares. We estimate the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model and the expense is recognized using the straight-line method over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period. We also account for forfeitures as they occur.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
Fair Value of Common Stock-See subsection entitled “Common Stock Valuations” below.
Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method, which is based on the mid-point between the contractual term and vesting period.
Volatility- Since we were a privately held company until July 2021, and do not yet have sufficient trading history of our common stock, we determine volatility based on the historical volatilities of comparable publicly traded life science companies over a period equal to the expected term because we do not have sufficient trading history for our common stock price. The comparable companies were chosen based on the similar size, stage in the life cycle, or area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding volatility on our own stock becomes available.
Risk-Free Interest Rate- The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant of the award for time periods approximately equal to the expected term of the award.
Dividend Yield-We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We will continue to use judgment in evaluating the expected term and expected volatility utilized for our stock-based compensation calculations on a prospective basis.
See Note 8-Stock-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation could be materially different.
Common Stock Valuations
As there was no public market for our common stock prior to the IPO in July 2021, the estimated fair value of our common stock underlying our stock-based awards was estimated on each grant date by our management and approved by our board of directors. Our board of directors exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including our stage of development, the rights, preferences and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock, our financial condition and operating results, the conditions in the biotechnology industry and the economy in general, the stock price performance and volatility of comparable public companies, and the lack of marketability of our common stock.
Valuations of our common stock were prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The grant date fair value of our common stock was determined using valuation methodologies incorporating a number of assumptions including probability weighting of events, volatility, time to liquidation, a risk-free interest rate and an assumption for a discount for lack of marketability (Level 3 inputs). The methodology to determine the fair value of our common stock included estimating the fair value of the enterprise using a hybrid-method market approach, which estimates the fair value of the company by including an estimation of the value of the business based on scenarios in a probability-weighted expected return method, or PWERM, framework. Under the hybrid-method market approach, the per share value calculated under the scenarios are weighted based on expected exit outcomes and the quality of the information specific to each allocation methodology to arrive at a final estimated fair value per share value of the common stock before a discount for lack of marketability is applied.
After the completion of the IPO in July 2021, the fair value of each share of underlying common stock is based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of grant on The Nasdaq Global Select Market.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.