ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Forward Looking Statements
Except for historical information, the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve certain risks and uncertainties. Such forward-looking statements include statements regarding, among other things, (a) discussions about mineral resources and mineralized material, (b) our projected sales and profitability, (c) our growth strategies, (d) anticipated trends in our industry, (e) our future financing plans, (f) our anticipated needs for working capital, (g) our lack of operational experience and (h) the benefits related to ownership of our common stock. Forward-looking statements, which involve assumptions and describe our future plans, strategies, and expectations, are generally identifiable by use of the words “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “estimate,” “believe,” “intend,” or “project” or the negative of these words or other variations on these words or comparable terminology. This information may involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from the future results, performance, or achievements expressed or implied by any forward-looking statements. These statements may be found under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” and “Description of Business,” as well as in this Report generally. Actual events or results may differ materially from those discussed in forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including, without limitation, the risks outlined under “Risk Factors” and matters described in this Report generally. In light of these risks and uncertainties, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this Report will in fact occur as projected.
Overview
On February 25, 2013, Inception Mining, Inc. (“Inception” or the “Company”) and its majority shareholder (the “Majority Shareholder”), and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Inception Development Inc. (the “Subsidiary”), entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement (the “Asset Purchase Agreement”) with Inception Resources, LLC, a Utah corporation (“Inception Resources”), pursuant to which Inception purchased the UP and Burlington Gold Mine in consideration of 16,000,000 shares of common stock of Inception, the assumption of promissory notes in the amount of $950,000 and the assignment of a 3% net smelter royalty, which may increase or decrease depending on the amount of gold produced. Inception Resources was an entity owned by and under the control of a shareholder. This transaction is deemed an asset purchase by entities under common control. The Asset Purchase Agreement closed on February 25, 2013 (the “Closing”). We were a “shell company” (as such term is defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended) immediately prior to our acquisition of the gold mine pursuant to the terms of the Assert Purchase Agreement.
We are a mining company engaged in the production, acquisition, exploration, and development of mineral properties, primarily for gold, from owned mining properties. Inception Resources has acquired two projects, as described below. Our target properties are those that have been the subject of historical exploration.
UP and Burlington Gold Mine
On February 25, 2013, the Company acquired certain real property and the associated exploration permits and mineral rights commonly known as the UP and Burlington Gold Mine (“UP and Burlington”).
On February 21, 2020, the Company sold the Up & Burlington property and mineral rights to Ounces High Exploration, Inc. in exchange for $250,000 in cash consideration and 66,974,252 shares of common stock of Hawkstone Mining Limited, a publicly-trade Australian company.
Clavo Rico Mine
On October 2, 2015, the Company consummated a merger with Clavo Rico Ltd. (“Clavo Rico”). Clavo Rico is a privately held Turks and Caicos company with principal operations in Honduras, Central America. Clavo Rico operates the Clavo Rico mining concession through its subsidiaries Compañía Minera Cerros del Sur, S.A de C.V. and Compañía Minera Clavo Rico, S.A. de C.V. and holds other mining concessions. Its workings include several historical underground mining operations dating back to the early Mayan and Spanish occupation.
The Company’s primary mine is located on the 200-hectare Clavo Rico Concession, located in southern Honduras. This mine was originally explored and exploited in the 16th century by the Spanish, and more recently has been operated by Compañía Minera Cerros del Sur, S. de R.L. as a small family business. In 2003, Clavo Rico’s predecessor purchased a 20% interest and later increased its ownership to 99.9%. This company has since invested over five million dollars in the expansion and development of the mine and surrounding properties. Today, the Company operates this mine through exploration of surface-level material.
Mining operations begin by crushing extracted material to approximately 3/8-inch size pebbles, which is then mixed with additional material and loaded on the recovery pad for processing. The pebble material is sprinkled with a solution that leaches the gold from the rock, and the solution is collected and processed on-site at Clavo Rico’s own ADR plant. The doré bars that result from this process are shipped to the USA for refining.
Prior to the expansion, the mine had only been processing approximately less than 500 tons of extracted material per day. The current recovery operational increase has been sized to handle from 500 to 750 tons of extracted material per day on a recovery bed that has the capacity to receive up to 750,000 tons of material. The Company commenced full operations on January 1, 2012 and believes that sufficiently high gold content ore bodies have been located and blocked out to load the leach pad to capacity by the end of December 31, 2022.
The Company has engaged in preliminary drilling of this area and the resulting assays of samples indicate that the material should have grades in the range of 0-5 grams of gold per ton.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
We had a net loss of $2,841,214 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was $5,182,791 less than the net income of $2,341,577 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change in our results over the two periods is primarily the result of a decrease in interest expense of $1,339,011, the change of derivative liabilities of $3,141,971 and an increase in loss on extinguishment of debt of $1,252,399 and recording the potential loss from a lawsuit of $1,225,000. The following table summarizes key items of comparison and their related increase (decrease) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenues
We had $4,725,778 and $4,143,908 in revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenues increased in 2021 as compared to 2020 as a result of increased mine production since there was no shutdowns related to Covid-19 as there was in 2020.
Cost of Sales
We had $3,286,010 and $2,826,448 in cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as a percentage of revenues, it was 69.5% and 68.2%, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,176,234 and $1,280,559, respectively. The decrease in operating expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 were comprised primarily of less consulting expense, legal fees and investor relations expenses.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income (expenses) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were ($2,575,110) and $2,304,676, respectively. Several factors contributed to the change in other income (expenses) between the two years of ($4,879,786). For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income was $21,113, gain on sale of mine property was $471,083, change in derivative liabilities was $6,657,628, change in marketable securities was $479,051, the loss on extinguishment of debt was $531,194 and interest expense was $4,793,005. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expense was $1,213,817, change in derivative liabilities was $3,515,657, change in marketable securities was $328,970, the loss on extinguishment of debt was $1,783,593 and interest expense was $3,453,994.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,841,214 while the net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $2,341,577.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, reflects assets of $1,172,037. As we had cash in the amount of $55,273 and a working capital deficit in the amount of $29,990,740 as of December 31, 2021, we do not have sufficient working capital to enable us to carry out our stated plan of operation for the next twelve months.
Working Capital
We anticipate generating losses and, therefore, may be unable to continue operations in the future. If we require additional capital, we would have to issue debt or equity or enter into a strategic arrangement with a third party.
Going Concern Consideration
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, the Company has an accumulated deficit of $37,508,429. In addition, there is a working capital deficiency of $30,115,740 and a stockholder’s deficiency of $30,275,558 the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and implement its business plan. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash flow used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $76,864, an increase of $57,055 from the $19,809 net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is mostly due to the net loss in 2021 versus the net income in 2020.
Investing Activities
Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $374,245, a decrease of $445,903 from the $820,148 net cash provided during the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was due to cash received from the sale of mine property of $249,660 and more cash received from the sale of marketable securities of $592,919 in 2020 versus the cash received from the sale of marketable securities of $447,136 in 2021.
Financing Activities
Financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, used $276,205, an increase of $538,196 from the $814,401 used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the company received $1,426,800 in notes payable from related parties, $31,667 in notes payable, made payments of $1,297,900 in cash on notes payable - related parties, $30,442 in cash on notes payable, $188,816 in cash on convertible notes and $217,514 in cash on secured borrowings.
Critical Accounting Policies
Going Concern - The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial statements during year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a net loss of $2,841,214 and used $76,864 in cash from operating activities. The Company has a net loss since inception of $37,508,429. In addition, there is a working capital deficiency of $30,115,740 and a stockholder’s deficiency of $30,275,558 as of December 31, 2021. These factors among others indicate that the Company may be unable to continue as a going concern for one year from the issuance of these financial statements.
The Company’s existence is dependent upon management’s ability to develop profitable operations and to obtain additional funding sources. There can be no assurance that the Company’s financing efforts will result in profitable operations or the resolution of the Company’s liquidity problems. The accompanying statements do not include any adjustments that might result should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Management is currently working to make changes that will result in profitable operations and to obtain additional funding sources to meet the Company’s need for cash during the next twelve months and beyond.
Principles of Consolidation - The accompanying consolidated financial statements include the accounts of Inception Mining, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiaries, Inception Development, Corp., Clavo Rico Development Corp., Clavo Rico, Ltd. and Compañía Minera Cerros del Río, S.A. de C.V., and its controlling interest subsidiaries, Compañía Minera Cerros del Sur, S.A. de C.V. and Compañía Minera Clavo Rico, S.A. de C.V. (collectively, the “Company”). All intercompany accounts have been eliminated upon consolidation.
Basis of Presentation - The Company prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Fair Value Measurements - The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that could be received upon the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. Financial assets are marked to bid prices and financial liabilities are marked to offer prices. The fair value should be calculated based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing the asset or liability, not on assumptions specific to the entity. In addition, the fair value of liabilities should include consideration of non-performance risk, including the party’s own credit risk.
Fair value measurements do not include transaction costs. A fair value hierarchy is used to prioritize the quality and reliability of the information used to determine fair values. Categorization within the fair value hierarchy is based on the lowest level of input that is significant to the fair value measurement. The fair value hierarchy is defined into the following three categories:
Level 1: Quoted market prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
Level 2: Observable inputs other than Level 1 prices such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets with insufficient volume or infrequent transactions (less active markets); or model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs are observable or can be derived principally from or corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
Level 3: Unobservable inputs to the valuation methodology that are significant to the measurement of fair value of assets or liabilities.
To the extent that valuation is based on models or inputs that are less observable or unobservable in the market, the determination of fair value requires more judgment. In certain cases, the inputs used to measure fair value may fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In such cases, for disclosure purposes, the level in the fair value hierarchy within which the fair value measurement is disclosed and is determined based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
The carrying value of the Company’s cash, accounts payable, short-term borrowings (including convertible notes payable), and other current assets and liabilities approximate fair value because of their short-term maturity.
The Company recognizes its derivative liabilities as level 3 and values its derivatives using the methods discussed below. While the Company believes that its valuation methods are appropriate and consistent with other market participants, it recognizes that the use of different methodologies or assumptions to determine the fair value of certain financial instruments could result in a different estimate of fair value at the reporting date. The primary assumptions that would significantly affect the fair values using the methods discussed below are that of volatility and market price of the underlying common stock of the Company.
Long-Lived Assets - We review the carrying amount of our long-lived assets for impairment whenever there are negative indicators of impairment. An asset is considered impaired when estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the asset. In the event the carrying amount of such asset is not considered recoverable, the asset is adjusted to its fair value. Fair value is generally determined based on discounted future cash flows.
Properties, Plant and Equipment - We record properties, plant and equipment at historical cost. We provide depreciation and amortization in amounts sufficient to match the cost of depreciable assets to operations over their estimated service lives or productive value. We capitalize expenditures for improvements that significantly extend the useful life of an asset. We charge expenditures for maintenance and repairs to operations when incurred. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over estimated useful lives as follows:
Building
to 15 years
Vehicles and equipment
to 7 years
Processing and laboratory
to 15 years
Furniture and fixtures
to 3 years
Reclamation Liabilities and Asset Retirement Obligations - Minimum standards for site reclamation and closure have been established for us by various government agencies. Asset retirement obligations are recognized when incurred and recorded as liabilities at fair value. The liability is accreted over time through periodic charges to earnings. In addition, the asset retirement cost is capitalized and amortized over the life of the related asset. Reclamation costs are periodically adjusted to reflect changes in the estimated present value resulting from the passage of time and revisions to the estimates of either the timing or amount of the reclamation and abandonment costs. The Company reviews, on an annual basis, unless otherwise deemed necessary, the asset retirement obligation at each mine site.
Revenue Recognition - Effective January 1, 2018 we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Subtopic 606-10, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606-10”). The adoption of ASC 606-10 had no impact on prior year or previously disclosed amounts. In accordance with ASC 606-10, revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a contract with a customer and recognized when we satisfy the performance obligation specified in each contract.
The Company generates revenue by selling gold and silver produced from its mining operations. The majority of the Company’s sales come from the sale of refined gold; however, the end product at the Company’s gold operations is generally doré bars. Doré is an alloy consisting primarily of gold but also containing silver and other metals. Doré is sent to refiners to produce bullion that meets the required market standard of 99.95% gold. Under the terms of the Company’s refining agreements, the doré bars are refined for a fee, and the Company’s share of the refined gold and silver is credited to its bullion account.
The Company recognizes revenue for gold and silver from doré production when it satisfies the performance obligation of transferring gold and silver inventory to the customer, which generally occurs upon transfer of gold and silver bullion credits as this is the point at which the customer obtains the ability to direct the use and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits of ownership of the asset.
The Company generally recognizes the sale of gold bullion credits at the prevailing market price when gold bullion credits are delivered to the customer. The transaction price is determined based on the agreed upon market price and the number of ounces delivered. Payment is due upon delivery of gold bullion credits to the customer’s account
All accounts receivable amounts are due from a single customer. Substantially all mining revenues recorded in the current period also related to the same customer. As gold can be sold through numerous gold market traders worldwide, the Company is not economically dependent on a limited number of customers for the sale of its product.
Derivative Liabilities - Derivatives liabilities are recorded at fair value when issued and the subsequent change in fair value each period is recorded in other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations. We do not hold or issue any derivative financial instruments for speculative trading purposes.
Income Taxes - The Company’s income tax expense and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect management’s best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining the consolidated income tax expense.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenue and expense. In evaluating the Company’s ability to recover its deferred tax assets, management considers all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies and recent financial operations. In projecting future taxable income, the Company develops assumptions including the amount of future state and federal pretax operating income, the reversal of temporary differences, and the implementation of feasible and prudent tax planning strategies. These assumptions require significant judgment about the forecasts of future taxable income, and are consistent with the plans and estimates that the Company is using to manage the underlying businesses. The Company provides a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets for which the Company does not consider realization of such deferred tax assets to be more likely than not.
Changes in tax laws and rates could also affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. Management is not aware of any such changes that would have a material effect on the Company’s results of operations, cash flows or financial position.
Operating Lease - The Company leases its corporate headquarters and administrative offices in Salt Lake City, Utah on a month-to-month basis.
The Company incurred rent expense of $14,945 and $14,508 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Non-Controlling Interest Policy - Non-controlling interest (NCI) is the portion of equity ownership in a subsidiary not attributable to the parent company, who has a controlling interest and consolidates the subsidiary’s financial results with its own. The amount of equity relating to the non-controlling interest is separately identified in the equity section of the balance sheet and the amount of the net income (loss) relating to the non-controlling interest is separately identified on the statement of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For recent accounting pronouncements, please refer to the notes to the financial statements section of this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements.