ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussions should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and related notes thereto included in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements made pursuant to the safe harbor provisions of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements are based on the Company’s beliefs and expectations about future outcomes and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from anticipated results. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include those described under “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” appearing in this Annual Report and factors described in other cautionary statements, cautionary language and risk factors set forth in other documents that the Company files with the Securities and Exchange Commission. The Company undertakes no obligation to publicly update forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
Celsion Corporation (“Celsion” and the “Company”) is a fully integrated, clinical stage biotechnology company focused on advancing a portfolio of innovative treatments including DNA-based immunotherapies, next generation vaccines and directed chemotherapies through clinical trials and eventual commercialization. The Company’s product pipeline includes GEN-1, a DNA-based immunotherapy for the localized treatment of ovarian cancer, and ThermoDox®, a proprietary heat-activated liposomal encapsulation of doxorubicin, currently under investigator-sponsored development for several cancer indications. Celsion has two feasibility stage platform technologies for the development of novel nucleic acid-based immunotherapies and next generation vaccines and other anti-cancer DNA or RNA therapies. Both are novel synthetic, non-viral vectors with demonstrated capability in nucleic acid cellular transfection.
IMMUNO-ONCOLOGY Program
On June 20, 2014, the Company completed the acquisition of substantially all of the assets of EGEN, a private company located in Huntsville, Alabama. Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, CLSN Laboratories acquired all of EGEN’s right, title and interest in substantially all of the assets of EGEN, including cash and cash equivalents, patents, trademarks and other intellectual property rights, clinical data, certain contracts, licenses and permits, equipment, furniture, office equipment, furnishings, supplies and other tangible personal property. A key asset acquired from EGEN was the TheraPlas technology platform. The first drug candidate developed from this technology platform is GEN-1.
THERAPLAS Technology Platform
TheraPlas is a technology platform for the delivery of DNA and mRNA therapeutics via synthetic non-viral carriers and is capable of providing cell transfection for double-stranded DNA plasmids and large therapeutic RNA segments such as mRNA. There are two components of the TheraPlas system, a plasmid DNA or mRNA payload encoding a therapeutic protein, and a delivery system. The delivery system is designed to protect the DNA/mRNA from degradation and promote trafficking into cells and through intracellular compartments. We designed the delivery system of TheraPlas by chemically modifying the low molecular weight polymer to improve its gene transfer activity without increasing toxicity. We believe that TheraPlas may be a viable alternative to current approaches to gene delivery due to several distinguishing characteristics, including enhanced molecular versatility that allows for complex modifications to potentially improve activity and safety.
The design of the TheraPlas delivery system is based on molecular functionalization of polyethyleneimine (PEI), a cationic delivery polymer with a distinct ability to escape from the endosomes due to heavy protonation. The transfection activity and toxicity of PEI is tightly coupled to its molecular weight; therefore, the clinical application of PEI is limited. We have used molecular functionalization strategies to improve the activity of low molecular weight PEIs without augmenting their cytotoxicity. In one instance, chemical conjugation of a low molecular weight branched BPEI1800 with cholesterol and polyethylene glycol (PEG) to form PEG-PEI-Cholesterol (PPC) dramatically improved the transfection activity of BPEI1800 following in vivo delivery. Together, the cholesterol and PEG modifications produced approximately 20-fold enhancement in transfection activity. Biodistribution studies following intraperitoneal or subcutaneous administration of DNA/PPC nanocomplexes showed DNA delivery localized primarily at the injection site with only small amount escaping into the systemic circulation. PPC is the delivery component of our lead TheraPlas product, GEN-1, which is in clinical development for the treatment of ovarian cancer. The PPC manufacturing process has been scaled up from bench scale (1-2 g) to 0.6Kg, and several cGMP lots have been produced with reproducible quality.
We believe that TheraPlas has emerged as a viable alternative to current approaches due to several distinguishing characteristics such as strong molecular versatility that may allow for complex modifications to potentially improve activity and safety with little difficulty. The biocompatibility of these polymers reduces the risk of adverse immune response, thus allowing for repeated administration. Compared to naked DNA or cationic lipids, TheraPlas is generally safer, more efficient, and cost effective. We believe that these advantages place Celsion in a position to capitalize on this technology platform.
Ovarian Cancer Overview
Ovarian cancer is the most lethal of gynecological malignancies among women with an overall five-year survival rate of 45%. This poor outcome is due in part to the lack of effective prevention and early detection strategies. There were approximately 20,000 new cases of ovarian cancer in the U.S. in 2021 with an estimated 13,000 deaths. Mortality rates for ovarian cancer declined very little in the last forty years due to the unavailability of detection tests and improved treatments. Most women with ovarian cancer are not diagnosed until Stages III or IV, when the disease has spread outside the pelvis to the abdomen and areas beyond causing swelling and pain, where the five-year survival rates are 25 - 41 percent and 11 percent, respectively. First-line chemotherapy regimens are typically platinum-based combination therapies. Although this first line of treatment has an approximate 80 percent response rate, 55 to 75 percent of women will develop recurrent ovarian cancer within two years and ultimately will not respond to platinum therapy. Patients whose cancer recurs or progresses after initially responding to surgery and first-line chemotherapy have been divided into one of the two groups based on the time from completion of platinum therapy to disease recurrence or progression. This time period is referred to as platinum-free interval. The platinum-sensitive group has a platinum-free interval of longer than six months. This group generally responds to additional treatment with platinum-based therapies. The platinum-resistant group has a platinum-free interval of shorter than six months and is resistant to additional platinum-based treatments. Pegylated liposomal doxorubicin, topotecan, and Avastin are the only approved second-line therapies for platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. The overall response rate for these therapies is 10 to 20 percent with median overall survival (“OS”) of eleven to twelve months. Immunotherapy is an attractive novel approach for the treatment of ovarian cancer particularly since ovarian cancers are considered immunogenic tumors. IL-12 is one of the most active cytokines for the induction of potent anti-cancer immunity acting through the induction of T-lymphocyte and natural killer cell proliferation. The precedence for a therapeutic role of IL-12 in ovarian cancer is based on epidemiologic and preclinical data.
GEN-1 Immunotherapy
GEN-1 is a DNA-based immunotherapeutic product candidate for the localized treatment of ovarian cancer by intraperitoneally administering an Interleukin-12 (“IL-12”) plasmid formulated with our proprietary TheraPlas delivery system. In this DNA-based approach, the immunotherapy is combined with a standard chemotherapy drug, which can potentially achieve better clinical outcomes than with chemotherapy alone. We believe that increases in IL-12 concentrations at tumor sites for several days after a single administration could create a potent immune environment against tumor activity and that a direct killing of the tumor with concomitant use of cytotoxic chemotherapy could result in a more robust and durable antitumor response than chemotherapy alone. We believe the rationale for local therapy with GEN-1 is based on the following:
● Loco-regional production of the potent cytokine IL-12 avoids toxicities and poor pharmacokinetics associated with systemic delivery of recombinant IL-12;
● Persistent local delivery of IL-12 lasts up to one week and dosing can be repeated; and
● Local therapy is ideal for long-term maintenance therapy.
OVATION I Study. In February 2015, we announced that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) accepted, without objection, the Phase I dose-escalation clinical trial of GEN-1 in combination with the standard of care in neoadjuvant ovarian cancer (the “OVATION I Study”). On September 30, 2015, we announced enrollment of the first patient in the OVATION I Study. The OVATION I Study was designed to:
(i) identify a safe, tolerable and therapeutically active dose of GEN-1 by recruiting and maximizing an immune response;
(ii) enroll three to six patients per dose level and evaluate safety and efficacy; and
(iii) attempt to define an optimal dose for a follow-on Phase I/II study.
In addition, the OVATION I Study established a unique opportunity to assess how cytokine-based compounds such as GEN-1, directly affect ovarian cancer cells and the tumor microenvironment in newly diagnosed ovarian cancer patients. The study was designed to characterize the nature of the immune response triggered by GEN-1 at various levels of the patients’ immune system, including:
● Infiltration of cancer fighting T-cell lymphocytes into primary tumor and tumor microenvironment including peritoneal cavity, which is the primary site of metastasis of ovarian cancer;
● Changes in local and systemic levels of immuno-stimulatory and immune-suppressive cytokines associated with tumor suppression and growth, respectively; and
● Expression profile of a comprehensive panel of immune related genes in pre-treatment and GEN-1-treated tumor tissue.
We initiated the OVATION I Study at four clinical sites at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, Oklahoma University Medical Center, Washington University in St. Louis, and the Medical College of Wisconsin. During 2016 and 2017, we announced data from the first fourteen patients in the OVATION I Study. On October 3, 2017, we announced final translational research and clinical data from the OVATION I Study.
Key translational research findings from all evaluable patients are consistent with the earlier reports from partial analysis of the data and are summarized below:
● The intraperitoneal treatment of GEN-1 in conjunction with NACT resulted in dose dependent increases in IL-12 and Interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) levels that were predominantly in the peritoneal fluid compartment with little to no changes observed in the patients’ systemic circulation. These and other post-treatment changes including decreases in VEGF levels in peritoneal fluid are consistent with an IL-12 based immune mechanism;
● Consistent with the previous partial reports, the effects observed in the IHC analysis were pronounced decreases in the density of immunosuppressive T-cell signals (Foxp3, PD-1, PDL-1, IDO-1) and increases in CD8+ cells in the tumor microenvironment;
● The ratio of CD8+ cells to immunosuppressive cells was increased in approximately 75% of patients suggesting an overall shift in the tumor microenvironment from immunosuppressive to pro-immune stimulatory following treatment with GEN-1. An increase in CD8+ to immunosuppressive T-cell populations is a leading indicator and believed to be a good predictor of improved OS; and
● Analysis of peritoneal fluid by cell sorting, not reported before, shows a treatment-related decrease in the percentage of immunosuppressive T-cell (Foxp3+), which is consistent with the reduction of Foxp3+ T-cells in the primary tumor tissue, and a shift in tumor naïve CD8+ cell population to more efficient tumor killing memory effector CD8+ cells.
The Company also reported positive clinical data from the first fourteen patients who completed treatment in the OVATION I Study. GEN-1 plus standard chemotherapy produced no dose limiting toxicities and positive dose dependent efficacy signals which correlate well with positive surgical outcomes as summarized below:
● Of the fourteen patients treated in the entire study, two patients demonstrated a complete response, ten patients demonstrated a partial response and two patients demonstrated stable disease, as measured by RECIST criteria. This translates to a 100% disease control rate and an 86% objective response rate (“ORR”). Of the five patients treated in the highest dose cohort, there was a 100% ORR with one complete response and four partial responses;
● Fourteen patients had successful resections of their tumors, with nine patients (64%) having a complete tumor resection (“R0”), which indicates a microscopically margin-negative resection in which no gross or microscopic tumor remains in the tumor bed. Seven out of eight (88%) patients in the highest two dose cohorts experienced a R0 surgical resection. All five patients treated at the highest dose cohort experienced a R0 surgical resection; and
● All patients experienced a clinically significant decrease in their CA-125 protein levels as of their most recent study visit. CA-125 is used to monitor certain cancers during and after treatment. CA-125 is present in greater concentrations in ovarian cancer cells than in other cells.
On March 2, 2019, the Company announced final, investigator assessed, progression free survival (“PFS”) results from the OVATION I Study. Median PFS in patients treated per protocol (n=14) was 21 months and was 17.1 months for the intent-to-treat (“ITT”) population (n=18) for all dose cohorts, including three patients who dropped out of the study after 13 days or less, and two patients who did not receive full NAC and GEN-1 cycles. Under the current standard of care, in women with Stage III/IV ovarian cancer undergoing NAC, their disease progresses within about 12 months on average. The results from the OVATION I Study support continued evaluation of GEN-1 based on promising tumor response, as reported in the PFS data, and the ability for surgeons to completely remove visible tumor at interval debulking surgery. GEN-1 was well tolerated, and no dose-limiting toxicities were detected. Intraperitoneal administration of GEN-1 was feasible with broad patient acceptance.
OVATION 2 Study. The Company held an Advisory Board Meeting on September 27, 2017 with the clinical investigators and scientific experts including those from Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical School, and M.D. Anderson Cancer Center to review and finalize clinical, translational research and safety data from the OVATION I Study in order to determine the next steps forward for our GEN-1 immunotherapy program.
On November 13, 2017, the Company filed its Phase I/II clinical trial protocol with the FDA for GEN-1 for the localized treatment of ovarian cancer. The protocol is designed with a single dose escalation phase to 100 mg/m² to identify a safe and tolerable dose of GEN-1 while maximizing an immune response. The Phase I portion of the study will be followed by a continuation at the selected dose in approximately 110 patients randomized Phase II study.
In the OVATION 2 Study, patients in the GEN-1 treatment arm will receive GEN-1 plus chemotherapy pre- and post-interval debulking surgery (“IDS”). The OVATION 2 Study will include up to 110 patients with Stage III/IV ovarian cancer, with 12 to 15 patients in the Phase I portion and up to 95 patients in Phase II. The study is powered to show a 33% improvement in the primary endpoint, PFS, when comparing GEN-1 with neoadjuvant + adjuvant chemotherapy versus neoadjuvant + adjuvant chemotherapy alone. The PFS primary analysis will be conducted after at least 80 events have been observed or after all patients have been followed for at least 16 months, whichever is later.
In March 2020, the Company announced encouraging initial clinical data from the first 15 patients enrolled in the Phase I portion of the OVATION 2 Study for patients newly diagnosed with Stage III and IV ovarian cancer. The OVATION 2 Study combines GEN-1, the Company’s IL-12 gene-mediated immunotherapy, with standard-of-care neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NACT). Following NACT, patients undergo interval debulking surgery (IDS), followed by three additional cycles of chemotherapy.
GEN-1 plus standard NACT produced positive dose-dependent efficacy results, with no dose-limiting toxicities, which correlates well with successful surgical outcomes as summarized below:
● Of the 15 patients treated in the Phase I portion of the OVATION 2 Study, nine patients were treated with GEN-1 at a dose of 100 mg/m² plus NACT and six patients were treated with NACT only. All 15 patients had successful resections of their tumors, with eight out of nine patients (88%) in the GEN-1 treatment arm having an R0 resection, which indicates a microscopically margin-negative complete resection in which no gross or microscopic tumor remains in the tumor bed. Only three out of six patients (50%) in the NACT only treatment arm had a R0 resection.
● When combining these results with the surgical resection rates observed in the Company’s prior Phase Ib dose-escalation trial (the OVATION 1 Study), a population of patients with inclusion criteria identical to the OVATION 2 Study, the data reflect the strong dose-dependent efficacy of adding GEN-1 to the current standard of care NACT:
● The ORR as measured by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) criteria for the 0, 36, 47 mg/m² dose GEN-1 patients were comparable, as expected, to the higher (61, 79, 100 mg/m²) dose GEN-1 patients, with both groups demonstrating an approximate 80% ORR.
On March 23, 2020, the Company announced that the European Medicines Agency (the “EMA”) Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products (“COMP”) has recommended that GEN-1 be designated as an orphan medicinal product for the treatment of ovarian cancer. GEN-1 is an IL-12 DNA plasmid vector encased in a non-viral nanoparticle delivery system, which enables cell transfection followed by persistent, local secretion of the IL-12 protein. GEN-1 previously received orphan designation from the FDA.
On March 26, 2020, the Company announced with Medidata, a Dassault Systèmes company, that examining matched patient data provided by Medidata in a synthetic control arm (“SCA”) with results from the Company’s completed Phase Ib dose-escalating OVATION I Study showed positive results in progression-free survival (“PFS”). The hazard ratio (“HR”) was 0.53 in the ITT group, showing strong signals of efficacy. Celsion believes these data may warrant consideration of strategies to accelerate the clinical development program for GEN-1 in newly diagnosed, advanced ovarian cancer patients by the FDA.
SCAs have the potential to revolutionize clinical trials in certain oncology indications and some other diseases where a randomized control is not ethical or practical. SCAs are formed by carefully selecting control patients from historical clinical trials to match the demographic and disease characteristics of the patients treated with the new investigational product. SCAs have been shown to mimic the results of traditional randomized controls so that the treatment effects of an investigational product can be visible by comparison to the SCA. SCAs can help advance the scientific validity of single arm trials, and in certain indications, reduce time and cost, and expose fewer patients to placebos or existing standard-of-care treatments that might not be effective for them.
On July 27, 2020, the Company announced the randomization of the first two patients in the Phase II portion of the OVATION 2 Study with GEN-1 in advanced ovarian cancer. The Company anticipates completing enrollment of up to 110 patients in the second half of 2022. Because this is an open-label study, the Company intends to provide clinical updates throughout the course of treatment including response rates and surgical resection scores.
In February 2021, the Company announced that it has received Fast Track designation from the FDA for GEN-1, its DNA-mediated IL-12 immunotherapy currently in Phase II development for the treatment of advanced ovarian cancer and also provided an update on the OVATION 2 Study. The Company reported that approximately one-third, or 34 patients, of the anticipated 110 patients had been enrolled into the OVATION 2 Study, of which 20 are in the treatment arm and 14 are in the control. Of the 34 patients enrolled in the trial, 27 patients have had their interval debulking surgery with the following results:
● 80% of patients treated with GEN-1 had a R0 resection, which indicates a microscopically margin-negative complete resection in which no gross or microscopic tumor remains in the tumor bed.
● 58% of patients in the control arm had an R0 resection.
● This interim data represents a 38% improvement in R0 resection rates for GEN-1 patients compared with control arm patients and is consistent with the reported improvement in resection scores noted in the encouraging Phase I OVATION I Study, the manuscript of which has been submitted for peer review publication.
In February 2022, the Company announced that following a pre-planned interim safety review of 81 as treated patients randomized in the OVATION 2 Study, the Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) unanimously recommended that the OVATION 2 Study continue treating patients with the dose of 100 mg/m2. The DSMB also determined that safety is satisfactory with an acceptable risk/benefit, and that patients tolerate GEN-1 during a course of treatment that lasts up to six months. No dose-limiting toxicities were reported.
The Company also announced that over 75% of the projected 110 patients have been enrolled in the OVATION 2 Study. Interim clinical data from the first 39 patients who have undergone interval debulking surgery showed that the GEN-1 treatment arm is showing a 27% improvement in R0 surgical resection rate over the control arm.
PLACCINE DNA VACCINE TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM
In January 2021, the Company announced the filing of a provisional U.S. patent application for a novel DNA-based, investigational vaccine for preventing or treating infections from a broad range of infectious agents including the coronavirus disease using its PLACCINE DNA vaccine technology platform (“PLACCINE”). The provisional patent covers a family of novel composition of multi-cistronic vectors and polymeric nanoparticles that comprise the PLACCINE DNA vaccine platform technology for preventing or treating infectious agents that have the potential for global pandemics, including the SARS-CoV-2 virus and its variations, using the Company’s platform technology.
Celsion’s PLACCINE DNA vaccine technology platform is characterized by a single multi-cistronic DNA plasmid vector expressing multiple pathogen antigens along with a potent immune modifier and delivered with a synthetic delivery system. It is easily adaptable to creating vaccines for a multitude of pathogens, including emerging pathogens leading to pandemics as well as infectious diseases that have yet to be effectively addressed with current vaccine technologies. This flexible vaccine platform is well supported by an already established supply chain to produce any plasmid vector and its assembly into a respective vaccine formulation.
PLACCINE is an extension of the Company’s synthetic, non-viral TheraPlas delivery technology currently in a Phase II trial for the treatment of late-stage ovarian cancer with GEN-1. Celsion’s proprietary multifunctional DNA vaccine technology concept is built on the flexible PLACCINE technology platform that is amenable to rapidly responding to the SARS-CoV-2 virus, as well as possible future mutations of SARS-CoV-2, other future pandemics, emerging bioterrorism threats, and novel infectious diseases. Celsion’s extensive experience with TheraPlas suggests that the PLACCINE-based nanoparticles are stable at storage temperatures of 4oC to 25oC, making vaccines developed on this platform easily suitable for broad world-wide distribution.
Celsion’s vaccine approach is designed to optimize the quality of the immune response dictating the efficiency of pathogen clearance and patient recovery. Celsion has taken a multivalent approach in an effort to generate an even more robust immune response that not only results in a strong neutralizing antibody response, but also a more robust and durable T-cell response. Delivered with Celsion’s synthetic polymeric system, the proprietary DNA plasmid is protected from degradation and its cellular uptake is facilitated.
COVID-19 Vaccine Overview
Emerging data from the recent literature indicates that the quality of the immune response as opposed to its absolute magnitude is what dictates SARS-CoV-2 viral clearance and recovery and that an ineffective or non-neutralizing enhanced antibody response might actually exacerbate disease. The first-generation COVID-19 vaccines were developed for rapid production and deployment and were not optimized for generating cellular responses that result in effective viral clearance. Though early data has indicated some of these vaccines to be over 95% effective, these first-generation vaccines were primarily designed to generate a strong antibody response and, while they have been shown to provide prophylactic protection against disease, the durability of this protection is currently unclear. Most of these vaccines have been specifically developed to target the SARS-CoV-2 Spike (S) protein (antigen), though it is known that restricting a vaccine to a sole viral antigen creates selection pressure that can serve to facilitate the emergence of viral resistance. Indeed, even prior to full vaccine rollout, it has been observed that the S protein is a locus for rapid evolutionary and functional change as evidenced by the D614G, Y453F, 501Y.V2, and VUI-202012/01 mutations/deletions. This propensity for mutation of the S protein leads to future risk of efficacy reduction over time as these mutations accumulate.
Our Next Generation Vaccine Initiative
Celsion’s vaccine candidate comprises a single plasmid vector containing the DNA sequence encoding multiple SARS-CoV-2 antigens. Delivery will be evaluated intramuscularly, intradermally, or subcutaneously with a non-viral synthetic DNA delivery carrier that facilitates vector delivery into the cells of the injected tissue and has potential immune adjuvant properties. Unique designs and formulations of Celsion vaccine candidates may offer several potential key advantages. The synthetic polymeric DNA carrier is an important component of the vaccine composition as it has the potential to facilitate the vaccine immunogenicity by improving vector delivery and, due to potential adjuvant properties, attract professional immune cells to the site of vaccine delivery.
Future vaccine technology will need to address viral mutations and the challenges of efficient manufacturing, distribution, and storage. We believe an adaptation of our TheraPlas technology, PLACCINE, has the potential to meet these challenges. Our approach is described in our provisional patent filing and is summarized as a DNA vaccine technology platform characterized by a single plasmid DNA with multiple coding regions. The plasmid vector is designed to express multiple pathogen antigens. It is delivered via a synthetic delivery system and has the potential to be easily modified to create vaccines against a multitude of infectious diseases, addressing:
● Viral Mutations: PLACCINE may offer broad-spectrum and mutational resistance (variants) by targeting multiple antigens on a single plasmid vector.
● Durable Efficacy: PLACCINE delivers a DNA plasmid-based antigen that can result in durable antigen exposure and a robust vaccine response to viral antigens.
● Storage & Distribution: PLACCINE allows for stability that is compatible with manageable vaccine storage and distribution.
● Simple Dosing & Administration: PLACCINE is a synthetic delivery system that should require a simple injection that does not require viruses or special equipment to deliver its payload.
We are conducting preliminary research associated with our recently announced proprietary DNA vaccine platform provisional patent filing. At the same time, we are redoubling our efforts and R&D resources in our immuno-oncology and next generation vaccine program.
On September 2, 2021, the Company announced results from preclinical in vivo studies showing production of antibodies and cytotoxic T-cell response specific to the spike antigen of SARS-CoV-2 when immunizing BALB/c mice with the Company’s next-generation PLACCINE DNA vaccine platform. Moreover, the antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 spike antigen prevented the infection of cultured cells in a viral neutralization assay. The production of antibodies predicts the ability of PLACCINE to protect against SARS-CoV-2 exposure, and the elicitation of cytotoxic T-cell response shows the vaccine’s potential to eradicate cells infected with SARS-CoV-2. These findings demonstrate the potential immunogenicity of Celsion’s PLACCINE DNA vaccine, which is intended to provide broad-spectrum protection and resistance against variants by incorporating multiple viral antigens, to improve vaccine stability at storage temperatures of 4o C and above, and to facilitate cheaper and easier manufacturing.
On January 31, 2022, the Company announced it had engaged BIOQUAL, Inc., a preclinical testing contract research organization, to conduct a non-human primate (NHP) challenge study with Celsion’s DNA-based approach for a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine. The NHP pilot study follows the generation of encouraging mouse data and will evaluate the Company’s lead vaccine formulations for safety, immunogenicity and protection against SARS-CoV-2. In completed preclinical studies, Celsion demonstrated safe and efficient immune responses including IgG response, neutralizing antibodies and T-cell responses that parallel the activity of commercial vaccines following intramuscular (IM) administration of novel vaccine compositions expressing a single viral antigen. In addition, vector development has shown promise of neutralizing activity against a range of SARS-CoV-2 variants. Celsion’s novel DNA-based vaccines have been based on a simple intramuscular injection that does not require viral encapsulation or special equipment for administration.
THERMODOX® - DIRECTED CHEMOTHERAPY
Liposomes are manufactured submicroscopic vesicles consisting of a discrete aqueous central compartment surrounded by a membrane bilayer composed of naturally occurring lipids. Conventional liposomes have been designed and manufactured to carry drugs and increase residence time, thus allowing the drugs to remain in the bloodstream for extended periods of time before they are removed from the body. However, the current existing liposomal formulations of cancer drugs and liposomal cancer drugs under development do not provide for the immediate release of the drug and the direct targeting of organ specific tumors, two important characteristics that are required for improving the efficacy of cancer drugs such as doxorubicin. A team of research scientists at Duke University developed a heat-sensitive liposome that rapidly changes its structure when heated to a threshold minimum temperature of 39.5º to 42º Celsius. Heating creates channels in the liposome bilayer that allow an encapsulated drug to rapidly disperse into the surrounding tissue. This novel, heat-activated liposomal technology is differentiated from other liposomes through its unique low heat-activated release of encapsulated chemotherapeutic agents. We are able to use several available focused-heat technologies, such as radiofrequency ablation (“RFA”), microwave energy and high intensity focused ultrasound (“HIFU”), to activate the release of drugs from our novel heat sensitive liposomes.
Investigator sponsored THERMODOX® for the Treatment of Various Cancers
Celsion’s Approach
While RFA uses extremely high temperatures (greater than 90° Celsius) to ablate the tumor, it may fail to treat micro-metastases in the outer margins of the ablation zone because temperatures in the periphery may not be high enough to destroy cancer cells. Our ThermoDox® treatment approach is designed to utilize the ability of RFA devices to ablate the center of the tumor while simultaneously thermally activating our ThermoDox® liposome to release its encapsulated doxorubicin to kill any remaining viable cancer cells throughout the heated region, including the ablation margins. This novel treatment approach is intended to deliver the drug directly to those cancer cells that survive RFA. This approach is designed to increase the delivery of the doxorubicin at the desired tumor site while potentially reducing drug exposure distant to the tumor site.
OPTIMA Study
The OPTIMA Study represents an evaluation of ThermoDox® in combination with a first line therapy, RFA, for newly diagnosed, intermediate stage HCC patients. The OPTIMA Study was designed to enroll up to 550 patients globally at approximately 65 clinical sites in the U.S., Canada, European Union (EU), China and other countries in the Asia-Pacific region and will evaluate ThermoDox® in combination with standardized RFA, which will require a minimum of 45 minutes across all investigators and clinical sites for treating lesions three to seven centimeters, versus standardized RFA alone. The primary endpoint for the OPTIMA Study is OS, and the secondary endpoints are progression free survival and safety. The statistical plan calls for two interim efficacy analyses by an independent Data Monitoring Committee (“DMC”).
On February 24, 2014, we announced that the FDA provided clearance for the OPTIMA Study, which is a pivotal, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase III trial of ThermoDox®, in combination with standardized RFA, for the treatment of primary liver cancer. The trial design of the OPTIMA Study is based on the comprehensive analysis of data from an earlier Phase III clinical trial called the HEAT Study (the “HEAT Study”). The OPTIMA Study is supported by a hypothesis developed from an OS analysis of a large subgroup of patients from the HEAT Study.
Post-hoc data analysis from our earlier Phase III HEAT Study suggests that ThermoDox® may substantially improve OS, when compared to the control group, in patients if their lesions undergo a 45-minute RFA procedure standardized for a lesion greater than 3 cm in diameter. Data from nine OS sweeps have been conducted since the top line progression free survival PFS data from the HEAT Study were announced in January 2013, with each data set demonstrating substantial improvement in clinical benefit over the control group with statistical significance. On August 15, 2016, we announced updated results from its final retrospective OS analysis of the data from the HEAT Study. These results demonstrated that in a large, well bounded, subgroup of patients with a single lesion (n=285, 41% of the HEAT Study patients), treatment with a combination of ThermoDox® and optimized RFA provided an average 54% risk improvement in OS compared to optimized RFA alone. The HR at this analysis is 0.65 (95% CI 0.45 - 0.94) with a p-value of 0.02. Median OS for the ThermoDox® group has been reached which translates into a two-year survival benefit over the optimized RFA group (projected to be greater than 80 months for the ThermoDox® plus optimized RFA group compared to less than 60 months projection for the optimized RFA only group). This information should be viewed with caution since it is based on a retrospective analysis of a subgroup.
In August 2018, the Company announced that the OPTIMA Study was fully enrolled. On August 5, 2019, the Company announced that the prescribed number of OS events had been reached for the first prespecified interim analysis of the OPTIMA Phase III Study. Following preparation of the data, the first interim analysis was conducted by the DMC. The DMC’s pre-planned interim efficacy review followed 128 patient events, or deaths, which occurred in August 2019. On November 4, 2019, the Company announced that the DMC unanimously recommended the OPTIMA Study continue according to protocol. The recommendation was based on a review of blinded safety and data integrity from 556 patients enrolled in the OPTIMA Study. Data presented demonstrated that PFS and OS data appeared to be tracking with patient data observed at a similar point in the Company’s subgroup of patients followed prospectively in the earlier Phase III HEAT Study, upon which the OPTIMA Study was based.
On April 15, 2020, the Company announced that the prescribed minimum number of events of 158 patient deaths had been reached for the second pre-specified interim analysis of the OPTIMA Phase III Study. The hazard ratio for success at 158 deaths is 0.70, which represents a 30% reduction in the risk of death compared with RFA alone. On July 13, 2020, the Company announced that it has received a recommendation from the DMC to consider stopping the global OPTIMA Study. The recommendation was made following the second pre-planned interim safety and efficacy analysis by the DMC on July 9, 2020. The DMC analysis found that the pre-specified boundary for stopping the trial for futility of 0.900 was crossed with an actual value of 0.903. However, the 2-sided p-value of 0.524 for this analysis provides uncertainty, subsequently, the DMC has left the final decision of whether or not to stop the OPTIMA Study to Celsion. There were no safety concerns noted during the interim analysis. The Company followed the advice of the DMC and considered its options either to stop the study or continue to follow patients after a thorough review of the data, and an evaluation of our probability of success. Timing for this decision is made less urgent by the fact that the OPTIMA Study has been fully enrolled since August 2018 and that the vast majority of the trial expenses have already been incurred.
On August 4, 2020, the Company issued a press release announcing it would continue following patients for OS, noting that the unexpected and marginally crossed futility boundary, suggested by the Kaplan-Meier analysis at the second interim analysis on July 9, 2020, may be associated with a data maturity issue. On October 12, 2020, the Company provided an update on the ongoing data analysis from its Phase III OPTIMA Study with ThermoDox® as well as growing interest among clinical investigators in conducting studies with ThermoDox® as a monotherapy or in combination with other therapies.
● Celsion engaged a global biometrics contract research organization, with forensic statistical analysis capability that specializes in data management, statistical consulting, statistical analysis and data sciences, with particular expertise in evaluating unusual data from clinical trials and experience with associated regulatory issues. The primary objective of the CRO’s work was to determine the basis and reasoning behind continuing to follow patients for survival, and if there were outside influences that may have impacted the forecast of futility.
● In parallel, the Company submitted all OPTIMA Study clinical trial data to the National Institutes of Health (NIH) with the expectation of receiving a report on the following:
○ A Cox Regression Analysis for single solitary lesions including minimum burn time per tumor volume, evaluating similarities to the hypothesis generated from the NIH paper published in the Journal of Vascular and Interventional Radiology, in which the key finding was that increased RFA heating time per tumor volume significantly improved OS in patients with single lesion HCC who were treated with RFA plus ThermoDox®, compared with patients treated with RFA alone.
○ A site-by-site evaluation for RFA heating time-based anomalies that may have contributed to the treatment arm performance.
○ An image-based evaluation comparing results from the OPTIMA Study to the data from the HEAT Study that led to the RFA heating time hypothesis.
On February 11, 2021, the Company provided a final update on the Phase III OPTIMA Study and the decision to stop following patients in the Study. Independent analyses conducted by a global biometrics contract research organization and the NIH, did not find any evidence of significance or factors that would justify continuing to follow patients for OS. Therefore, the Company notified all clinical sites to discontinue following patients. The OPTIMA Study database of 556 patients is now be frozen at 185 patient deaths. While the analyses did identify certain patient subgroups that appear to have had a clinical benefit, the Company concluded that it would not be in its best interest to pursue these retrospective findings as the regulatory hurdles supporting further discussion will be significant.
Investigator-Sponsored Studies with ThermoDox®
Celsion continues working closely and supporting investigations by others throughout the world in breast cancer, pancreatic cancer and in solid tumors in children. Following inquiries from the NIH, we renewed our Cooperative Research and Development Agreement (CRADA) with the Institute at a nominal cost, one goal of which is to pursue their interest in a study of ThermoDox® to treat patients with bladder cancer. Importantly, Celsion is developing a business model to support these investigator-sponsored studies in a manner that will not interfere with the Company’s focus on our GEN-1 program and vaccine development initiative.
Below are summaries of several investigator-sponsored studies using ThermoDox®:
● Oxford University commenced enrolling patients in a Phase I pancreatic cancer study with ThermoDox® in combination with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (HIFU) in July of 2021. The primary objective of this trial, the PanDox Study: Targeted Doxorubicin in Pancreatic Tumors, is to quantify the enhancement in intratumoral doxorubicin concentration when delivered with ThermoDox® and HIFU, versus doxorubicin monotherapy. This study is being undertaken pursuant to promising data in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer, which was published in the International Journal of Hyperthermia in 2018. That preclinical study showed a 23x increase in intratumoral doxorubicin concentration with ThermoDox® + HIFU, compared with a 2x increase in intratumoral doxorubicin concentration with free doxorubicin plus HIFU.
● Utrecht University in the Netherlands continues to enroll patients in a Phase I breast cancer study to determine the safety, tolerability and feasibility of ThermoDox® in combination with Magnetic Resonance Guided High Intensity Focused Ultrasound (MR-HIFU) hyperthermia and cyclophosphamide therapy for the local treatment of the primary tumor in metastatic breast cancer (mBC). This investigator-sponsored study, which is being funded by the Dutch Cancer Society, the Center for Translational Molecular Medicine (a public-private partnership in the Netherlands), will be conducted at University Medical Center Utrecht and will enroll up to 12 newly diagnosed mBC patients. Celsion will supply Thermodox® clinical product for the trial.
Because of the risks and uncertainties discussed in this Annual Report, among others, we are unable to estimate the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when, if ever, and to what extent we will receive cash inflows from the commercialization and sale of a product. Our inability to complete any of our research and development activities, preclinical studies or clinical trials in a timely manner or our failure to enter into collaborative agreements when appropriate could significantly increase our capital requirements and could adversely impact our liquidity. While our estimated future capital requirements are uncertain and could increase or decrease as a result of many factors, including the extent to which we choose to advance our research, development activities, preclinical studies and clinical trials, or if we are in a position to pursue manufacturing or commercialization activities, we will need significant additional capital to develop our product candidates through development and clinical trials, obtain regulatory approvals and manufacture and commercialize approved products, if any. We do not know whether we will be able to access additional capital when needed or on terms favorable to us or our stockholders. Our inability to raise additional capital, or to do so on terms reasonably acceptable to us, would jeopardize the future success of our business.
Business Plan
Since inception, the Company has incurred substantial operating losses, principally from expenses associated with the Company’s research and development programs, clinical trials conducted in connection with the Company’s product candidates, and applications and submissions to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The Company has not generated significant revenue and has incurred significant net losses in each year since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has incurred approximately $333 million of cumulative net losses and had approximately $56.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, interest receivable, net proceeds on the sale of net operating losses and restricted cash. We have substantial future capital requirements to continue our research and development activities and advance our product candidates through various development stages. The Company believes these expenditures are essential for the commercialization of its technologies.
The Company expects its operating losses to continue for the foreseeable future as it continues its product development efforts, and when it undertakes marketing and sales activities. The Company’s ability to achieve profitability is dependent upon its ability to obtain governmental approvals, manufacture, and market and sell its new product candidates. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to commercialize its technology successfully or that profitability will ever be achieved. The operating results of the Company have fluctuated significantly in the past.
In January 2020, the WHO declared an outbreak of coronavirus, COVID-19, to be a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern,” and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services declared a public health emergency to aid the U.S. healthcare community in responding to COVID-19. This virus has spread to over 200 countries, including the U.S. Governments and businesses around the world took unprecedented actions to mitigate the spread of COVID-19, including, but not limited to, shelter-in-place orders, quarantines, significant restrictions on travel, as well as restrictions that prohibited many employees from going to work. Uncertainty with respect to the economic impacts of the pandemic introduced significant volatility in the financial markets. The Company did not observe significant impacts on its business or results of operations during 2021 or 2020 due to the global emergence of COVID-19. While the extent to which COVID-19 impacts the Company’s future results will depend on future developments, the pandemic and associated economic impacts could result in a material impact to the Company’s future financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
The Company’s ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, financial markets in the U.S. and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. These disruptions may also disrupt the clinical trials process and enrollment of patients. This may delay commercialization efforts. The Company continues to monitor its operating activities in light of these events, and it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on the Company’s financial condition and results of operations. The specific impact, if any, is not readily determinable as of the date of the Financial Statements.
The actual amount of funds the Company will need to operate is subject to many factors, some of which are beyond the Company’s control. These factors include the following:
● the progress of research activities;
● the number and scope of research programs;
● the progress of preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom the Company has entered into research and development agreements;
● the costs associated with additional clinical trials of product candidates;
● the ability to maintain current research and development licensing arrangements and to establish new research and development and licensing arrangements;
● the ability to achieve milestones under licensing arrangements;
● the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
● the costs and timing of regulatory approvals.
On July 13, 2020, the Company announced that it has received a recommendation from the independent DMC to consider stopping the global Phase III OPTIMA Study of ThermoDox® in combination with RFA for the treatment of HCC, or primary liver cancer. The recommendation was made following the second pre-planned interim safety and efficacy analysis by the DMC on July 9, 2020. The DMC’s analysis found that the pre-specified boundary for stopping the trial for futility of 0.900 was crossed with an actual value of 0.903. The Company followed the advice of the DMC and considered its options to either stop the study or continue to follow patients after a thorough review of the data, and an evaluation of the probability of success. On February 11, 2021, the Company issued a letter to shareholders stating that the Company was notifying all clinical sites to discontinue following patients in the OPTIMA Study.
Since 2018, the Company has annually submitted applications to sell a portion of the Company’s State of New Jersey net operating losses (“New Jersey NOLs”) as part of the Technology Business Tax Certificate Program (the “NOL Program”) sponsored by The New Jersey Economic Development Authority. Under the program, emerging biotechnology companies with unused New Jersey NOLs and unused research and development credits are allowed to sell these benefits to other New Jersey-based companies. In 2018 and 2019, the Company sold cumulative New Jersey NOLs from 2011 to 2018 totaling $13 million and received net proceeds of $12.2 million. As part of the NOL Program, the Company sold $1.5 million and $2.0 million of its New Jersey NOLs in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The sale of these net operating losses resulted in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $1.4 million in 2021 and $1.9 million in 2020. During 2021, the New Jersey State Legislature increased the maximum lifetime benefit per company from $15 million to $20 million, which will allow the Company to participate in this funding program in future years for up to an additional $3.4 million in New Jersey NOLs under this maximum lifetime benefit.
Financing Overview
Equity, Debt and Other Forms of Financing
Since 2018, the Company has annually submitted applications to sell a portion of the Company’s State of New Jersey net operating losses as part of the NOL Program sponsored by The New Jersey Economic Development Authority. Under the program, emerging biotechnology companies with unused New Jersey NOLs and unused research and development credits are allowed to sell these benefits to other New Jersey-based companies. In 2018 and 2019, the Company sold cumulative New Jersey NOLs from 2011 to 2018 totaling $13 million and received net proceeds of $12.2 million. As part of the NOL Program, the Company sold $1.5 million and $2.0 million of its New Jersey NOLs in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The sale of these net operating losses resulted in net proceeds to the Company of approximately $1.4 million in 2021 and $1.9 million in 2020. During 2021, the New Jersey State Legislature increased the maximum lifetime benefit per company from $15 million to $20 million, which will allow the Company to participate in this funding program in future years for up to an additional $3.4 million in New Jersey NOLs under this maximum lifetime benefit.
As more fully discussed in Note 10 to the Financial Statements, during 2021, the Company raised approximately $6.9 million in gross proceeds from the use of its JonesTrading Capital on DemandTM financing facility, $35 million from a registered direct financing completed in January 2021, $15 million from a registered direct financing completed on April 5, 2021, and $1.5 million from warrant exercises. With $56.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, interest receivable, net proceeds on the sale of New Jersey NOLs and restricted cash, the Company believes it has sufficient capital resources to fund its operations through the end of 2024.
The Company entered into a Credit Agreement with Horizon Technology Finance Corporation (“Horizon”) that provided $10 million in capital (the “Horizon Credit Agreement”) in June 2018. The obligations under the Horizon Credit Agreement are secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all assets of Celsion other than intellectual property assets. Payments under the loan agreement are interest only (calculated based on one-month LIBOR plus 7.625%) for the first 24 months through July 2020, followed by a 21-month amortization period of principal and interest starting on August 1, 2020 and ending through the scheduled maturity date on April 1, 2023. On August 28, 2020, in connection with an Amendment to the Horizon Credit Agreement, Celsion repaid $5 million of the $10 million loan and $0.2 million in related end of term charges, and the remaining $5 million in obligations were restructured.
As more fully discussed in Note 8 to the Financial Statements, in June 2021, the Company entered into a $10 million loan facility with Silicon Valley Bank. The Company immediately used $6 million from this facility to retire all outstanding indebtedness with Horizon Technology Finance Corporation. The remaining $4 million under the SVB Loan Facility will be available to be drawn down up to 12 months after closing. The funding is in the form of money market secured indebtedness bearing interest at a calculated WSJ Prime-based variable rate (currently 3.25%). Payments under the loan agreement are interest only for the first 24 months after loan closing, followed by a 24-month amortization period of principal and interest through the scheduled maturity date.
In September 2018, the Company filed with the SEC a $75 million shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “2018 Shelf Registration Statement”) that allowed the Company to issue any combination of common stock, preferred stock or warrants to purchase common stock or preferred stock. This shelf registration was declared effective on October 12, 2018 and was fully utilized by the end of January 2021.
On March 19, 2021, the Company filed with the SEC a new $100 million shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “2021 Registration Statement”) that allows the Company to issue any combination of common stock, preferred stock or warrants to purchase common stock or preferred stock. This shelf registration was declared effective on March 30, 2021.
During 2020 and 2021 we issued a total of 4.2 million shares of common stock as discussed below for an aggregate $83.2 million in gross proceeds.
● On December 4, 2018, the Company entered into the Capital on Demand Agreement with JonesTrading, pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, through JonesTrading shares of Common Stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $16.0 million. During 2020, the Company sold and issued an aggregate of 0.3 million shares under the Capital on Demand Agreement, receiving approximately $6.2 million in gross proceeds. During 2021, the Company sold 0.5 million shares under the Capital on Demand Agreement, receiving approximately $6.9 million in gross proceeds under the Capital on Demand Agreement.
● On February 27, 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “February 2020 Purchase Agreement”) with several institutional investors, pursuant to which we agreed to issue and sell, in a registered direct offering (the “February 2020 Offering”), an aggregate of 304,761 shares (the “Shares”) of our common stock at an offering price of $15.75 per Share for gross proceeds of approximately $4.8 million before the deduction of the Placement Agent fees and offering expenses. The February 2020 Purchase Agreement contained customary representations, warranties and agreements by the Company and customary conditions to closing. In a concurrent private placement, the Company issued to the investors that participated in the February 2020 Offering, for no additional consideration, warrants, to purchase up to 198,095 shares of Common Stock (the “Original Warrants”). The Original Warrants were initially exercisable six months following their date of issue and were set to expire on the five-year anniversary of such initial exercise date. The Original Warrants had an exercise price of $17.25 per share subject to adjustment as provided therein. On March 12, 2020, the Company entered into private exchange agreements (the “Exchange Agreements”) with holders of the Original Warrants. Pursuant to the Exchange Agreements, in return for a higher exercise price of $18.60 per share of Common Stock, the Company issued new warrants to the investors to purchase up to 213,333 shares of Common Stock (the “Exchange Warrants”) in exchange for the Original Warrants. The Exchange Warrants, like the Original Warrants, are initially exercisable six months following their issuance (the “Initial Exercise Date”) and expire on the five-year anniversary of their Initial Exercise Date. Other than having a higher exercise price, different issue date, Initial Exercise Date and expiration date, the terms of the Exchange Warrants are identical to those of the Original Warrants. On July 31, 2020, the Company filed a Form S-3 Registration Statement to register the shares of Common Stock issuable under the Exchange Warrants; the Registration Statement was declared effective by the SEC on August 13, 2020. No Exchange Warrants were exercised during 2020. During 2021, the Company has issued 81,111 shares pursuant to investors exercising Exchange Warrants, receiving approximately $1.5 million.
● On June 22, 2020, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. (the “Underwriter”), relating to the issuance and sale (the “Underwritten Offering”) of 177,777 shares of the Company’s common stock. Pursuant to the terms of the Underwriting Agreement, the Underwriter agreed to purchase the shares at a price of $52.3125 per share. The Underwriter offered the shares at a public offering price of $56.25 per share, reflecting an underwriting discount equal to $3.9375, or 7.0% of the public offering price. The net proceeds to the Company from the Underwritten Offering, after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated offering expenses payable by the Company, were approximately $9.1 million.
● On September 8, 2020, the Company entered into a purchase agreement (the “LPC Purchase Agreement”) and a Registration Rights Agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which, upon the terms and subject to the conditions and limitations set forth therein, the Company has the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to $26.0 million of shares of the Company’s common stock at the Company’s discretion as described below. During 2020, the Company sold and issued an aggregate of 218,854 shares, including 29,188 commitment shares provided to Lincoln Park, under the LPC Purchase Agreement, receiving approximately $2.2 million in gross proceeds. On January 21, 2021, the Company terminated the LPC Purchase Agreement. The Company did not sell any shares under the LPC Purchase Agreement in 2021.
● On January 22, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “January 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with several institutional investors, pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell, in a registered direct offering (the “January 2021 Offering”), an aggregate of 1,728,395 shares of the Company’s common stock at an offering price of $20.25 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $35 million before the deduction of the January 2021 Placement Agents (as defined below) fee and offering expenses. The January 2021 Purchase Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and agreements by the Company and customary conditions to closing. The closing of the January 2021 Offering occurred on January 26, 2021. In connection with the January 2021 Offering, the Company entered into a placement agent agreement with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (“AGP” and together with Brookline Capital Markets, the “January 2021 Placement Agents”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to pay the January 2021 Placement Agents a cash fee equal to 7% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised from the sale of the securities sold in the January 2021 Offering and reimburse the January 2021 Placement Agents for certain of their expenses in an amount not to exceed $82,500.
● On March 31, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “March 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with several institutional investors, pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell, in a registered direct offering (the “March 2021 Offering”), an aggregate of 769,230 shares of the Company’s common stock, at an offering price of $19.50 per share for gross proceeds of approximately $15 million before the deduction of the placement agents fee and offering expenses. The shares were offered by the Company pursuant to the 2021 Registration Statement. The closing of the offering occurred on April 5, 2021.
In connection with the March 2021 Offering, the Company entered into a placement agent agreement with AGP, as lead placement agent (together with JonesTrading Institutional Services LLC and Brookline Capital Markets, a division of Arcadia Securities, LLC, serving as co-placement agents, the “March 2021 Placement Agents”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to pay the March 2021 Placement Agents an aggregate cash fee equal to 7% of the aggregate gross proceeds raised from the sale of the securities sold in the offering and reimburse the Placement Agents for certain of their expenses in an amount not to exceed $82,500.
● In 2019, Company, entered into the 2019 Aspire Purchase Agreement with Aspire Capital. Pursuant to the 2019 Aspire Purchase Agreement, Aspire Capital was committed to purchase up to an aggregate of $10.0 million of shares of the Company’s common stock over the 24-month term of the 2019 Aspire Purchase Agreement. On March 5, 2020, the Company delivered notice to Aspire Capital terminating the 2019 Aspire Purchase Agreement effective as of March 6, 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, the Company sold 66,666 million shares of common stock under the 2019 Aspire Purchase Agreement and received $1.6 million in gross proceeds.
● On January 10, 2022, the Company entered into the Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement with several institutional investors, pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue and sell, in the Preferred Offerings, (i) 50,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock, and (ii) 50,000 shares of Series B Preferred Stock, in each case at an offering price of $285 per share, representing a 5% original issue discount to the stated value of $300 per share, for gross proceeds of each Preferred Offering of $14.25 million, or approximately $28.50 million in the aggregate for the Preferred Offerings, before the deduction of the Placement Agent’s (as defined below) fee and offering expenses. The shares of Series A Preferred Stock have a stated value of $300 per share and are convertible, at a conversion price of $13.65 per share, into 1,098,901 shares of common stock (subject in certain circumstances to adjustments). The shares of Series B Preferred Stock have a stated value of $300 per share and are convertible, at a conversion price of $15.00 per share, into 1,000,000 shares of common stock (subject in certain circumstances to adjustments). The closing of the Preferred Offerings occurred on January 13, 2022.
The Company held a special meeting of stockholders to consider an amendment (the “Amendment”) to the Company’s Certificate of Incorporation, as amended (the “Charter”), to effect a reverse stock split of the outstanding shares of common stock (“Common Stock”) by a ratio to be determined by the Board of Directors of the Company (the “Reverse Stock Split”), ranging from 7-to-1 to, 10-to-1, 12-to-1 or 15-to-1. The investors have agreed in the Purchase Agreement to not transfer, offer, sell, contract to sell, hypothecate, pledge or otherwise dispose of the shares of the Preferred Stock until the Reverse Stock Split, to vote the shares of the Series A Preferred Stock purchased in the Preferred Offerings in favor of such Amendment and to vote the shares of the Series B Preferred Stock purchased in the Preferred Offerings in a manner that “mirrors” the proportions on which the shares of Common Stock (excluding any shares of Common Stock that are not voted) and Series A Preferred Stock are voted on the Reverse Stock Split and the Amendment.
The holder of Preferred Stock will be entitled to dividends, on an as-if converted basis, equal to dividends actually paid, if any, on shares of Common Stock. The Preferred Stock is convertible into shares of Common Stock at a rate of $13.95 per share for the Series A Preferred Stock and $15.00 per share for the Series B Preferred Stock. The conversion price can be adjusted pursuant to the Certificate of Designation. The Preferred Stock can be converted at the option of the holder at any time after the Company has received stockholder approval for the Reverse Stock Split and filed the requisite Amendment with the Delaware Secretary of State’s office to effectuate the Reverse Stock Split (the “Reverse Stock Split Date”), subject to beneficial ownership limitations set forth in the applicable Certificate of Designation. In addition, on or after the Reverse Stock Split Date, and subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions, the Company can cause the holder of the Preferred Stock to convert their shares of Preferred Stock, subject to such beneficial ownership limitations.
Each holder of the Preferred Stock has the right to cause the Company to redeem all or part of their shares of the Preferred Stock from the earlier of receipt of stockholder approval of the reverse stock split or of 90 days following the original issue date until 120 days following the original issue date, the “Redemption Date,” in cash at a redemption price equal to 105% of the stated value plus an amount equal to accumulated but unpaid dividends, if any, on such shares (whether or not earned or declared, but excluding interest on such dividends) up to, but excluding, the Redemption Date.
In connection with the Preferred Offerings, the Company entered into a placement agent agreement (the “Placement Agent Agreement”) with AGP, as placement agent pursuant to which the Company agreed to pay AGP an aggregate cash fee equal to $1,000,000 and reimburse AGP for certain of their expenses in an amount not to exceed $110,000.
On March 3, 2022, the Company redeemed for cash at a price equal to 105% of the $300 stated value per share all of its 50,000 outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock and its 50,000 outstanding Series B Preferred Stock. As a result, all shares of the Preferred Stock have been retired and are no longer outstanding and Celsion’s only class of outstanding stock is its common stock. Each share of common stock entitles the holder to one vote.
Please refer to Note 2 to our Financial Statements. Also refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors, in this Annual Report, including, but not limited to, “We will need to raise substantial additional capital to fund our planned future operations, and we may be unable to secure such capital without dilutive financing transactions. If we are not able to raise additional capital, we may not be able to complete the development, testing and commercialization of our product candidates.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements, which appear at Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., which require that we make certain assumptions and estimates and, in connection therewith, adopt certain accounting policies. Our significant accounting policies are set forth in Note 1 to our Financial Statements. Of those policies, we believe that the policies discussed below may involve a higher degree of judgment and may be more critical to an accurate reflection of our financial condition and results of operations.
In-Process Research and Development, Other Intangible Assets and Goodwill
During 2014, the Company acquired certain assets of EGEN, Inc. As more fully described in Note 5 to our Financial Statements, the acquisition was accounted for under the acquisition method of accounting which required the Company to perform an allocation of the purchase price to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Under the acquisition method of accounting, the total purchase price is allocated to net tangible and intangible assets and liabilities based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date.
Lease Accounting
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, “Leases” - Topic 842 (ASC Topic 842), which requires that lessees recognize assets and liabilities for leases with lease terms greater than twelve months in the statement of financial position. Leases will be classified as either finance or operating, with classification affecting the pattern of expense recognition in the income statement. This update also requires improved disclosures to help users of financial statements better understand the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. The update became effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim reporting periods within that reporting period. The FASB subsequently issued the following amendments to ASC Topic 842, which have the same effective date and transition date of January 1, 2019:
● ASU No. 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases, which amends certain narrow aspects of the guidance issued in ASU No. 2016-02; and
● ASU No. 2018-11, Leases (Topic 842): Targeted Improvements, which allows for a transition approach to initially apply ASU No. 2016-02 at the adoption date and recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the period of adoption as well as an additional practical expedient for lessors to not separate non-lease components from the associated lease component.
We adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 842 effective January 1, 2019 and elected to apply the available practical expedients and implement internal controls to enable the preparation of financial information on adoption. We have identified all of our leases which consist of the New Jersey corporate office lease and the Alabama lab facility lease and we estimate the adoption of this standard will result in the recognition of right-of-use assets of approximately $1.4 million, related operating lease liabilities of $1.5 million and reduced other liabilities by approximately $0.1 million on the consolidated balance sheets as of January 1, 2019 of approximately $1.5 million related to our operating lease commitments, with no material impact to the opening balance of retained earnings. See Note 15 to our Financial Statements for further discussions regarding the adoption of ASC Topic 842.
In August 2018, the FASB issued ASU No. 2018-13, Fair Value Measurement: Disclosure Framework - Changes to the Disclosure Requirements for Fair Value Measurement, which adds and modifies certain disclosure requirements for fair value measurements. Under the new guidance, entities will no longer be required to disclose the amount of and reasons for transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 of the fair value hierarchy, or valuation processes for Level 3 fair value measurements. However, public companies will be required to disclose the range and weighted average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3 fair value measurements, and related changes in unrealized gains and losses included in other comprehensive income. This update is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2019, and interim periods within those periods. The adoption of this standard did not have an impact on the Company’s Financial Statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740). The standard simplifies the accounting for income taxes by removing certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 related to the approach for intra-period tax allocation and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. The standard also clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill. The standard also improves consistent application of and simplifies GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. The amendment is effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2020. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on the Company’s Financial Statements.
We review our financial reporting and disclosure practices and accounting policies on an ongoing basis to ensure that our financial reporting and disclosure system provides accurate and transparent information relative to the current economic and business environment. As part of the process, the Company reviews the selection, application and communication of critical accounting policies and financial disclosures. The preparation of our Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires that our management make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the Financial Statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We review our estimates and the methods by which they are determined on an ongoing basis. However, actual results could differ from our estimates.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 and Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net loss was $20.8 million compared to a net loss of $21.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company recognized $1.4 million and $1.9 million in tax benefits from the sale of its New Jersey net operating losses under the NOL Program in each of the fourth quarters of 2021 and 2020, respectively. With $56.9 million in cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, interest receivable, net proceeds on the sale of net operating losses and restricted cash, the Company believes it has sufficient capital resources to fund its operations through 2024.
Technology Development and Licensing Revenue
In January 2013, we entered into a technology development contract with Hisun, pursuant to which Hisun paid us a non-refundable technology transfer fee of $5.0 million to support our development of ThermoDox® in the China territory. The $5.0 million received as a non-refundable payment from Hisun in the first quarter 2013 has been recorded to deferred revenue and will be amortized over the ten-year term of the agreement; therefore, we recognized revenue of $500,000 in each of the years 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses decreased $0.7 million from $11.3 million in 2020 to $10.6 million in 2021. Costs associated the OVATION 2 Study were consistent at $1.3 million in 2021 and 2020. Costs associated with the OPTIMA Study decreased to $1.0 million in 2021 compared to $2.2 million in 2020. In July 2020, the Company unblinded the OPTIMA Study at the recommendation of the DMC to halt the study due to futility. Other clinical and regulatory costs were $2.6 million in 2021 compared to $2.5 million in 2020. R&D costs associated with the development of GEN-1 to support the OVATION 2 Study as well as development of the PLACCINE DNA vaccine technology platform increased to $4.3 million in 2021 compared to $3.1 million in the same period of 2020. CMC costs decreased to $1.5 million in 2021 compared to $2.1 million in the same period of 2020 due to the discontinuation of the ThermoDox® clinical development program in primary liver cancer.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased to $10.9 million in 2021 compared to $7.6 million in 2020. This increase is primarily attributable to higher non-cash stock compensation expense of approximately $1.3 million, an increase in professional fees of $1.5 million (largely legal fees to defend various suits filed after the announcement in July 2020 of the OPTIMA Phase III clinical results) and an increase in premiums for directors’ and officers’ insurance of $0.3 million in 2021 when compared to 2020.
Change in Earn-out Milestone Liability
The total aggregate purchase price for the acquisition of assets from EGEN included potential future earn-out payments contingent upon achievement of certain milestones. The difference between the aggregate $30.4 million in future earn-out payments and the $13.9 million included in the fair value of the acquisition consideration at June 20, 2014 was based on the Company’s risk-adjusted assessment of each milestone and utilizing a discount rate based on the estimated time to achieve the milestone. The milestone liability is fair valued at the end of each quarter and any change in the value is recognized in our Financial Statements.
On March 28, 2019, the Company and EGWU, Inc, entered into an amendment to the Asset Purchase Agreement discussed in Note 12 to our Financial Statements. Pursuant to the Amended Asset Purchase Agreement, payment of the earnout milestone liability related to the Ovarian Cancer Indication of $12.4 million has been modified. The Company has the option to make the payment as follows:
● $7.0 million in cash within 10 business days of achieving the milestone; or
● $12.4 million in cash, common stock of the Company, or a combination of either, within one year of achieving the milestone.
At December 31, 2021, the Company fair valued the earn-out milestone liability at $5.4 million and recognized a non-cash gain of $1.6 million during 2021 as a result of the change in the fair value of the earn-out milestone liability of $7.0 million at December 31, 2020. In assessing the fair value of the earnout milestone liability at December 31, 2021, the Company considered each of the settlement provisions per the Amended Asset Purchase Agreement and equally weighted the probability of a cash or cash and common stock payment.
At December 31, 2020, the Company fair valued the earn-out milestone liability at $7.0 million and recognized a non-cash charge of $1.3 million during 2020 as a result of the change in the fair value of earn-out milestone liability of $5.7 million at December 31, 2019. In assessing the fair value of the earnout milestone liability at December 31, 2020, the Company considered each of the settlement provisions per the Amended Asset Purchase Agreement and equally weighted the probability of a cash or cash and common stock payment.
Impairment of Goodwill and IPR&D
IPR&D and Goodwill are reviewed for impairment at least annually as of our third quarter ended September 30 by assessing if any events or changes in circumstances have occurred which indicate that the carrying value of the assets might not be recoverable.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company’s fair value exceeded its carrying value and as such no impairment was recognized for Goodwill through the third quarter of 2021. Due to the continuing deterioration of public capital markets in the biotech industry in 2021 and 2022 and its impact on market capitalization rates in this sector, Goodwill was reviewed for impairment as of December 31, 2021. Based on this assessment, Company concluded that Goodwill was impaired during the fourth quarter of 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company wrote off the $2.0 million carrying value of this asset, thereby recognizing a non-cash charge of $2.0 million in the fourth quarter of 2021. During 2020, the Company concluded Goodwill was not impaired during that period.
As of September 30, 2021, the Company assessed whether there were indicators of impairment for the Company’s IPR&D and determined that no IPR&D asset was impaired during that period. Due to the continuing deterioration of public capital markets in the biotech industry in 2021 and 2022 and its impact on market capitalization rates in this sector, IPR&D was reviewed for impairment. Having conducted a quantitative analysis of the company’s IPR&D assets, the Company concluded no IPR&D asset was impaired during that period. As more fully discussed in Note 5 to the Financial Statements, due to the continuing slowdown in investment by public capital markets in the biotech industry and its impact on market capitalization rates in this sector, the Company conducted a valuation analysis of its IPR&D for the ovarian cancer indication as of December 31, 2021. Based on this valuation analysis, the Company has concluded that it is not more likely than not that the asset is impaired as of December 31, 2021. As such, no impairment charges for IPR&D related to the ovarian cancer indication were recorded during 2021 or 2020.
At September 30, 2020, after our assessment of the totality of the events that could impair IPR&D, the Company determined certain IPR&D assets related to the development of its GBM product candidate may be impaired. To arrive at this determination, the Company assessed the status of studies in GBM conducted by its competitors and the Company’s strategic commitment of resources to its studies in primary liver cancer and ovarian cancer. The Company concluded that the GBM asset, valued at $2.4 million, was fully impaired and wrote off the GBM asset, incurring a non-cash charge of $2.4 million in the third quarter of 2020.
Investment income and interest expense
Investment income was insignificant in both 2021 and 2020. In connection with the Horizon Credit Agreement, the Company incurred $0.6 million and $1.3 million in interest expense in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As more fully discussed in Note 8 to the Financial Statements, in June 2021, the Company entered into the SVB Loan Facility with SVB. The Company immediately used $6 million from this facility to retire all outstanding indebtedness with Horizon. The remaining $4 million will be available to be drawn down up to 12 months after closing. In connection with these loan facilities, the Company incurred $0.6 million in interest expense in 2021 compared to $1.3 million during 2020. In connection with the termination of the Horizon Credit Agreement in the second quarter of 2021, the Company paid early termination and end of term charges to Horizon and recognized $0.2 million as a loss on debt extinguishment.
Income Tax Benefit
Annually, the State of New Jersey enables approved technology and biotechnology businesses with New Jersey net operating tax losses the opportunity to sell these losses through the NOL Program, thereby providing cash to companies to help fund their research and development and business operations. During 2021, the New Jersey State Legislature increased the maximum lifetime benefit per company from $15 million to $20 million, which will allow the Company to participate in this innovative funding program in future years. After the cumulative net operating loss sales through 2021, the Company has approximately $3.4 million remaining under the NOL Program.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to sell the approved portion of the New Jersey NOLs applied for in 2021 for $1.4 million. At December 31, 2021, the Company evaluated the valuation reserve for its tax net operating losses associated with its New Jersey NOLs and reduced the valuation reserve and recognized $1.4 million as a deferred tax asset and an income tax benefit. The Company completed the sale of these net operating losses in February of 2022.
During the first quarter of 2021, the Company entered into an agreement to sell the approved portion of the New Jersey NOLs applied for in 2020 for approximately $1.9 million. At December 31, 2020, the Company evaluated the valuation reserve for its tax net operating losses associated with its New Jersey NOLs and reduced the valuation reserve and recognized approximately $1.9 million as a deferred income tax asset and an income tax benefit. The Company completed the sale of these net operating losses in May of 2021.
Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception we have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations. We have financed our operations primarily through the net proceeds from the sales of equity, credit facilities and amounts received under our product licensing agreement with Yakult and our technology development agreement with Hisun. The process of developing ThermoDox®, GEN-1 and other product candidates and technologies requires significant research and development work and clinical trial studies, as well as significant manufacturing and process development efforts. We expect these activities, together with our general and administrative expenses to result in significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. Our expenses have significantly and regularly exceeded our revenue, and we had an accumulated deficit of $333 million at December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021 we had total current assets of $51.9 million and current liabilities of $6.8 million, resulting in net working capital of $45.1 million. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, interest receivable on short-term investments, net proceeds on the sale of net operating losses and money market investments ($6.0 million of which is restricted cash included in other assets) of $56.9 million. At December 31, 2020 we had total current assets of $18.8 million (including cash and cash equivalents of $17.2 million) and current liabilities of $6.8 million, resulting in net working capital of $12.0 million. We have substantial future capital requirements to continue our research and development activities and advance our product candidates through various development stages. The Company believes these expenditures are essential for the commercialization of its technologies.
Net cash used in operating activities for 2021 was $16.2 million. Our net loss of $20.7 million for 2021 included the following non-cash transactions: (i) $3.8 million in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, (ii) $2.0 million non-cash charge from the write-off of Goodwill, (iii) $0.2 million in non-cash interest expense and (iv) $1.6 non-cash benefit based on the change in the earn-out milestone liability. The $16.2 million net cash used in operating activities was funded from cash and cash equivalents, short term investments, and cash proceeds received in equity financings during 2021. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, interest receivable on short term investments, receivable from the sale of New Jersey operating losses and money market investments ($6.0 million of which is restricted cash included in other assets) of $56.9 million. The Company believes it has sufficient capital resources to fund its operations through 2024. See Financing Overview as well as Notes 8, 9 and 10 to our Financial Statements.
The Company may seek additional capital through further public or private equity offerings, debt financing, additional strategic alliance and licensing arrangements, collaborative arrangements, or some combination of these financing alternatives. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity securities, the percentage ownership of our stockholders could be significantly diluted, and the newly issued equity securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of the holders of our common stock. If we raise funds through the issuance of debt securities, those securities may have rights, preferences, and privileges senior to those of our common stock. If we seek strategic alliances, licenses, or other alternative arrangements, such as arrangements with collaborative partners or others, we may need to relinquish rights to certain of our existing or future technologies, product candidates, or products we would otherwise seek to develop or commercialize on our own, or to license the rights to our technologies, product candidates, or products on terms that are not favorable to us. The overall status of the economic climate could also result in the terms of any equity offering, debt financing, or alliance, license, or other arrangement being even less favorable to us and our stockholders than if the overall economic climate were stronger. We also will continue to look for government sponsored research collaborations and grants to help offset future anticipated losses from operations and, to a lesser extent, interest income.
If adequate funds are not available through either the capital markets, strategic alliances, or collaborators, we may be required to delay or, reduce the scope of, or terminate our research, development, clinical programs, manufacturing, or commercialization efforts, or effect additional changes to our facilities or personnel, or obtain funds through other arrangements that may require us to relinquish some of our assets or rights to certain of our existing or future technologies, product candidates, or products on terms not favorable to us.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not utilize off-balance sheet financing arrangements as a source of liquidity or financing.