ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations related to future events and our future financial performance that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our intentions, plans, objectives, expectations, forecasts and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report. You should carefully read the “Risk Factors” to gain an understanding of the important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from our forward-looking statements. Please also see the section of this report titled “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a commercial-stage pharmaceutical company developing transformative therapies for people suffering from diseases with high unmet medical needs, with an initial focus on diseases of the central nervous system, or CNS. Our company was founded on the premise that the upper nasal space can be an optimal treatment entry point for CNS and other diseases where rapid vascular absorption can result in superior clinical outcomes. Our strategy is to pair our proprietary Precision Olfactory Delivery, or POD, upper nasal delivery technology with well-established therapeutics or other therapeutics where rapid vascular absorption is preferred to drive therapeutic benefit, improve patient outcomes, reduce drug development risk and expand the commercial opportunity within our target diseases. On September 2, 2021 Trudhesa was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, for the acute treatment of migraine headaches with or without aura in adult patients available by prescription in pharmacies. Since 2016, we have identified and advanced multiple product candidates, including TrudhesaTM (INP104) for the acute treatment of migraine and INP105 for the acute treatment of agitation and aggression in patients with Autism Spectrum Disorder, or ASD. Our pipeline of proprietary product candidates also includes INP107 for the treatment of OFF episodes in Parkinson’s Disease.
We have retained all development and commercial rights to Trudhesa and each of our product candidates. Given the concentrated prescriber base of our target market for Trudhesa we have independently initiated the launch of in the third quarter of 2021. Our inaugural sales team is comprised of approximately 60 representatives to support our targeted launch strategy. The sales team is supported by an established market access, medical affairs, marketing, and operations infrastructure. We intend to increase the size of our Trudhesa field organization to 120 representatives in the early 2023. We anticipate independently commercializing our other product candidates, if approved, by establishing similar targeted sales teams supported by our existing infrastructure.
We have built out an internal research and development team and also used and plan to continue to use third-party contract research organizations, or CROs, to carry out our preclinical and clinical development. We rely on third-party contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, to manufacture and supply our clinical materials to be used during the development of our product candidates. These CMOs are currently manufacturing commercial stage POD devices for Trudhesa, which we also used for our Phase 1 clinical trial, our registration lots and our STOP301 trial. CMOs are currently manufacturing clinical stage POD devices for INP105 and INP107, which we expect to transition to a commercial stage POD device for pivotal studies and commercialization. The development work on the commercial stage POD device for INP105 is ongoing while the commercial formulation and drug production are scaled to commercial level.
Though December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations primarily through proceeds from the sale of equity securities, including proceeds from the sale and issuance of common stock, redeemable convertible preferred stock, warrants, debt and convertible notes. We have incurred significant operating losses to date. Our net losses were $76.5 million and $46.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $214.8 million and a cash balance of $88.2 million
Recent Developments
IPO and Follow-on Public Offering
In April 2021, we completed an initial public offering, or IPO, of our common stock. As part of the IPO, we issued and sold 5,333,334 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $15.00 per share and less underwriting discounts and commissions. We received net proceeds of approximately $72.0 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $5.6 million and offering costs of $2.4 million.
In September 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock, pursuant to which we issued and sold 3,450,000 shares of our common stock (which included 450,000 shares that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a public offering price of $15.00 per share. Including the option exercise, we received net proceeds of approximately $48.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $2.8 million and offering costs of $0.6 million.
Oaktree Financing and Revenue Interest Financing
On March 17, 2022, we entered into a senior secured loan agreement and related security agreements or the Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto, or collectively Oaktree, under which we borrowed $50.0 million less transactions costs (see Liquidity and Capital Resources - Recent Debt Financings).
Concurrently on March 17, 2022, we entered into a Revenue Interest Financing Agreement or RIF with certain purchasers party thereto, collectively the Purchasers, and Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC as administrative agent, pursuant to which we sold to the Purchasers the right to receive payments from us at a tiered percentage, or the Applicable Tiered Percentage, of future net revenues of Trudhesa, including worldwide net product sales and upfront payments, and milestones, together the Revenue Interests (see Liquidity and Capital Resources - Recent Debt Financings).
COVID-19
We are continuing to proactively monitor and assess the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic. We have been monitoring the potential impact on our business that may result from this continuing evolving crisis and to avoid any unnecessary potential delays to our programs. The safety and well-being of employees, patients and partners is our highest priority. To date, we have continued to operate without material impact on our business.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we have implemented various strategies to minimize any disruptions to commercialization of Trudhesa and our planned clinical trials. We did not experience any disruption in our supply chain of drugs necessary to commercialize Trudhesa and to conduct our clinical trials. However, we are continuing to evaluate our clinical supply chain in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. Numerous state and local jurisdictions have imposed and lifted, and others in the future may impose, “shelter-in-place” orders, quarantines, executive orders and similar government orders and restrictions for their residents to control the spread of COVID-19 and its variants in connection with the resurgence of infections. We are supporting our employees by utilizing remote work, leveraging virtual meeting technology and encouraging employees to follow local guidance.
Financial Operations Overview
Product Revenues, Net
We began to recognize revenue from product sales, net of discounts and other adjustments, in September 2021 in conjunction with the launch of Trudhesa. We recently launched Trudhesa and will continue to evaluate trends related to revenue momentum for Trudhesa, including any discernible impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold includes direct and indirect costs related to the manufacturing and distribution of Trudhesa, including third-party manufacturing costs, packaging services, and freight-in.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and other staff-related costs, including associated stock-based compensation, laboratory supplies, nonclinical and clinical studies and trials, manufacturing, costs for product candidates and POD devices to support our studies and trials, to design new versions of PODs, vendor validation and quality control preparation and fees paid to other entities that conduct certain research and development activities on our behalf. We consider regulatory approval of product candidates to be uncertain, and product manufactured prior to regulatory approval may not be sold unless regulatory approval is obtained. We expense manufacturing costs as incurred to research and development expense for product candidates prior to regulatory approval. If, and when, regulatory approval of a product is obtained, we begin to capitalize manufacturing costs related to the approved product into inventory.
We accrue for costs incurred as the services are being provided by monitoring the status of the trial or project and the invoices received from our external service providers. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in future periods for use in research and development activities are deferred and capitalized. The capitalized amounts are then expensed as the related goods are delivered and the services are performed. In addition, we account for fully refundable research and development tax credits, based on 43.5% of qualified research and development expenditures of our Australian subsidiary, as an offset to research and development expenses.
We track our direct costs by product candidate, but we do not allocate overhead costs or certain external costs because they support multiple product candidates. In particular, with respect to internal costs, several of our departments support multiple product candidate research and development programs, and we do not allocate those costs by product candidate.
We expect to continue to incur significant research and development expenses over the next several years as our clinical programs progress and we seek to complete existing clinical studies and trials and initiate additional nonclinical and clinical studies and trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates.
The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. Our research and development expenses may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•the phases of development of our product candidates;
•the progress and results of our research and development activities;
•the number of trials required for regulatory approval of our product candidates;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted;
•the length of time required to enroll eligible subjects and initiate clinical trials;
•the number of subjects that participate in the trials;
•the drop-out and discontinuation rate of subjects;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of subject participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the cost and timing of manufacturing of our product candidates;
•the receipt of regulatory approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•the timing, receipt and terms of any marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•the hiring and retention of research and development personnel;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic or other future pandemics on timelines and clinical operations, which may lead to increased costs, delays or both; and
•the extent to which we establish collaboration, licensing or similar arrangements and the performance of any related third parties.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Selling, General and Administrative
Our selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation for our personnel in executive, finance and accounting, human resources, and other administrative functions, as well as fees paid for accounting, legal and tax services, consulting fees and facilities costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses. With the approval of Trudhesa in September 2021, we continue to expect our selling and marketing costs to increase relating to the commercialization of Trudhesa and further growth of our commercial infrastructure thereafter. We will incur additional expenses associated with operating as a public company, including increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC and standards applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net, consists of interest earned on our cash, interest expense on our borrowings, and changes in the fair value of our stock warrant liabilities, redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liabilities and convertible notes, and loss on extinguishment of debt.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following tables summarize our results of operations for the periods presented.
Product revenue, net
We recorded net product revenue in 2021 following FDA approval of Trudhesa in September 2021. We commenced shipments of Trudhesa during September 2021 and fully launched with a deployed sales force in October 2021. At launch we implemented our "bridge and co-pay savings" program which we believe provides an affordability solution for patients that enables physician prescribing. The program only provides assistance to commercially insured patients. Our data suggests these programs are playing an important role in supporting demand for Trudhesa, particularly as payers are in the process of publishing coverage policies for Trudhesa. Following FDA approval in 2021, we recognized $0.7 million of net product revenue related to sales of Trudhesa with specific assumptions for variable consideration components including but not limited to trade discounts and allowances, co-pay assistance programs and payor rebates.
Cost of goods sold
Cost of goods sold of $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 is related to conversion and packing costs incurred after FDA approval related to the cost of Trudhesa products sold, in addition to certain overhead costs. We recorded a charge of $0.2 million in 2021 related to the write down of inventory to net realizable value in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Prior to receiving FDA approval for Trudhesa in September 2021, we recorded all costs incurred in the manufacture of Trudhesa to be sold upon commercialization as research and development expense. As a result, a portion of the manufacturing costs related to the Trudhesa build-up incurred before FDA approval were already expensed in a prior period, referred to as zero cost inventories, and are therefore excluded from the cost of goods sold in 2021. We expect to sell the zero cost inventories within the next year.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses were $20.6 million in 2021, compared to $28.3 million for 2020. The decrease of $7.7 million was primarily due to a decrease in program specific costs supporting clinical development of our product candidates, primarily for Trudhesa, as clinical trials either closed or neared completion.
The following table summarizes the period-over-period change in research and development expenses by product candidate for the periods indicated:
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $50.9 million in 2021, compared to $17.0 million in 2020. The increase of $33.9 million was primarily due to the ramp up of commercial and marketing related activity to prepare for the approval and subsequent launch of Trudhesa in 2021. Marketing and market access expenses increased by $14.0 million.
sales and commercial operations increased by $16.2 million and medical affairs increased by $1.9 million. There was additionally a $1.7 million increase in finance, corporate legal, and executive expense, primarily related to insurance, IT related expense, and board compensation.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net was an expense of $4.6 million in 2021, compared to $0.5 million in 2020. The change of $4.5 million was primarily due to a (i) charge of $2.0 million for the loss on early extinguishment of debt related to the refinancing of the term loan with Avenue, (ii) an increase in interest expense on our borrowings of $1.5 million, and (iii) amortization of debt discount of $0.7 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses and negative cash flows from our operations. Through December 31, 2021, we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of common stock, convertible promissory notes, redeemable convertible preferred stock, debt, warrants and convertible notes with aggregate proceeds of $292.8 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had available cash and cash equivalents of $88.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $214.8 million.
Based upon our current operating plan, we estimate that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 along with proceeds from the March 2022 Revenue Interest Financing Agreement and borrowings under the Oaktree Loan and Security Agreement discussed below, are together sufficient for us to fund operating, investing, and financing cash flow needs for at least one year from the issuance date of our financial statements. If sufficient funds on acceptable terms are not available when needed, we could be required to reduce operating expenses and delay, reduce the scope of, or eliminate one or more of our development programs or planned product launch plans. Failure to manage discretionary spending or raise additional financing, as needed, may adversely impact our ability to achieve its intended business objectives.
Recent Equity Issuances
In September 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock, pursuant to which we issued and sold 3,450,000 shares of common stock (which included 450,000 shares that were offered and sold pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares) at a public offering price of $15.00 per share. Including the option exercise, we received net proceeds of approximately $48.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $2.8 million and offering costs of $0.6 million.
In April 2021, we completed an IPO, of our common stock. As part of the IPO, we issued and sold 5,333,334 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $15.00 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $72.0 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $5.6 million and offering costs of $2.4 million.
Recent Debt Financings
Oaktree Facility
On March 17, 2022, or the Closing Date, we entered into a senior secured loan agreement and related security agreements or the Senior Credit Agreement with Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC as administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto (collectively “Oaktree”) under which we borrowed $50.0 million. The term loan has a maturity date of March 17, 2027, initially bearing interest at the Secured Overnight Financing Rate, or SOFR, + 8.75% (with a SOFR floor of 1.00%). Once Trudhesa achieves at least $125.0 million in net sales, interest will step down to SOFR + 8.00% (with a SOFR floor of 1.00%).
We are required to make quarterly interest-only payments until the fourth anniversary of the Closing Date, after which we are required to make quarterly amortizing payments, with the remaining balance of the principal plus accrued and unpaid interest due at maturity. Prepayments of the loan, in whole or in part, will subject to early prepayment fee which declines each year until the fourth anniversary date of the Closing Date, after which no prepayment fee is required. We are also required to pay an exit fee upon any payment or prepayment equal to 2.0% of the aggregate principal amount of the loans funded under the Senior Credit Agreement.
A portion of the loan proceeds were used to repay in full the $32.9 million aggregate principal amount (including the prepayment fee and final payment fee) of loans outstanding owed to Oxford Finance LLC, or Oxford and Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB by the Company.
Revenue Interest Financing Agreement
On March 17, 2022, we entered into a Revenue Interest Financing Agreement, or RIF, with certain purchasers party thereto, collectively the Purchasers, and Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC as administrative agent, in such capacity, the RIF Agent, pursuant to which we sold to the Purchasers the right to receive payments from us at a tiered percentage, or the Applicable Tiered Percentage, of future net revenues of Trudhesa, including worldwide net product sales and upfront payments, and milestones, collectively, the Revenue Interests. Under the terms of the agreement, we received $50.0 million, the Investment Amount, less certain transaction expenses in exchange for tiered royalty payments on worldwide net sales from Trudhesa, as follows: 7.75% on annual United States net sales up to $150.0 million; 4.75% on annual United States net sales between $150 million and $300 million; 0.75% on annual United States net sales greater than $300.0 million; and 10% of any upfront payments, milestone payments and royalties received by us from licensing or partnerships relating to Trudhesa outside the United States.
The Purchaser's rights to receive the Revenue Interests shall terminate on the date on which the Purchasers have received payments equal to 175% of the funded portion of the Investment Amount including the aggregate of all payments made to the Purchasers as of such date, unless the RIF is earlier terminated. If the Purchasers have not received payments equal to the 175% of the funded portion of the Investment Amount by the nine-year anniversary of the initial closing date, among other things, we shall pay the Purchasers an amount equal to the funded portion of the Investment Amount plus a specific annual rate of return less payments previously received.
Under the RIF, we have an option, or the Call Option, to repurchase future Revenue Interests at any time until the third anniversary of the Closing Date upon advance written notice. Additionally, the Purchasers have an option, or the Put Option, to terminate the RIF and to require us to repurchase future Revenue Interests upon enumerated events such as a bankruptcy event, a material adverse effect or a change of control. If the Put Option or the Call Option are exercised, the required repurchase price is an amount equal to (a) 1.25 multiplied by (b) the Investment Amount, (ii) as of any date on or after the one-year anniversary of the Closing Date and before the two-year anniversary of the Closing Date, an amount equal to (a) 1.40 multiplied by (b) the Investment Amount, (iii) as of any date on or after the two-year anniversary of the Closing Date and before the three-year anniversary of the Closing Date, an amount equal to (a) 1.55 multiplied by (b) the Investment Amount, and (iv) as of any date on or after the three-year anniversary of the Closing Date, an amount equal to (a) 1.75 multiplied by (b) the Investment Amount, in each case net of the sum of any payments received by the Purchasers prior to such Put Option Closing Date or Call Option Closing Date, as applicable.
If the Purchasers have not received 100% of the Investment Amount by February 15, 2027, the first tier royalty rate will be subject to an increase from 7.75% to 10.75%. The Company's obligations under the RIF are secured, subject to customary permitted liens and other agreed upon exceptions and subject to an intercreditor agreement with Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC, as administrative agent for the lenders under the Senior Credit Agreement, by a perfected security interest in (i) accounts receivable arising from net sales of Trudhesa and (ii) intellectual property that is claiming or covering Trudhesa, or any method of using, making or manufacturing Trudhesa, including regulatory approvals, clinical data and all other Trudhesa assets.
Oxford and Silicon Valley Bank
In July 2021, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or the Oxford Loan Agreement, with Oxford, as the collateral agent and a lender, and SVB and, together with Oxford, the Lenders, as a lender to borrow up to an aggregate principal amount of $50.0 million in a series of term loans. Upon entering into the Loan Agreement, we borrowed $20.0 million, or the Term A Loan, from Oxford and SVB, or the Lenders, with approximately $10.8 million of such amount applied to the repayment of the outstanding principal, interest and final payment fees owed pursuant to our prior loan and security agreement with Avenue Ventures dated November 5, 2020. Under the terms of the Agreement, we may, at our sole discretion, borrow up to an additional $10.0 million, or the Term B Loan, upon the achievement by us of NDA approval from the FDA of Trudhesa which we drew down on the entire $10.0 million in September 2021. Under the terms of the Loan Agreement, we may, at our sole discretion, borrow from the Lenders up to an additional $20.0 million, or the Term C Loan, upon the achievement by us of net revenue for a trailing six (6) month period of at least $15.0 million, or the Term C Milestone Event. We may draw the Term C Loan during the period commencing on the date of the occurrence of the Term C Milestone Event and ending on the earliest of (i) December 31, 2022 (ii) the sixtieth (60th) day following the occurrence of the Term C Milestone Event, and (iii) the occurrence of an event of default.
On March 17, 2022, we repaid approximately $32.9 million of outstanding principal, interest and final payment fees owed under loan agreements with Oxford Finance LLC and Silicon Valley Bank.
In connection with entering into the Loan Agreement and borrowing the Term A Loan and Term B Loan, we issued warrants to purchase 71,522 and 23,166 shares of common stock, respectively, or the Warrants, to the Lenders at a per share exercisable price of $8.389 and $12.95, respectively.
Convertible Promissory Notes
In March 2021, we issued convertible promissory notes to various investors for an aggregate amount of $7.5 million. The notes bore interest at a rate of 5.0% per annum and matured on the earlier of (a) December 31, 2021 and (b) a change of control. The notes were (i) automatically convertible into shares of our common stock upon a Qualified Public Offering or a SPAC transaction at 90% of the price per share in such transactions, (ii) convertible at the holder’s option or upon a change of control into shares of Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock at the Series D original issuance price, and (iii) convertible at the holder’s option upon a new redeemable convertible preferred stock financing into shares of redeemable preferred stock issued in such financing at 90% of the price per share. In April 2021, upon completion of our IPO, these convertible promissory notes were converted into 559,585 shares of common stock.
Avenue Term Loan
In November 2020, we entered into a debt and equity financing agreement, or the Avenue Agreement, with Avenue Venture Opportunities Fund. The Avenue Agreement provided for a 36-month term loan of up to $20.0 million, of which $10.0 million was funded at close and an additional $10.0 million was available at our request until December 31, 2021, subject to (i) completion of an underwritten public offering with gross proceeds of at least $75.0 million, or a Qualified Public Offering, (ii) receipt of FDA approval of Trudhesa and (iii) approval by Avenue’s investment committee. Loans under the Avenue Agreement incur interest at an initial interest rate of 11% per year. On July 2, 2021, we repaid approximately $10.8
million of outstanding principal, interest and final payment fees owed under the Avenue Agreement and terminated the Avenue Agreement. We recorded a loss of $2.0 million on the early extinguishment of debt related to the unamortized debt discount associated with the fair value of the warrants, final payment fee, and unamortized debt issuance costs.
We also issued a warrant to Avenue to purchase, at its option, either 1,762,810 shares of our Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock or a number of shares of the preferred stock issued in our next preferred stock equity financing determined based on the sale price of such preferred stock. In April 2021, upon completion of our IPO, this warrant was automatically exchanged for 107,663 shares of common stock for no additional consideration.
Cash Flows
Cash Flows From Operating Activities
For 2021, cash used in operating activities was $66.4 million, which consisted of a net loss of $76.5 million partially offset by a net change of $2.2 million in operating assets and liabilities and by $8.1 million in non-cash charges. The net change in our operating assets was primarily due to an increase in inventories, accounts receivables and prepaid expenses and other current assets of $5.5 million offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $7.7 million due primarily to an increase in the level of selling, general and administrative expenses. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, loss on early extinguishment of debt, amortization of debt discount, inventory write-downs to net realizable value, a change in the fair value of convertible notes, and a change in the fair value of our warrant liabilities.
For 2020, cash used in operating activities was $39.2 million, which consisted of a net loss of $45.8 million partially offset by $5.1 million in non-cash charges and by a net change of $1.5 million in operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consisted of stock-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, amortization of debt discounts and changes in the fair value of our redeemable convertible preferred stock warrant liabilities. The net change in our operating assets was primarily due to an increase in accounts payable of $1.5 million and a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $1.4 million partially offset by a decrease in accrued liabilities of $1.2 million and an increase in other assets of $0.2 million
Cash Flows From Investing Activities
For 2021 and 2020, cash used in investing activities of $0.4 million and $1.8 million, respectively, was related to purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows From Financing Activities
For 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $147.9 million, consisting primarily of net proceeds received from our IPO of $72.0 million and follow-on offering of $48.3 million net of issuance costs, net proceeds of $19.1 million under the Loan Agreement, proceeds of $7.5 million from the issuance of convertible notes and to a lesser extent from exercises of stock options and exercise of redeemable convertible preferred stock warrants.
For 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $11.1 million, consisting primarily of $9.7 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt, $0.9 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $0.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock.
Funding Requirements
We use our cash to fund operating expenses, including research and development expenditures and commercialization expenses for Trudhesa. We will incur significant commercialization expenses for product sales, marketing and outsourced manufacturing with respect to Trudhesa. We plan to continue to incur research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue clinical trials and move further into product candidate development. As a result, until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs primarily through a combination of equity or debt financings.
The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•the costs and timing of commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution for Trudhesa, or any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
• the number and development requirements of other product candidates that we may pursue;
• the costs associated with building out our operations;
• the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
• our ability to establish strategic collaborations;
• the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
• the risk/benefit profile, cost and reimbursement policies with respect to our product candidates, if approved, and existing and potential future therapies that compete with our product candidates; and
• the costs associated with being a public company.
If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity or convertible debt offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to additional liens against potentially all of our assets and covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Critical Accounting Policies, Significant Judgments and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and consolidated results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated, and reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 "Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the notes to our financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services.
Product Revenue, Net
Subsequent to its regulatory approval in the U.S. in September 2021, the Company began to sell Trudhesa in the U.S. The product is distributed through an exclusive third-party logistics, or 3PL, distribution agent that does not take title to the product. The 3PL distributes Trudhesa to the customers, a specialty pharmacy and a specialty distributor (collectively referred to as "customers"), who then distribute the product to health care providers and patients. In our exclusive distribution agreement with the 3PL company, we act as principal because we retain control of the product.
Revenue from product sales is recognized when the customer obtains control of our product, which occurs upon transfer of title to the customer. We classify payments to customers or other parties in the distribution channel for services that are distinct and priced at fair value as selling, general and administrative expenses in our consolidated statements of operations. Payments to customers or other parties in the distribution channel that do not meet those criteria are classified as a reduction of revenue, as discussed further below. Taxes collected from the customer relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenue. Because our payment terms are generally forty-five days, we conclude there is not a significant financing component because the period between the transfer of a promised good or service to the customer and when the customer pays for that good or service will be one year or less. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract as and when incurred since the expected amortization period of the asset that we would have recognized is one year or less.
Reserves for Variable Consideration
Revenues from product sales are recorded at the net sales price, or the transaction price, which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are established and which result from discounts, returns, co-pay assistance, chargebacks, rebates and other allowances that are offered within contracts between us and our customer, health care providers and other indirect customers relating to the sale of Trudhesa. These reserves are based on the amounts earned or to be claimed on the related sales and are classified as reductions of accounts receivable or a current liability. Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the contract. The amount of variable consideration that is included in the transaction price may be constrained and is included in the net sales price only to the extent that it is considered probable that a significant reversal in the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Actual amounts of consideration ultimately received may differ from our estimates. If actual results in the future vary from our estimates, we will adjust these estimates, which would affect net product revenue and earnings in the period such variances become known.
The following are the components of variable consideration related to product revenue:
•Product Returns: Our customer has limited return rights related to the product’s damage or defect. We estimate the amount of product sales that may be returned and record the estimate as a reduction of revenue and a refund liability in the period the related product revenue is recognized. Based on the distribution model for Trudhesa and the price of Trudhesa, we believe there will be minimal returns.
•Other incentives: Other incentives include co-payment assistance we provide to patients with commercial insurance that have coverage and reside in states that allow co-payment assistance. The calculation of the
accrual for co-pay assistance is based on an estimate of claims and the cost per claim that we expect to receive associated with product that has been recognized as revenue. The estimate is recorded as a reduction of revenue in the same period the related revenue is recognized.
•Managed care rebates: We are subject to rebates with certain commercial payers. We record these rebates as an accrual on our consolidated balance sheet in the same period we recognize the related revenue. We estimate our managed care rebates based on our estimated payer mix and the applicable contractual rebate rate.
•Chargebacks: We estimate obligations resulting from contractual commitments with the government and other entities to sell products to qualified healthcare providers and patients at prices lower than the list prices charged to our customer. The government and other entities charge us for the difference between what they pay for the product and the selling price to our customer. We record reserves for these chargebacks related to product sold to our customer during the reporting period, as well as our estimate of product that remains in the distribution channel at the end of the reporting period that we expect will be sold to qualified healthcare providers and patients in future periods. As of December 31, 2021, we did not enter into any contracts with government entities and other entities that are eligible for chargebacks.
•Government rebates: We are subject to discount obligations under government programs, including Medicaid programs, Medicare and Tricare in the U.S. We estimate Medicaid, Medicare and Tricare rebates based upon a range of possible outcomes that are probability-weighted for the estimated payer mix. These reserves are recorded in the same period the related revenue is recognized, resulting in a reduction of product revenue and the establishment of a liability that is included in accrued expenses on our consolidated balance sheet. For Medicare, we also estimate the number of patients in the prescription drug coverage gap for whom we will owe an additional liability under the Medicare Part D program. On a quarterly basis, we update our estimates and record any adjustments in the period that we identify the adjustments.
Accounts Receivable, net
Our trade accounts receivable consists of amounts due from customers in the U.S. net of distribution service fees, prompt pay discounts and other adjustments. Our contracts with customers have standard payment terms that generally require payment within 45 days. We analyze accounts that are past due for collectability, and periodically evaluate the creditworthiness of our customers. As of December 31, 2021, we determined an allowance for doubtful accounts was not required based upon our review of contractual payment terms and individual customer circumstances.
Inventory
Prior to receiving approval from the FDA in September 2021 to sell Trudhesa in the U.S., we expensed all costs incurred related to the manufacture of Trudhesa as research and development expense because of the inherent risks associated with the development of a drug candidate, the uncertainty about the regulatory approval process and the lack of history for our regulatory approval of drug candidates. Subsequent to receiving FDA approval in September 2021, we began to capitalize inventory related costs that were incurred subsequent to FDA approval. we value our inventories at the lower-of-cost or net realizable value and determine the cost of our inventories, which includes costs related to products held for sale in the ordinary course of business, products in process of production for such sale and items to be currently consumed in the production of goods to be available for sale, on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. Due to the nature of our supply chain process, inventory that is owned by us, is physically stored at third-party warehouses, logistics providers and contract manufacturers. Determining net realizable value of inventories involves significant judgments, including projecting future average selling prices and future sales volumes. To project average selling prices and sales volumes, we review recent sales volumes, prescription volumes, existing customer orders, general economic trends, and other information. When these analyses reflect estimated net realizable values below our manufacturing costs, we record a charge to cost of goods sold in advance of when inventories are actually sold. Differences in forecasted average selling prices used in calculating lower of cost or net realizable value adjustments can result in significant changes in the estimated net realizable value of product inventories and accordingly the amount of write-down recorded.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense related to stock options, restricted stock units, or RSUs, performance-based restricted stock units, or PSUs by estimating the fair value on the date of grant. The Company estimates the fair value of stock options granted to employees and non-employees using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of RSUs and PSUs granted to employees is estimated based on the closing price of the Company's common stock on the date of grant.
Each PSU award reflects a target number of shares (“Target Shares”) that may be issued to the award recipient and the units earned at the end of the performance period will be determined based on the achievement of certain revenue targets over the performance period. The PSUs also include a performance objective relating to total shareholder return (“TSR”). TSR reflects the change in the value of the Company’s common stock over each performance period. Depending on the revenue achieved and the TSR during the two-year performance periods, the actual number of shares that a grant recipient receives at the end of the performance period may range from 0% to 125% of the Target Shares granted for the 2022 performance period and 0% to 150% of the Target Shares granted for the 2023 performance period.
Management assesses the probability of achieving the specified revenue targets at each reporting period based on current and expected performance of Trudhesa, In the period it becomes probable that the minimum threshold specified in the award will be achieved, we recognize expense for the proportionate share of the total fair value of the PSUs related to the vesting period that has already lapsed for the shares expected to vest and be released. The remaining fair value of the shares expected to vest and be released is expensed on a straight-line basis over the balance of the vesting period. In the event the Company determines it is no longer probable that we will achieve the minimum threshold specified in the award, we reverse all of the previously recognized compensation expense in the period such a determination is made
The fair value of the portion of the Target Shares that relate to a relative TSR performance objective was determined using a Monte Carlo simulation analysis to estimate the total shareholder return ranking of the Company among a peer group over the remaining performance periods. See Note 10-Stock Incentive Plan to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2-Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one yet, of their potential impact on our financial condition of results of operations.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to get comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.