Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Rule 175 of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Rule 3b-6 of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, that involve substantial risks and uncertainties. These forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates and projections about our industry, our beliefs and our assumptions. Words such as “anticipate,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “seeks” and “estimates” and variations of these words and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks, uncertainties and other factors, some of which are beyond our control and difficult to predict and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in the forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which apply only as of the date of this Form 10-K. Investors should carefully consider all of such risks before making an investment decision with respect to the Company’s stock. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and summary of selected financial data for Innovative MedTech, Inc. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment from our Management.
DESCRIPTION OF COMPANY
Innovative MedTech, Inc. (the “Company”) was originally formed on April 21, 2005, in New Jersey as “Serino 1, Corp.,”. On December 16, 2005, the Company merged with Fresh Harvest Products, Inc., and then changed its name to Fresh Harvest Products, Inc., and began operating as a natural and organic food and beverage company, changing its name to “Fresh Harvest Products, Inc.” In 2012, the Company redomiciled to Delaware and began focusing its efforts on developing software and mobile application development and video production and developing an e-book company, and in the intervening years, expanded its technology development and development efforts, creating a revenue sharing partnership with a mobile app, TreatER (available for free on the Apple App Store) in 2017, and in 2018, focusing on building a software program for financially valuing a film concept and mapping the predicted human behavior by region to films using a combination of geographical based social sentiment and the distribution data and financial performance of historically released films. On November 4, 2017, the Company redomiciled from New Jersey to Delaware, and changed its fiscal year end from October 31st to June 30th. On March 9, 2021, the Company effectuated a 10,000:1 reverse split, changed its stock symbol from “FRHV” to “IMTH,” and changed its name to Innovative MedTech, Inc. On March 25, 2021, the Company acquired two companies, Sarah Adult Day Services, Inc., and Sarah Day Care Centers, Inc. (collectively “SarahCare”), an adult day care center franchisor and provider. On March 25, 2021, the Company acquired two companies, Sarah Adult Day Services, Inc., and Sarah Day Care Centers, Inc. (collectively “SarahCare”), an adult day care center franchisor and provider. With 26 centers (2 corporate and 24 franchise locations) located in 13 states, SarahCare offers seniors daytime care and activities focusing on meeting their physical and medical needs on a daily basis, and ranging from nursing care to salon services and providing meals, to offering engaging and enriching activities to allow them to continue to lead active and engaged lives. We are now focusing all of our efforts on our senior care operations.
The Company has also been working on launching an RX Vitality wallet digital offering and mobile app which, once implemented and live, the Company’s digital healthcare wallet will be able to be accessed by customers via mobile wallet on both the Apple iOS and Android App Stores. The Company intends to have a physical healthcare card as well.
On April 1, 2022, the Company partnered with TruCash Group of Companies Inc. (“TruCash”), a leading global payments provider, to launch an all-in-one Super Healthcare App, called RX Vitality Wallet, that will be designed to cater to consumers, patients, hospitals, Seniors, and governments, with a solid platform of benefits and online banking. The RX Vitality digital healthcare wallet is being designed to offer 20%-75% pharmaceutical discounts at 65,000 pharmacies across the United States, including Walgreens and CVS. In addition, we plan to offer health and wellness discounts at 500+ online merchants, as well as earning points on our Loyalty Program. The Company intends to generate revenue from its digital wallet and mobile app in multiple ways, including but not limited to monthly recurring fees, transfer fees, and the inter-exchange rate. On June 15, 2022, the Company’s RX Vitality digital healthcare wallet became available for download at the Apple iOS App store for Apple iPhone users. The Company’s app has also been approved and is available on the Google Play Store.
On April 5, 2022, the Company engaged mPulse Mobile, a leader in conversational AI and digital engagement solutions for the healthcare industry, to drive engagement with the Company’s digital app and wallet (currently under development).
On April 28, 2022, the Company entered into a share exchange agreement to acquire RX Vitality, Inc. (“RX Vitality”), a media and finance advisory company.
On May 13, 2022, the Company entered into a partnership with VSUSA Corp. (“VSUSA”), a non-for-profit organization that empowers Veterans and Seniors by offering services designed to build successful life transitions with access to workforce and independent housing; health services; and social service programs in communities across the United States. The partnership will permit the Company to use the VSUSA logo on the back of its Vitality Debit Card. For this the Company will give up to 1% of its revenue generated from its Vitality Debit Card to VSUSA. The Company’s Chairman is a principal and co-Founder of VSUSA.
On June 1, 2022, the Company announced that Dr. Merle Griff, SarahCare’s Founder and CEO, will also be CEO of the Company.
The following Management Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and accompanying notes included in this Form 10-K.
COMPARISON OF THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2022 TO THE YEAR ENDED JUNE 30, 2021
Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, and related management discussion herein.
Our financial statements are stated in U.S. Dollars and are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles of the United States (“GAAP”).
Going Concern Qualification
Several conditions and events cast substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has incurred cumulative net losses of $32,903,328 since its inception and requires capital for its contemplated operational and marketing activities to take place. The Company’s ability to raise additional capital through debt or future issuances of capital stock is unknown. The obtainment of additional financing, the successful development of the Company’s contemplated plan of operations, and its transition, ultimately, to the attainment of profitable operations are necessary for the Company to continue operations. The ability to successfully resolve these factors raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
Operating Results
Our operating results for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, and the changes between those periods for the respective items, are summarized as follows:
Revenues
Our revenue increased to $1,297,613 for the year ended June 30, 2022, from revenue of $349,143 in the comparative year ended June 30, 2021, due primarily to the reduced number of closures of our SarahCare centers due to Covid-19 during the most recent fiscal year as compared to the prior fiscal year. The following table presents revenue expenses for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Operating Loss
Our loss from operations increased to $18,258,093 during the year ended June 30, 2022, from an operating loss of $708,875 in the comparative year ended June 30, 2021. The following table presents operating expenses for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
The Company recorded $933,269 in general and administrative fees during the year ended June 30, 2022, as compared to $295,475 for the prior fiscal year, with the increase primarily due to the Company’s stock exchange with Vitality RX and increased administrative expenses associated with it. We realized a decrease of $147,129 in legal and professional fees during the year ended June 30, 2022, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year. We realized an increase of $723,139 in salaries and wages during the year ended June 30, 2022, as compared to the same period in the prior fiscal year, primarily due to increasing operations during the most recent fiscal year as compared to the prior fiscal year. Stock-based compensation increased from $0 during the year ended June 30, 2021, to $16,628,360 during the year ended June 30, 2022, primarily due to consulting arrangements with the former principals of Vitality RX during the most recent fiscal year.
Other Income (Expense)
The following table presents other income and expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company did not recognize a loss on extinguishment of debt or impairment of goodwill, but it recognized a significant loss on extinguishment of debt and impairment of goodwill during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. During the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company did not recognize a gain on disposal of fixed assets (but it recognized a gain of $2,695 during the prior fiscal year), but it did recognize other income of $180,820 and a gain on the PPP loan forgiveness of $266,640, as compared to smaller other income and gain on PPP loan forgiveness amounts during the prior fiscal year. During the year ended June 30, 2022, interest expense decreased to $182,500 from $172,286 for the prior fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, and interest expense, related parties, increased to $8,972 from $0 for the prior fiscal year. During the year ended June 30, 2022, there was a decrease in the fair value of derivatives declined to $28,115 from ($233,264) for the prior fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Net Loss
The Company incurred a $18,058,354 net loss during the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to net loss of $3,264,957 in the prior fiscal year. The increasing net loss is primarily due to the increase in the Company’s operating expenses, specifically its stock compensation expense due to consulting arrangements with the former principals of Vitality RX during the most recent fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, partially offset by increasing other income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based upon our current financial condition, we do not have sufficient cash to operate our business at the current level for the next twelve months. We intend to fund operations through debt and/or equity financing arrangements, which may be insufficient to fund expenditures or other cash requirements. We plan to seek additional financing in a private equity offering to secure funding for operations. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in raising additional funding. If we are not able to secure additional funding, the implementation of our business plan will be impaired. There can be no assurance that such additional financing will be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
Working Capital
The following table presents our working capital position as of June 30, 2022 and 2021:
The change in working capital during the year ended June 30, 2022, was primarily due to a decrease in current assets of $147,811 in conjunction with an increase in current liabilities of $1,060,157. Current assets decreased primarily due to a decrease in cash in the amount of $132,908. Current liabilities increased primarily due to the stock exchange with Vitality RX.
Cash Flow
The following tables presents our cash flow for the year ended June 30, 2022 and 2021:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash flows used in operating activities decreased to ($582,878) from $28,100 for the year ended June 30, 2021, due primarily to the Company’s due to an increase in operating expenses during the most recent fiscal year.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash flows used in investing activities decreased to ($10,199) from ($1,561,837) for the year ended June 30, 2021, due a decrease in investing activity during the most recent fiscal year.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
For the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash flows from financing activities decreased to $460,979 from $1,966,406 for the year ended June 30, 2021, due to a decrease in proceeds from the sale of stock during the most recent fiscal year.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make a number of estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Such estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experiences and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate estimates and assumptions based upon historical experience and various other factors and circumstances. We believe our estimates and assumptions are reasonable in the circumstances; however, actual results may differ from these estimates under different future conditions.
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”) and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) and reflect all adjustments, consisting of normal recurring adjustments, which management believes are necessary to fairly present the financial position, results of operations and cash flows of the Company as of and for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its consolidated subsidiaries. The ownership interest of consolidated entities not wholly-owned by the Company are presented as noncontrolling interests in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated in consolidation, and net income (loss) is reduced by the portion of net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests. The Company reports investments in unconsolidated entities over whose operating and financial policies it has the ability to exercise significant influence under the equity method of accounting.
The Company evaluates its potential variable interest entity (“VIE”) relationships under certain criteria as provided for in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 810, Consolidation (“ASC 810”). ASC 810 broadly defines a VIE as an entity with one or more of the following characteristics: (a) the total equity investment at risk is insufficient to finance the entity’s activities without additional subordinated financial support; (b) as a group, the holders of the equity investment at risk lack (i) the ability to make decisions about the entity’s activities through voting or similar rights, (ii) the obligation to absorb the expected losses of the entity, or (iii) the right to receive the expected residual returns of the entity; or (c) the equity investors have voting rights that are not proportional to their economic interests, and substantially all of the entity’s activities either involve, or are conducted on behalf of, an investor that has disproportionately few voting rights. The Company performs this evaluation on an ongoing basis and consolidates any VIEs for which the Company is determined to be the primary beneficiary, as determined by the Company's power to direct the VIE's activities and the obligation to absorb its losses or the right to receive its benefits, which are potentially significant to the VIE.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Because of the use of estimates inherent in the financial reporting process, actual results may differ significantly from those estimates.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company maintains cash balances in a non-interest bearing account that sometimes exceeds over $250,000 federally insured limits. For the purpose of the statements of cash flows, all highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less are considered to be cash equivalents. There were no cash equivalents As of June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Earnings Per Share Calculation
Basic earnings per common share (“EPS”) is computed by dividing income available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per shares is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average shares outstanding, assuming all dilutive potential common shares were issued.
Revenue Recognition
Participant Fees
Resident fee revenue is reported at the amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive in exchange for the services provided. These amounts are due from participants or third-party payors and include variable consideration for retroactive adjustments from estimated reimbursements, if any, under reimbursement programs. Performance obligations are determined based on the nature of the services provided. Resident fee revenue is recognized as performance obligations are satisfied.
Under the Company’s day care agreements, which are generally for a contractual term of 30 days to one year, the Company provides services to participants for a stated daily or monthly fee. The Company has elected the lessor practical expedient within ASC 842, Leases (“ASC 842”) and recognizes, measures, presents, and discloses the revenue for services under the Company’s senior living residency agreements based upon the predominant component, either the lease or nonlease component, of the contracts. The Company has determined that the services included under the Company's independent living, assisted living, and memory care residency agreements have the same timing and pattern of transfer and are performance obligations that are satisfied over time. The Company recognizes revenue under ASC 606, Revenue Recognition from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”) for its participants agreements for which it has estimated that the nonlease components of such agreements are the predominant component of the contract.
The Company enters into contracts to provide home assisted health, and certain outpatient services. Each service provided under the contract is capable of being distinct, and thus, the services are considered individual and separate performance obligations. The performance obligations are satisfied as services are provided and revenue is recognized as services are provided.
The Company receives payment for services under various third-party payor programs which include Medicaid, Veterans Affairs and other third-party payors. Estimates for settlements with third-party payors for retroactive adjustments from estimated reimbursements due to audits, reviews, or investigations are included in the determination of the estimated transaction price for providing services. The Company estimates the transaction price based on the terms of the contract with the payor, correspondence with the payor, and historical payment trends. Changes to these estimates for retroactive adjustments are recognized in the period the change or adjustment becomes known or when final settlements are determined.
Billings for services under third-party payor programs are recorded net of estimated retroactive adjustments, if any. Retroactive adjustments are accrued on an estimated basis in the period the related services are rendered and adjusted in future periods or as final settlements are determined. Contractual or cost related adjustments from Medicaid or Veterans Affairs are accrued when assessed (without regard to when the assessment is paid or withheld). Subsequent adjustments to these accrued amounts are recorded in net revenues when known.
Franchise Fees
The Company franchises a number of its locations under franchise contracts which provide periodic franchise fee payments to the Company and reimbursement for costs and expense related to such franchises. Our franchisees pay us a variety of royalties and fees, including an agreed upon percentage of gross revenues (as defined in the franchise agreement). The Company estimates the amount of franchise fee revenue expected to be earned, if any, during the annual contract period and revenue is recognized as services are provided. The Company’s estimate of the transaction price for the franchise services also includes the amount of reimbursement due from the franchises for services provided and related costs incurred. Such revenue is included in “revenues” on the consolidated statements of operations. The related costs are included in “operating expenses” on the consolidated statements of operations.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is the total of the current taxes payable and the net of the change in the deferred income taxes. Provision is made for the deferred income taxes where differences exist between the period in which transactions affect current taxable income and the period in which they enter into the determination of net income in the financial statements.
Leases
In December 2018, the FASB issued ASC 842 and as ASU 2016-02, is the new lease accounting standard published by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). It replaced the previous US GAAP leasing standard, ASC 840. The purpose of the new standard is to close a major accounting loophole in ASC 840: off-balance sheet operating leases. Public companies began to implement the standard starting after December 15, 2018. Private companies will follow a year later on December 15, 2020. ASC 842 represents a significant overhaul of the accounting treatment for leases, with the most significant change being that most leases, including most operating leases, are now capitalized on the balance sheet. Under ASC 840, FASB permitted operating leases to be reported only in the footnotes of corporate financial statements. Under ASC 842, the only leases that are exempt from the capitalization requirement are short-term leases less than or equal to 12 months in length. This became effective December 1, 2019 and the Company chose to adopt it early on December 1, 2018. The adoption did not have any material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements as the Company has no long term leases.
Fair value of financial instruments
The Company’s financial instruments include cash and cash equivalents, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and debt. Derivative liabilities were adjusted to fair market value at the end of each reporting period, using Level 3 inputs. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Valuation techniques used to measure fair value must maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs. The fair value hierarchy is based on three levels of inputs, of which the first two are considered observable and the last unobservable, as follows:
·
Level 1 - Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
·
Level 2 - Inputs other than Level 1 that are observable, either directly or indirectly, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities; quoted prices in markets that are not active; or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities.
·
Level 3 - Unobservable inputs that are supported by little or no market activity and that are significant to the measurement of the fair value of the assets or liabilities.
The carrying amounts of the Company’s financial assets and liabilities, such as cash, accounts payable and accrued expenses, accrued interest, certain notes payable and notes payable - due to related parties, approximate their fair values because of the short maturity of these instruments.
The Company accounts for its derivative liabilities, at fair value, on a recurring basis under Level 3 (See Note 6).
Embedded Conversion Features
The Company evaluates embedded conversion features within convertible debt under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815 “Derivatives and Hedging” to determine whether the embedded conversion feature(s) should be bifurcated from the host instrument and accounted for as a derivative at fair value with changes recorded in earnings. If the conversion feature does not require derivative treatment under ASC 815, the instrument is evaluated under ASC 470-20 “Debt with Conversion and Other Options” for consideration of any beneficial feature.
Derivative Financial Instruments
When the Company issues debt that contains a conversion feature, it first evaluates whether the conversion feature meets the requirements to be treated as a derivative: a) one or more underlying, typically the price of the Company’s stock; b) one or more notional amounts or payment provisions or both, generally the number of shares upon conversion; c) no initial net investment, which typically excludes the amount borrowed; and d) net settlement provisions, which in the case of convertible debt generally means the stock received upon conversion can be readily sold for cash. There are certain scope exceptions from derivative treatment, but these typically exclude conversion features that provide for a variable number of shares.
If the conversion feature within convertible debt meet the requirements to be treated as a derivative, the Company estimates the fair value of the derivative liability using the Monte Carlo Simulation Model upon the date of issuance. If the fair value of the derivative liability is higher than the face value of the convertible debt, the excess is immediately recognized as interest expense. Otherwise, the fair value of the derivative liability is recorded as a liability with an offsetting amount recorded as a debt discount, which offsets the carrying amount of the debt. The derivative liability is revalued at the end of each reporting period and any change in fair value is recorded as a change in fair value in the statements of operations. The debt discount is amortized through interest expense over the life of the debt. Derivative instrument liabilities and the host debt agreement are classified on the balance sheets as current or non-current based on whether settlement of the derivative instrument could be required within twelve months of the balance sheet date.
The accounting treatment of derivative financial instruments requires that the Company record the embedded conversion option at their fair values as of the inception date of the agreement and at fair value as of each subsequent balance sheet date. Any change in fair value is recorded as non-operating, non-cash income or expense for each reporting period at each balance sheet date. The Company reassesses the classification of its derivative instruments at each balance sheet date. If the classification changes as a result of events during the period, the contract is reclassified as of the date of the event that caused the reclassification. As a result of entering into warrant agreements, for which such instruments contained a variable conversion feature with no floor, the Company has adopted a sequencing policy in accordance with ASC 815-40-35-12 “Derivatives and Hedging” (provides comprehensive guidance on derivative and hedging transactions) whereby all future instruments may be classified as a derivative liability with the exception of instruments related to share-based compensation issued to employees or directors.
Debt Issue Costs and Debt Discount
The Company may record debt issue costs and/or debt discounts in connection with raising funds through the issuance of debt. These costs may be paid in the form of cash, or equity (such as warrants). These costs are amortized to interest expense over the life of the debt. If a conversion of the underlying debt occurs, a proportionate share of the unamortized amounts is immediately expensed.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
As of and for the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company does not expect any of the recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a material impact on its financial condition or results of operations.
Seasonality
We do not expect our sales to be impacted by seasonal demands for our products and services.