Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation
General
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our discussion of cautionary statements and significant risks to the company’s business under Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual report on Form 10-K.
Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $493,885 in cash on hand, negative working capital of $7,948,256 and a stockholders’ deficit of $7,948,256. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company reported net income attributable to common shareholders of $3,586,034. Net income for the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021 includes significant non-cash non-operating gains aggregating $4,535,122 as follows:
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company reported net income attributable to common shareholders of $1,588,617. Included in net income for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a non-cash non-operating gain of $3,502,280 resulting from the assignment of debt.
Historically the Company has relied on the funding of operations through private equity financings and management expects operating losses and negative cash flows to continue at more significant levels in the future. As the Company continues to incur losses, transition to profitability is dependent upon the successful development, approval, and commercialization of its current or future product candidates as they become available and the achievement of a level of revenues adequate to support the Company’s cost structure. The Company may never achieve profitability, and unless and until it does, the Company will continue to need to raise additional cash. Management intends to fund future operations through additional private or public debt or equity offerings and may seek additional capital through arrangements with strategic partners or from other sources.
Working capital at December 31, 2021 is not sufficient to meet the cash requirements to fund planned operations through the next twelve months without additional sources of cash. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern and do not include adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. This basis of accounting contemplates the recovery of the Company’s assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
Management is developing as a strategy to re-capitalize the Company and position it for future growth. Key steps to this process include:
● Improve the condition of the financial position and balance sheet via license arrangements and capital infusions.
● Identify and acquire late-stage assets for commercialization.
● Build out operational infrastructure to generate revenue opportunities to grow shareholder value.
There can be no guaranties that the Company will be successful in securing adequate capital to continue operations and in identifying and acquiring assets for future development.
If the Company is unable to secure new working capital, other alternatives strategies will be required.
Historically, the Company has been able to acquire and develop assets, spin them out and retain both an equity stake and royalties and milestone payments. In so doing, the Company has acted as an incubator for late-stage drug development. Management believes that this strategy can continue to be successful. At this time, the Company is reviewing several opportunities which it may pursue as soon as funding is available. At present no definitive actions have been taken.
There can be no guaranties that the Company will be successful in:
● Executing its restructuring plan
● Securing adequate capital to continue operations.
● Identifying and acquiring assets for future development.
Overview
Revenue, Direct Expenses and Gross Margin
The Company had no revenue and incurred no direct expenses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Direct expenses include the cost of finished product sold from the Company’s contract manufacturers, sales incentives, associated travel, and inventory return charges.
Research and Development
R&D expenses consist of payments made to contractors for services related to research and product development, product development costs, payments made for patents and licenses to which the Company has acquired rights to use. The Company’s spending on R&D has been primarily to maintain patents and licenses.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include salary and benefit costs for employees and contractors included in general and administrative functions, professional services, insurance, travel expenses, telecommunications, and office expenses. Professional services consist principally of external legal, audit, tax and other consulting services.
Other income (expense)
Other income (expense) consists of interest expense on borrowings, finance charges reflecting with debt issuance costs and changes in fair market value of certain assets and liabilities. During the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, the Company recognized non-cash gains upon the assignment of certain debt and other liabilities to Cytocom.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 1, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of its results of operations. The Company’s senior management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures with the Company’s Board of Directors. The impact and any associated risks related to these policies on our business operations are discussed throughout this section where such policies affect our reported and expected financial results. Our preparation of financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates and such differences may be material.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the Company’s financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from such estimates.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk are primarily cash and cash equivalents. The Company is exposed to credit risk, subject to federal deposit insurance, in the event of a default by the financial institutions holding its cash and cash equivalents to the extent of amounts recorded on the balance sheets. The cash accounts are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation up to $250,000.
Segment and Geographic Information
Operating segments are defined as components of an enterprise about which separate discrete information is available for evaluation by the chief operating decision maker, or decision-making group, in deciding how to allocate resources and in assessing performance. The Company views its operations and manages its business in one operating segment and does not segment the business for internal reporting or decision making.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
In accordance with the reporting requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 825, “Financial Instruments”, the Company calculates the fair value of its assets and liabilities which qualify as financial instruments under this standard and includes this additional information in the notes to the financial statements when the fair value is different than the carrying value of those financial instruments.
Cash, cash equivalents and accounts payable are accounted for at cost which approximates fair value due to the relatively short maturity of these instruments. The carrying value of the Company’s investment in the common stock of Statera BioPharma (“STAB”) is measured based on the quoted per share price as reported on NASDAQ. The carrying value of notes payable approximate fair value since they bear market rates of interest and other terms. None of these instruments are held for trading purposes.
Derivative Financial Instruments
FASB ASC 815, Fair Value Measurements requires bifurcation of certain embedded derivative instruments in certain debt or equity instruments, and measurement at their fair value for accounting purposes. A holder redemption feature embedded in the Company’s note payable requires bifurcation from its host instrument and is accounted for as a freestanding derivative. The Company held no derivative financial instruments at December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are charged to expense as incurred and are comprised of fees paid to consultants and patent related costs.
Income Taxes
The Company follows ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which requires recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are based on the differences between the financial statements and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management concludes it is more likely than not that the asset will not be realized. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled.
The standard addresses the determination of whether tax benefits claimed or expected to be claimed on a tax return should be recorded in the financial statements. Under ASC Topic 740, the Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. ASC Topic 740 also provides guidance on de-recognition, classification, interest and penalties on income taxes, accounting in interim periods and requires increased disclosures.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and at the date of adoption, the Company did not have a liability for unrecognized tax uncertainties. The Company’s policy is to record interest and penalties on uncertain tax positions as income tax expense. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has not accrued any interest or penalties related to uncertain tax positions.
Stock-Based Compensation and Issuance of Stock for Non-Cash Consideration
The Company measures and recognizes compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors based on estimated fair values equaling either the market value of the shares issued, or the value of consideration received, whichever is more readily determinable. Generally, the non-cash consideration pertains to services rendered by consultants and others and has been valued at the fair value of the Company’s common stock at the date of the agreement.
The Company’s accounting policy for equity instruments issued to consultants and vendors in exchange for goods and services follows the provisions of ASC Topic 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” The measurement date for the fair value of the equity instruments issued is determined at the earlier of (i) the date at which a commitment for performance by the consultant or vendor is reached or (ii) the date at which the consultant or vendor’s performance is complete.
The Company did not grant any stock-based compensation awards during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Net Income per Share
Basic net income per share is calculated by dividing the net income attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding for the period, without consideration for common stock equivalents.
The Company’s potentially dilutive securities which include primarily warrants, have been included in the computation of diluted net income per share for the twelve-month periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
Revenues (dollar amounts in thousands):
We had no revenues from operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Expenses
Selling, general and administrative (dollar amounts in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
In 2021, selling, general and administrative expense was $585, compared to $760 for 2020, a decrease of $175 or 23%. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, selling, general and administrative expenses were made up as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has focused on business development activities and the negotiation and finalization of certain licensing transactions described further in Note 8 Licensing Agreements in the notes to the financial statements.
The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense reflects the reduction of board fees and professional fees offset by an increase in payroll costs. Professional fees and consulting costs are incurred for legal, tax and accounting services. Legal fees incurred reflect the Company’s financial reorganization efforts and licensing strategies underway with Cytocom and Forte as described in Note 8 to the financial statements.
The 2020 professional fees include legal costs incurred in connection with the assignment of certain notes and other liabilities completed in the third quarter of 2020. The decrease in board fees recognized the reduction in board members during the reporting periods. The Company had 4 board members in the first quarter of 2020 and subsequently reduced the board to two members thereafter through December 31, 2021. Payroll and benefits reflect accrued wages payable to the Company’s Chief Executive Officer and wages paid to a part time financial analyst.
Research and development
R&D expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
The Company recorded $152 of research and development costs during the year ended December 31, 2021 reflecting fees payable to Penn State University related to license maintenance fees, minimum royalties and various patent evaluation and filing expenses. These liabilities were assigned to Cytocom in connection with the August 12, 2020 letter agreement as described in Note 8 to the financial statements. As Penn State did not consent to the assignment of these fees, the Company retained the liability for them until subsequently paid by Cytocom; at which time, the Company recognized a gain on the settlement of debt.
The Company recognized $481 in gains on the settlement of liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021 upon Cytocom’s settlement of these Penn State liabilities.
Research and development programs are managed internally and have historically focused working with individuals and universities to identify and utilize patents we have sub-licensed or acquired since our inception. We continue to seek to expand our pipeline of intellectual property by reviewing other compounds, technologies, or capabilities. The Company continues to seek and identify innovative technologies to incorporate into our intellectual property assets.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, research and development expenses were made up as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollar amounts in thousands):
Interest expense is comprised of interest expense and amortization of loan origination fees owed by the Company. The decrease year over year reflects the reduction in outstanding notes payable. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company assigned outstanding notes with principal amounts aggregating $2,728,731 to Cytocom.
Gain on assignment of certain debt and liabilities:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized a non-cash gain of $711,893 upon the settlement of certain liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recognized a non-cash gain of $3,502,280 in 2020 upon the settlement of certain debt and liabilities upon the assignment to Cytocom.
Liquidity:
Liquidity is measured by the Company’s ability to secure enough cash to meet its contractual and operating needs as they arise. The Company had cash of $493,885 at December 31, 2021 compared to $9,971 at December 31, 2020.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, cash used in operating activities was $231,717 and $191,954, respectively. The Company had no cash inflows or outflows for investing activities for the two years ended December 31, 2021. During 2021, the Company received proceeds of $715,631 from several investors for which the documentation had not been completed as of December 31, 2021. During 2020 the Company received proceeds of $197,000 from notes issuances.
The Company does not expect to generate revenues in the coming twelve months. Management continues to pursue new financing sources to support the business. We may be unable to raise additional working capital to meet operating obligations and expenditures and as such may be required to modify it business plan. If the Company is unable to generate sufficient cash flows from sales, or if it does not raise additional working capital to meet all its operating obligations and expenditures, the Company may have to modify its business plan. Over the next 12 months, the Company believes it will require between $500,000 and $1,000,000 to meet its ongoing expenses and obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in item 303(a)(4) of the SEC’s Regulation S-K.