ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The objectives of our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations are to provide users of our consolidated financial statements with a narrative explanation from the perspective of management of our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect future results. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. The forward-looking statements are not historical facts, but rather are based on current expectations, estimates, assumptions and projections about our industry, business and future financial results. Our actual results could differ materially from the results contemplated by these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional factors relating to such statements and see “Risk Factors” included in Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our past operating results are not necessarily indicative of operating results in any future periods.
Overview
We are a leading omnichannel money remittance service company focused primarily on the United States of America (“United States” or “U.S.”) to Latin America and the Caribbean (“LAC”) corridor, which includes Mexico, Central and South America and the Caribbean. In recent years, we expanded our services to allow remittances to Africa and Asia from the United States and from Canada to Latin America and Africa. We utilize our proprietary technology to deliver convenient, reliable and value-added services to our customers through a broad network of sending and paying agents. Our remittance services, which include a comprehensive suite of ancillary financial processing solutions and payment services, are available in all 50 states in the U.S., Washington D.C., Puerto Rico and 13 provinces in Canada, where customers can send money to beneficiaries in 17 LAC countries, eight countries in Africa and two countries in Asia. Our services are accessible in person through over 100,000 independent sending and paying agents and 36 Company-operated stores, as well as online and via Internet-enabled mobile devices. Additionally, our product and service portfolio include online payment options, pre-paid debit cards and direct deposit payroll cards, which may present different cost, demand, regulatory and risk profiles relative to our core money remittance business.
Money remittance services to LAC countries, mainly Mexico and Guatemala, are the primary source of our revenue. These services involve the movement of funds on behalf of an originating customer for receipt by a designated beneficiary at a designated receiving location. Our remittances to LAC countries are primarily generated in the United States by customers with roots in Latin American and Caribbean countries, many of whom do not have an existing relationship with a traditional full-service financial institution capable of providing the services we offer. We provide these customers with flexibility and convenience to help them meet their financial needs. We believe many of our customers who use our services may have access to traditional banking services, but prefer to use our services based on reliability, convenience and value. We generate money remittance revenue from fees paid by our customers (i.e., the senders of funds), which we share with our sending agents in the originating country and our paying agents in the destination country. Remittances paid in local currencies that are not pegged to the U.S. dollar can also generate revenue if we are successful in our daily management of currency exchange spreads.
Our money remittance services enable our customers to send funds through our broad network of locations in the United States and Canada that are primarily operated by third-party businesses, as well as through our Company-operated stores. Transactions are processed and payment is collected by our agent (“sending agent(s)”) and those funds become available for pickup by the beneficiary at the designated destination, usually within minutes, at any Intermex payer location (“paying agent(s)”). We refer to our sending agents and our paying agents collectively as agents. In addition, our services are offered digitally through Intermexonline.com and via Internet-enabled mobile devices. During the three years ended December 31, 2021, we have grown our agent network by approximately 35.2% and increased our principal amount sent by more than 65.5%. In 2021, we processed approximately 40.1 million remittances, representing over 25.4% growth in transactions as compared to 2020.
COVID-19 Update
During March 2020, a global pandemic was declared by the World Health Organization related to the rapidly growing outbreak of a novel strain of coronavirus (“COVID-19”). The pandemic has had and continues to have a significant effect on economic conditions in the United States, as the efforts of federal, state, local and foreign governments to react to the public health crisis with mitigation measures have created and continue to cause significant uncertainties in the U.S. and global economy, particularly as new variants of COVID-19 appear to be causing an increase in COVID-19 cases in certain places around the world. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and its variants affect our business, operations and financial results depends, and will continue to depend, on numerous evolving factors that we may not be able to accurately predict such as the reduction or reimposition by government and health authorities of restrictions and progress in and effectiveness of vaccination efforts in the United States or in the countries in which we operate and conduct business.
Index
In response to the pandemic, our top priority continues being to take appropriate actions to protect the health and safety of our employees. We have adjusted standard operating procedures within our business operations to ensure continued worker safety, and are continually monitoring evolving health guidelines and responding to changes as appropriate. These procedures include reconfiguring facilities to reduce employee density, expanded and more frequent cleaning within facilities, implementation of appropriate and mandated hybrid-mode work, distancing programs, employee temperature monitoring, frequent testing and requiring use of certain personal protective equipment at our call centers in Mexico and Guatemala. As of December 31, 2021, all of our facilities are open and operating with adjustments to ensure compliance with social distancing and facial covering recommendations and requirements established by state and local regulations.
Notwithstanding the operational challenges created by the pandemic, our business continues to function and, to date, our customer service has not been adversely affected in any material respect. Nevertheless, the COVID-19 pandemic continues to pose the risk that we or our employees, sending and paying agents, as well as consumers and their beneficiaries, are or may become further restricted from conducting business activities, partially or completely, for an indefinite period of time, including due to shutdowns requested or mandated by governmental authorities or imposed by our management, or that the pandemic may otherwise interrupt or impair business activities.
Although certain measures that restrict the normal course of operations of businesses and consumers were still in place for the year ended December 31, 2021, such measures did not have a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company’s business is dependent upon the willingness and ability of its employees, network of agents and consumers to conduct money transfer services and the ultimate effects of the economic disruption caused by the pandemic and responses thereto. Although the Company’s operations continued effectively despite social distancing and other measures taken in response to the pandemic, the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows is subject to future developments, including the duration of the pandemic and the related extent of its severity, as well as its impact on the economic conditions, particularly the level of unemployment of our customers, inflation, interest rate levels and foreign exchange volatility, all of which remain uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. If the global response to contain and remedy the COVID-19 pandemic escalates further or is unsuccessful, or if governmental decisions to ease pandemic related restrictions are ineffective, premature or counterproductive, the Company could experience a material adverse effect on its financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Further quantification and discussion of these pandemic related effects, to the extent relevant and material, are included in the discussion of results of operations below.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Business
Various trends and other factors have affected and may continue to affect our business, financial condition and operating results, including, but not limited to:
•public health conditions, including the COVID-19 pandemic, responses thereto and the economic and market effects thereof;
•competition in the markets in which we operate;
•volatility in foreign exchange rates that could affect the volume of consumer remittance activity and/or affect our foreign exchange related gains and losses;
•our ability to maintain favorable banking and agent relationships necessary to conduct our business;
•credit risks from our agents and the financial institutions with which we do business;
•bank failures, sustained financial illiquidity, or illiquidity at our clearing, cash management or custodial financial institutions;
•new technology or competitors that disrupt the current ecosystem, including by introducing digital platforms;
•cyber-attacks or disruptions to our information technology, computer network systems, data centers and phone apps;
•our ability to satisfy our debt obligations and remain in compliance with our credit facility requirements;
•our success in developing and introducing new products, services and infrastructure;
•customer confidence in our brand and in consumer money transfers generally;
•our ability to maintain compliance with applicable regulatory requirements;
Index
•international political factors, political stability, tariffs, border taxes or restrictions on remittances or transfers of money out of the United States and Canada;
•currency restrictions and volatility in countries in which we operate or plan to operate;
•consumer fraud and other risks relating to the authenticity of customers’ orders;
•changes in immigration laws and their enforcement;
•our ability to protect our brand and intellectual property rights;
•weakness in U.S. or international economic conditions;
•changes in tax laws; and
•our ability to recruit and retain key personnel.
Latin American political and economic conditions continue being unstable, as evidenced by high unemployment rates in key markets, currency reserves, currency controls, restricted lending activity, weak currencies and low consumer confidence, some of which reflects the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors. Specifically, continued political and economic unrest in parts of Mexico and some countries in South America contributed to volatility. Our business has generally been resilient during times of economic instability as money remittances are essential to many recipients, with the funds used by the receiving parties for their daily needs; however, long-term sustained appreciation of the Mexican peso or Guatemalan quetzal as compared to the U.S. dollar could negatively affect our revenues and profitability.
Money remittance businesses have continued to be subject to strict legal and regulatory requirements, and we continue to focus on and regularly review our compliance programs. In connection with these reviews, and in light of regulatory complexity and heightened attention of governmental and regulatory authorities related to cybersecurity and compliance activities, we have made, and continue to make, enhancements to our processes and systems designed to detect and prevent cyber-attacks, consumer fraud, money laundering, terrorist financing and other illicit activities, along with enhancements to improve consumer protection, including the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and similar regulations outside the United States. In coming periods, we expect these and future enhancements will continue to result in changes to certain of our business practices and may result in increased costs.
We maintain a compliance department, the responsibility of which is to monitor transactions, detect and report suspicious activity, maintain appropriate records and train our employees and agents. An independent third-party periodically reviews our policies and procedures and performs independent testing to assess the effectiveness of our anti-money laundering and Bank Secrecy Act compliance program. We also maintain a regulatory affairs and licensing department, under the direction of our Chief Operating Officer, whose responsibility is to manage regulatory affairs and licensing.
The market for money remittance services is very competitive. Our competitors include a small number of large money remittance providers, financial institutions, banks and a large number of small niche money remittance service providers that serve select regions. We compete with larger companies, such as Western Union, MoneyGram and Euronet, and a number of other smaller MSB entities. We generally compete for money remittance agents on the basis of value, service, quality, technical and operational differences, commission structure and marketing efforts. As a philosophy, we sell credible solutions to our sending agents, not discounts or higher commissions, as is typical for the industry. We compete for money remittance customers on the basis of trust, convenience, service, efficiency of outlets, value, technology and brand recognition.
We have encountered and continue to expect to encounter increasing competition as new electronic platforms emerge that enable customers to send and receive money through a variety of channels, but we do not expect adoption rates to be as significant in the near term for the customer segment we serve. Regardless, we continue to innovate in the industry by differentiating our money remittance business through programs to foster loyalty among agents as well as customers and have expanded our channels through which our services are accessed to include online and mobile offerings which are experiencing customer adoption.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are revenues, service charges from agents and banks, salaries and benefits, other selling, general and administrative expenses and net income. To help us assess our performance with these key indicators, we use Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings per Share and Adjusted EBITDA as non-GAAP financial measures. We believe these non-GAAP measures provide useful information to investors and expanded insight to measure our revenue and cost performance as a supplement to our U.S. GAAP consolidated financial statements. See the “Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share” and “Adjusted
Index
EBITDA” sections below for reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to net income and earnings per share, our closest GAAP measures.
Revenues
Transaction volume is the primary generator of revenue in our business. Revenue on transactions is derived primarily from transaction fees paid by customers to transfer money. Revenues per transaction vary based upon send and receive locations and the amount sent. In certain transactions involving different send and receive currencies, we generate foreign exchange gains based on the difference between the set exchange rate charged by us to the sender and the rate available to us in the wholesale foreign exchange market.
Operating Expenses
Service Charges from Agents and Banks
Service charges primarily consist of agent commissions and bank fees. Service charges vary based on agent commission percentages and the amount of fees charged by the banks. Sending agents earn a commission on each transaction they process of approximately 50% of the transaction fee. Service charges may increase if banks or payer organizations increase their fee structure or sending agents use higher fee methods to remit funds to us. Service charges also vary based on the method the customer selects to send the transfer and the payer organization that facilitates the transaction.
Salaries and Benefits
Salaries and benefits include cash and share-based compensation associated with our corporate employees and sales team as well as employees at our Company-operated stores. Corporate employees include management, customer service, compliance, information technology, operations, finance and human resources. Our sales team, located throughout the United States and Canada, is focused on supporting and growing our sending agent network. Share-based compensation is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period; unrecognized compensation expense related to options, restricted stock units (“RSUs”), restricted stock awards (“RSAs”) and performance stock units (“PSUs”) of approximately $8.4 million is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.75 years.
Other Selling, General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of fixed overhead expenses associated with our operations, such as information technology, telecommunications, rent, insurance, professional services, non-income taxes, facilities maintenance and other similar types of operating expenses. A portion of these expenses relate to our Company-operated stores; however, the majority relate to the overall business and compliance requirements of a regulated publicly traded financial services company. Selling expenses include expenses such as advertising and promotion, provision for credit losses and expenses associated with increasing our network of agents. These expenses are expected to continue to increase at a slower pace than the increase in our revenues.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation largely consists of depreciation of computer equipment and software that supports our technology platform. Amortization of intangible assets is primarily related to our agent relationships, trade name and developed technology.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest associated with our debt, which consists of a term loan facility and a revolving credit facility. The effective average interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2021 for the term loan facility and revolving credit facility, which related to the Original Credit Agreement (as defined herein) and A&R Credit Agreement (as defined herein), were 4.23% and 0.78%, respectively. Interest on the term loan and revolving credit facilities is determined by reference to either LIBOR (subject to replacement) or a “base rate”, in each case plus an applicable margin, under the A&R Credit Agreement, of between 2.50% and 3.00% per annum for LIBOR loans and between 1.50% and 2.00% per annum for base rate loans depending on the level of our consolidated leverage ratio, as calculated pursuant to the terms of the A&R Credit Agreement. The Company is also required to pay a fee on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility equal to 0.35% per annum.
Income tax provision
Our income tax provision includes the expected benefit of all deferred tax assets, including our net operating loss carryforwards. With few exceptions, our net operating loss carryforwards will expire from 2030 through 2041. After consideration of all evidence, both positive
Index
and negative, management has determined that no valuation allowance is required at December 31, 2021 on the Company’s U.S. federal or state deferred tax assets; however, a valuation allowance has been recorded as of December 31, 2021 on deferred tax assets associated with Canadian net operating loss carryforwards. Our income tax provision reflects the effects of state taxes, non-deductible expenses, share-based compensation expense, and foreign tax rates applicable to the Company’s foreign subsidiaries that are higher or lower than the U.S. statutory rate.
Net Income
Net income is determined by subtracting operating and non-operating expenses from revenues.
Earnings per Share
Basic earnings per share is calculated by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for each period. Diluted earnings per share is calculated by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common shares and common share equivalents outstanding for each period. Diluted earnings per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if outstanding stock options at the presented dates are exercised and shares of restricted stock units, restricted stock awards and performance stock units have vested, using the treasury stock method. Shares of treasury stock are not considered outstanding and therefore are excluded from the weighted average number of common shares outstanding calculation.
Segments
Our business is organized around one reportable segment that provides money transmittal services between the United States and Canada to Mexico, Guatemala and other countries in Latin America, Africa and Asia through a network of authorized agents located in various unaffiliated retail establishments and 36 Company-operated stores throughout the United States and Canada. This is based on the objectives of the business and how our chief operating decision maker, the CEO and President, monitors operating performance and allocates resources.
Index
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated:
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the above periods are presented below:
Wire transfer and money order fees, net of $393.2 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $85.3 million, or 27.7%, from $307.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to a 25.4% increase in transaction volume compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, largely due to the continued growth in our agent network, which increased by 11.7% from December 2020 to December 2021, as our average price per transaction has remained stable as compared to the prior year.
Revenues from foreign exchange gain, net of $62.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased by $16.0 million, or 34.4%, from $46.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to higher transaction volume achieved
Index
by growth in our agent network and a higher average amount sent by our customers, as well as, increased foreign exchange volatility in the Mexican peso during the year.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the above periods are presented below:
Service charges from agents and banks- Service charges from agents and banks were $307.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $238.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $68.9 million, or 28.9%, was primarily due to the increase in transaction volume described above.
Salaries and benefits- Salaries and benefits were $43.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $10.3 million, or 31.2%, from $32.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to $7.7 million spent in talent acquisition and retention to support the continued growth of our business, increased wages and bonuses to recognize performance, a $1.1 million increase in commission expense for our sales representatives and a $1.4 million increase in share-based compensation as a result of new awards granted during 2021.
Other selling, general and administrative expenses- Other selling, general and administrative expenses of $31.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $9.2 million, or 41.9%, from $22.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase was primarily the result of:
•$1.7 million - relating to the losses from two separate closures of financial institutions in Mexico. These amounted to $2.0 million and $0.3 million (pre-tax) in 2021 and 2020, respectively;
•$2.1 million - increase in advertising and promotion expenses as compared to 2020 during which we curtailed these activities because of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•$1.0 million in a write-off of software development expenditures in the third quarter of 2021;
•$1.0 million of professional and legal fees directly attributable to potential acquisitions;
•$2.0 million - higher other operating expenses to support our business growth, some of which expenses were reduced last year due to the COVID-19 pandemic; and
•$1.3 million - higher IT related expenses incurred to sustain our business expansion and improve our technology environment.
Depreciation and amortization- Depreciation and amortization of $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $1.3 million, or 12.3%, from $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is mainly due to $1.8 million less amortization related to trade name, developed technology and agent relationships during the year ended December 31, 2021 as these intangibles are being amortized on an accelerated basis, which declines over time. This decrease was partially offset by an increase in depreciation of $0.5 million associated primarily with additional computer equipment to support our growing business and agent network.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense- Interest expense was $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $2.1 million, or 30.9%, from $6.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower market interest rates paid under the credit agreements (as described below) and lower drawings under our revolving credit facility.
Income tax provision- Income tax provision was $16.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $4.0 million, or 31.6%, from an income tax provision of $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the income tax provision was mainly attributable to higher taxable income resulting from our growth as discussed above.
Index
Net Income
We reported net income of $46.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net income of $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which resulted in an increase of $13.0 million due to the same factors discussed above.
Earnings Per Share
Earnings per Share - Basic for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.22, representing an increase of $0.33, or 37.1%, compared to $0.89 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Earnings per Share - Diluted for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.20, representing an increase of $0.32, or 36.4%, compared to $0.88 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The increase in both basic and diluted EPS largely reflect the increased net income discussed above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings per Share and Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our performance, both internally and as compared with our peers, because these measures exclude certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results, as well as items that can vary widely among companies within our industry. For example, non-cash compensation costs can be subject to volatility from changes in the market price per share of our common stock or variations in the value and number of shares granted, and amortization of intangible assets is subject to acquisition activity, which varies from period to period and amortization of intangibles expense is primarily related to the effects of push down accounting resulting from acquisitions.
We present these non-GAAP financial measures because we believe they are frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. Furthermore, we believe they are helpful in highlighting trends in our operating results by focusing on our core operating results and are useful to evaluate our performance in conjunction with our GAAP financial measures. Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted Earnings per Share and Adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial measures and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income, net income or earnings per share as a measure of operating performance or cash flows or as a measure of liquidity. Non-GAAP financial measures are not necessarily calculated the same way by different companies and should not be considered a substitute for or superior to GAAP measures.
Adjusted EBITDA is one of the primary metrics used by management to evaluate the financial performance of our business because it excludes, among other things, the effects of certain transactions that are outside the control of management, while other measures can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the jurisdictions in which we operate and capital investments.
In particular, Adjusted EBITDA is subject to certain limitations, including the following:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the amounts necessary to service interest or principal payments on our Credit Agreement;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income tax provision (benefit), and because the payment of taxes is part of our operations, tax provision is a necessary element of our costs and ability to operate;
•Although depreciation and amortization are eliminated in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any costs of such replacements;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the noncash component of share-based compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters we consider not to be reflective, on a recurring basis, of our ongoing operations; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We adjust for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA, as well as our other non-GAAP financial measures, only as supplemental information.
Index
Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Earnings per Share
Adjusted Net Income is defined as net income adjusted to add back certain charges and expenses, such as non-cash amortization of intangible assets resulting from push-down accounting, which will recur in future periods until these assets have been fully amortized, and excludes the amortization of other intangible assets related to the acquisition of Company-operated stores, non-cash compensation costs, litigation settlements and other items set forth in the table below, as these charges and expenses are not considered a part of our core business operations and are not an indicator of ongoing, future company performance.
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Basic and Diluted is calculated by dividing Adjusted Net Income by GAAP weighted-average common shares outstanding (basic and diluted).
Adjusted Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $57.5 million, representing an increase of $15.2 million, or 35.7%, from Adjusted Net Income of $42.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Adjusted Net Income was primarily due to the increase in net income discussed above and certain higher adjusting items detailed in the table below.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted Net Income:
(a)Represents share-based compensation relating to equity awards granted to employees and independent directors of the Company.
(b)Represents expenses incurred for professional and legal fees in connection with secondary offerings for the Company’s common stock.
(c)Represents legal fees for the settlement of a class action lawsuit related to the TCPA.
(d)Represents two separate losses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the closure of financial institutions in Mexico.
(e)Represents professional and legal fees incurred in potential acquisitions, which are included within “Other selling, general and administrative expenses” in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
(f)Represents primarily loss on disposal of fixed assets, including a write-off of software development expenditures in an amount of $1.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and foreign currency (gains) losses.
(g)Represents the amortization of certain intangible assets that resulted from the application of push-down accounting.
(h)Represents the current and deferred tax impact of the taxable adjustments to net income using the Company’s blended federal and state tax rate for each period. Relevant tax-deductible adjustments include all adjustments to net income.
Index
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Basic (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.49, representing an increase of $0.38, or 34.2%, compared to $1.11 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Adjusted Earnings per Share - Diluted (previously defined and used as described above) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.47, representing an increase of $0.37, or 33.6%, compared to $1.10 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the reconciliation of GAAP Earnings per Share, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted Earnings per Share:
NM - Per share amounts are not meaningful.
The table above may contain slight summation differences due to rounding.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income before depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income taxes, and also adjusted to add back certain charges and expenses, such as non-cash compensation costs and other items set forth in the table below, as these charges and expenses are not considered a part of our core business operations and are not an indicator of ongoing, future company performance.
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $86.7 million, representing an increase of $18.3 million, or 26.7%, from $68.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to the increase in net income discussed above and certain higher adjusting items detailed in the table below.
The following table presents the reconciliation of Net Income, our closest GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
Index
(a)Represents share-based compensation relating to equity awards granted to employees and independent directors of the Company.
(b)Represents expenses incurred for professional and legal fees in connection with secondary offerings for the Company’s common stock.
(c)Represents legal fees for the settlement of a class action lawsuit related to the TCPA.
(d)Represents two separate losses during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to the closure of financial institutions in Mexico.
(e)Represents professional and legal fees incurred in potential acquisitions, which are included within “Other selling, general and administrative expenses” in our consolidated statements of income and comprehensive income.
(f)Represents primarily loss on disposal of fixed assets, including a write-off of software development expenditures in an amount of $1.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and foreign currency (gains) losses.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
A discussion of changes in our results of operations from fiscal 2020 to fiscal 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K, but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 15, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov and at www.intermexonline.com, by clicking “Investors” located at the bottom of the page.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We consider liquidity in terms of cash flows from operations and their sufficiency to fund business operations, including working capital needs, debt service, acquisitions, capital expenditures, contractual obligations and other commitments. In particular, to meet our payment service obligations at all times, we must have sufficient highly liquid assets and be able to move funds on a timely basis.
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash generated by operating activities supplemented with borrowings under our revolving credit facility. Our primary cash needs are for day-to-day operations, to pay interest and principal on our indebtedness, to fund working capital requirements and to make capital expenditures.
Notwithstanding the recent effects of the COVID-19 pandemic in the U.S. economy, we have funded and still expect to continue funding our liquidity requirements through internally generated funds, supplemented in the ordinary course, with borrowings under our revolving credit facility. While our operating cash flows may be affected by the economic conditions resulting from the pandemic and other factors, we maintain a strong cash balance position and have access to committed funding sources, which we have used only on a limited and ordinary course basis during the year ended December 31, 2021. Therefore, we believe that our projected cash flows generated from operations, together with borrowings under our revolving credit facility are sufficient to fund our principal debt payments, interest expense, our working capital needs and our expected capital expenditures for at least the next twelve months.
Index
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
The Company and certain of its domestic subsidiaries as borrowers and the other guarantors from time to time party thereto (collectively, the “Loan Parties”) entered into a financing agreement with a group of banking institutions, dated November 7, 2018 and further amended on various dates (as amended, the “Original Credit Agreement”). The Original Credit Agreement provided for a $45.0 million revolving credit facility, a $90.0 million term loan facility and an up to $30.0 million incremental facility of which an aggregate of $22.0 million was utilized prior to entry into the A&R Credit Agreement. The Original Credit Agreement also provided for the issuance of letters of credit, which would reduce availability under the revolving credit facility. The maturity date of the Original Credit Agreement was November 7, 2023.
On June 24, 2021, the Loan Parties entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “A&R Credit Agreement”) with a group of banking institutions. The A&R Credit Agreement amended and restated in its entirety the Original Credit Agreement. The A&R Credit Agreement provides for a $150.0 million revolving credit facility, an $87.5 million term loan facility and an uncommitted incremental facility, which may be utilized for additional revolving or term loans, of up to $70.0 million. The A&R Credit Agreement also provides for the issuance of letters of credit, which would reduce availability under the revolving credit facility. The proceeds of the term loan were used to refinance the existing term loan under the Original Credit Agreement, and the revolving credit facility is available for working capital, general corporate purposes and to pay fees and expenses in connection with this transaction. The maturity date of the A&R Credit Agreement is June 24, 2026.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total indebtedness of $85.3 million, consisting of borrowings under the term loan facility and excluding debt origination costs of $2.2 million. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no outstanding amounts drawn on the revolving credit facility. There were $220.0 million of additional borrowings available under these facilities as of December 31, 2021.
At the election of the Company, interest on the term loan facility and revolving credit facility under the A&R Credit Agreement is determined by reference to either LIBOR (subject to replacement) or a “base rate”, in each case plus an applicable margin ranging between 2.50% and 3.00% per annum for LIBOR loans or between 1.50% and 2.00% per annum for base rate loans depending on the level of our consolidated leverage ratio, as calculated pursuant to the terms of the A&R Credit Agreement. The Company is also required to pay a fee on the unused portion of the revolving credit facility equal to 0.35% per annum. The effective interest rates for the year ended December 31, 2021 for the term loan and revolving credit facility were 4.23% and 0.78%, respectively. Interest is payable (x)(i) generally on the last day of each interest period selected for LIBOR loans, but in any event, not less frequently than every three months, and (ii) on the last business day of each quarter for base rate loans and (y) at final maturity. The A&R Credit Agreement contains provisions for the replacement of the benchmark for interest rates in light of the cessation of the publication of LIBOR rates.
The principal amount of the term loan facility under the A&R Credit Agreement must be repaid in consecutive quarterly installments of 5.0% in years 1 and 2, 7.5% in year 3, and 10.0% in years 4 and 5, in each case on the last day of each quarter, commencing in September 2021 with a final balloon payment at maturity. The term loans under the A&R Credit Agreement may be prepaid at any time without premium or penalty. Revolving loans may be borrowed, repaid and reborrowed from time to time in accordance with the terms and conditions of the A&R Credit Agreement. The Company is also required to repay the loans upon receipt of net proceeds from certain casualty events, upon the disposition of certain property and upon incurrence of indebtedness not permitted by the A&R Credit Agreement. In addition, the Company is required to make mandatory prepayments annually from excess cash flow if the Company’s consolidated leverage ratio (as calculated under the A&R Credit Agreement) is greater than or equal to 3.0, and the remainder of any such excess cash flow is contributed to the available amount which may be used for a variety of purposes, including investments and distributions.
The A&R Credit Agreement contains financial covenants that require the Company to maintain a quarterly minimum fixed charge coverage ratio of 1.25:1.00 and a quarterly maximum consolidated leverage ratio of 3.25:1.00. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants of the A&R Credit Agreement. The A&R Credit Agreement also contains covenants that limit the Company’s and its subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, grant liens, incur additional indebtedness, make acquisitions or investments, dispose of certain assets, change the nature of their businesses, enter into certain transactions with affiliates or amend the terms of material indebtedness.
In addition, the A&R Credit Agreement generally restricts the payment of dividends or cash distributions by the Company with certain exceptions, including the following: i) to repurchase the Company’s common stock from current or former employees in an aggregate amount of up to $10.0 million per calendar year, and ii) other restricted payments in an aggregate amount not to exceed $40.0 million plus the Available Amount (as defined in the A&R Credit Agreement).
The obligations under the A&R Credit Agreement are guaranteed by the Company and certain domestic subsidiaries of the Company and secured by liens on substantially all of the assets of the Loan Parties, subject to certain exclusions and limitations.
Our indebtedness could adversely affect our ability to raise additional capital, limit our ability to react to changes in the economy or our industry, expose us to interest rate risk and prevent us from meeting our obligations. See “Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our
Index
Indebtedness-We have a substantial amount of indebtedness, which may limit our operating flexibility and could adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.”
Repurchase Program
In August 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program (the “Repurchase Program”) that authorizes the Company to purchase up to $40.0 million of outstanding shares of the Company’s common stock. Under the Repurchase Program, the Company is authorized to repurchase shares from time to time in accordance with applicable laws, both on the open market and in privately negotiated transactions and may include the use of derivative contracts or structured share repurchase agreements. The timing and amount of repurchases depends on several factors, including market and business conditions, the trading price of the Company’s common stock and the nature of other investment opportunities. The Repurchase Program may be limited, suspended or discontinued at any time without prior notice. The Repurchase Program does not have an expiration date. Under the terms of the A&R Credit Agreement, the Company has restrictions that limit the maximum amount of repurchases to (i) $40.0 million in the aggregate (plus the Available Amount as defined in the A&R Credit Agreement) and (ii) $10.0 million annually for shares held by any current or former officer, director, employee or consultant (or any spouses, ex-spouses or estates of the foregoing) of the Company or its subsidiaries.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company purchased 341,522 shares for an aggregate purchase price totaling $5.6 million. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining amount available for future share repurchases under the Repurchase Program was $34.4 million.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the changes to our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $78.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a change of $79.0 million from net cash used in operating activities of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change of $79.0 million is primarily a result of $65.7 million related to changes in working capital, which varies due to timing of money transmissions and payments, and by additional cash generated by our improved operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, which reflected the further growth of our business.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $6.7 million from $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cash used was primarily due to higher purchases of property and equipment as a result of our continued growth of sending agents, as well as, upgrading equipment of existing agents during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities was $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of a $40.1 million debt repayment and $2.9 million of debt origination costs in connection with the refinancing of the Original Credit Agreement, $4.1 million in scheduled quarterly payments due on the term loan facility, $5.6 million of repurchases of common stock and $0.8 million of payments for stock-based awards for shares withheld in connection with stock-based compensation arrangements and related payments to taxing authorities, offset by $40.2 million borrowings in connection with the refinancing of the Original Credit Agreement and $3.8 million in proceeds from issuance of stock as a result of the exercise of options.
Index
Net cash used in financing activities was $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which consisted of $7.7 million in scheduled quarterly repayments due on the term loan facility, offset by $1.5 million of proceeds from issuance of stock as a result of the exercise of options.
Contractual Obligations
The following table includes aggregated information about contractual obligations that affect our liquidity and capital needs. At December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations over the next several periods were as follows:
Our consolidated balance sheet reflects $83.1 million of debt as of December 31, 2021, as the principal payment obligations of $85.3 million are gross of unamortized debt origination costs of $2.2 million. The above table reflects the principal and interest of the revolver and term loan under the A&R Credit Agreement that will be paid through the maturity of the debt using the rates in effect on December 31, 2021 and assuming no voluntary prepayments of principal.
Non-cancelable operating leases include various office leases, including our office headquarters.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions about future events that affect amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and related notes, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. Our significant accounting policies are discussed in Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
Allowance for Credit Losses
Accounts receivable are recorded upon initiation of the wire transfer and are typically due to us within five days. We maintain an allowance for credit losses for estimated losses resulting primarily from the inability of our sending agents to make required payments. When preparing these estimates, we consider a number of factors, including the aging of a sending agent’s account, creditworthiness of specific sending agents, historical trends and other information. One of the most significant judgments used in the allowance for credit losses estimate relates to the net historical loss rates for the different pools of accounts and advances receivable grouped based on similar characteristics.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets result primarily from business combination acquisitions. Intangible assets include agent relationships, trade name, developed technology and other intangibles, all with finite lives. Our agent relationships, trade name and developed technology are currently amortized utilizing an accelerated method over their estimated useful lives. Other intangible assets are amortized straight-line over a useful life of 10 years. Upon the acquisition, the purchase price is first allocated to identifiable assets and liabilities, including the trade name and other intangibles, with any remaining purchase price recorded as goodwill.
Goodwill is not amortized; however, it is assessed for impairment at least annually, at the beginning of the fourth quarter, or more frequently if triggering events occur. For purposes of the annual impairment test, management initially performs a qualitative assessment, which includes consideration of the economic, industry and market conditions in addition to our overall financial performance and the performance of these assets. If our qualitative assessment does not conclude that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, we perform a quantitative analysis. In a quantitative test, the fair value of a reporting unit is determined based on a discounted cash flow analysis. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various assumptions, including assumptions about future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on our long-term projections. Assumptions used in our impairment testing are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If not, we recognize an impairment equal to the difference between the carrying amount of the reporting unit and its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
Index
The Company continuously monitors for events and circumstances that could negatively impact the key assumptions in determining fair value. While the Company believes the judgments and assumptions used in the goodwill impairment tests are reasonable, different assumptions or changes in general industry, market and macro-economic conditions, including a more prolonged and/or severe COVID-19 pandemic, could change the estimated fair values and, therefore, future impairment charges could be required, which could be material to the consolidated financial statements.
The Company evaluates amortizable intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Upon such an occurrence, recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by comparing the carrying amount of an asset to forecasted undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. Fair value is determined based on discounted cash flows, appraised values or management’s estimates, depending upon the nature of the assets.
Uncertain Tax Position
The Company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. federal jurisdiction and various state jurisdictions and our foreign subsidiaries are subject to taxes by local tax authorities. As required by the uncertain tax position guidance, we recognize the financial statement benefit of a position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the positions following an audit. Tax regulations within each jurisdiction are subject to the interpretation of the related tax laws and regulations and require significant judgment to apply. We apply the uncertain tax position guidance to all tax positions for which the statute of limitations remains open. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on the Company’s financial condition and operating results.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Part II, Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies”, for further discussion.