Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of gamma-delta T cell therapies for the treatment of cancer. Gamma-delta T cells are naturally occurring immune cells that embody properties of both the innate and adaptive immune systems and can intrinsically differentiate between healthy and diseased tissue. These cells serve as a functional bridge between innate and adaptive immunity to contribute to direct tumor killing, as well as immune cell recruitment and activation to drive deeper immune responses. The pivotal role of gamma-delta T cells in immune function and activation, against diseases such as cancer, underscores their therapeutic potential across a wide range of solid and hematologic malignancies. We develop ex vivo-expanded and activated gamma-delta T cell candidates based upon our deep expertise in gamma-delta T cell biology, proprietary genetic engineering and cell-type specific manufacturing capabilities, which we refer to collectively as our DeltEx platform. Our platform employs allogeneic, autologous and genetically modified approaches to advance novel cell therapies, which are designed to effectively identify and eradicate tumor cells. We are currently the most clinically advanced gamma-delta T cell company.
Our lead product candidates are in Phase 1 clinical trials: INB-200, for the treatment of newly diagnosed glioblastoma, or GBM, and INB-100, for the treatment of patients with high-risk leukemias that are undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, or HSCT. For INB-200, we expect to report initial topline Phase 1 clinical trial results in the second half of 2022. For INB-100, we expect to report initial results from the first cohort in our Phase 1 clinical trial in 2022, with topline results for all cohorts in 2023. In addition, we plan to initiate a new Phase 1b/2 clinical program INB-400 in which both allogeneic and autologous genetically modified gamma-delta T cells will be assessed in both relapsed and newly diagnosed GBM patients. A portfolio of preclinical programs, including INB-300, focused on addressing various solid tumors using a dedicated gamma-delta chimeric antigen receptor T cell, or CAR-T cell, construct is also in progress. We will continue to advance internal research, including advancing manufacturing approaches and the application of our proprietary DeltEx DRI approach into additional solid tumor indications. We expect to file several INDs for our pipeline product candidates through 2023, with the first IND expected to be filed by the second half of 2022.
On August 3, 2021, we completed our IPO, whereby we issued and sold 4,000,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $10.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $40.0 million. We received approximately $32.3 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
Since inception in 2016, our operations have focused on identifying and developing potential product candidates, conducting clinical trials, organizing and staffing the Company, business planning, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, raising capital, and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any product candidates approved for sale and have not generated any revenue. We have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity and equity-linked securities. Through December 31, 2021, we raised an aggregate of $75.6 million of gross proceeds from the sale of our securities, including through our IPO.
We have incurred significant operating losses since our inception. Our net losses were $14.7 million and $8.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $32.7 million. We expect our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates through clinical trials, seek to expand our product candidate portfolio through developing additional product candidates, grow our clinical, regulatory and quality capabilities, and incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend on the successful development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates and do not enter into a third-party commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution activities. As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations or other strategic transactions. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including the periods of resurgences of cases relating to the spread of various strains such as the Delta and Omicron variants, has had a significant impact, both direct and indirect, on businesses and commerce, as certain worker shortages have occurred, supply chains have been disrupted, and facilities and productions have been suspended. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted and may continue to impact the clinical sites and startup activities for our Phase 1/2 clinical trial, including third-party manufacturing and logistics providers, which have disrupted and may continue to disrupt its clinical supply chain and the availability or cost of materials, and it has affected and may continue to affect the Company’s ability to timely initiate, enroll and complete its clinical trials, conduct regulatory activities and operate its business more generally. The pandemic may impact the timing of regulatory approval of the investigational new drug application for clinical trials, the enrollment of any clinical trials that are approved, the availability of clinical trial materials and regulatory approval and commercialization of our products. The pandemic may also impact the capital markets, inflation expectations and the Company’s ability to access capital, which could negatively impact short-term and long-term liquidity. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly continue to impact our business, results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, including ongoing and future clinical trials and research and development costs, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of evolving variants of COVID-19, the actions taken to contain or treat it, including the likelihood of achieving widespread global vaccination rates, the duration and intensity of the related effects of the pandemic and the uncertainty of the timing of the broader economic recovery to pre-pandemic levels.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Since inception, we have not generated any revenue and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future. If our development efforts for one or more of our product candidates are successful and result in regulatory approval, or if we enter into collaboration or license agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue in the future from a combination of product sales or payments from collaboration or license agreements.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates, and include:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits and stock-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•fees paid to consultants for services directly related to our product development and regulatory efforts;
•preclinical studies expenses associated with conducting preclinical studies performed by ourselves, outside vendors or academic collaborators;
•expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs, as well as contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, and consultants that conduct and provide supplies for our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•costs associated with preclinical activities and development activities;
•costs associated with our intellectual property portfolio; and
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Costs for external development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expenses. Beginning with fiscal year 2020, we allocate our direct external research and development costs across each product candidate. Preclinical expenses consist of external research and development costs associated with activities to support our current and future clinical programs, but are not allocated by product candidate due to the overlap of the potential benefit of those efforts across multiple product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue clinical development for our product candidates and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates. If any of our product candidates enter into later stages of clinical
development, they will generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive and finance functions. General and administrative expenses also include professional fees for legal, accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; travel expenses; director and officer insurance expenses as a publicly traded company; and facility-related expenses, which include allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs not included in research and development.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as our organization and headcount needed in the future grow to support continued research and development activities and potential commercialization of our product candidates. These increases will likely include increased costs related to building a team to support our administrative, accounting and finance, communications, legal and business development efforts. In addition, we expect increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of additional personnel, accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred or for the research and development tax credits earned in each year, as we believe, based upon the weight of available evidence, that it is more likely than not that all of our net operating loss carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards will not be realized.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $7.3 million and $5.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $1.9 million was primarily due to increased third-party clinical trial-related activities and contract manufacturing costs for the ongoing INB-200 clinical trial and increased personnel related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation due to increased headcount.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $7.3 million and $3.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $4.1 million was primarily due to increased personnel costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation due to increased headcount and increased legal expenses related to the IPO, insurance and activities as a public company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $37.0 million. To date, we have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity and equity-linked securities. Through December 31, 2021, we have raised an aggregate of $75.6 million of gross
proceeds from the sale of our securities, including through our IPO. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021, will fund our projected operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months.
Our plan of operation is to continue implementing our business strategy, continue research and development of INB-100 and INB-200 and our other product candidates and continue to expand our research pipeline and our internal research and development capabilities.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our available cash is sufficient to fund existing and planned cash requirements. We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials of our product candidates. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs.
Additionally, the process of testing drug candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress in these trials is uncertain. We cannot estimate the actual amounts necessary to successfully complete the development and commercialization of our product candidates or whether, or when, we may achieve profitability. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, timing, progress, costs, and results of discovery, preclinical development, and clinical trials for our current and future product candidates;
•the number of clinical trials required for regulatory approval of our current and future product candidates;
•the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of any of our current and future product candidates;
•the cost of manufacturing clinical and commercial supplies of our current and future product candidates;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending any intellectual property-related claims, including any claims by third parties that we are infringing upon their intellectual property rights;
•our ability to maintain existing, and establish new, strategic collaborations, licensing, or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements, including the timing and amount of any future milestone, royalty, or other payments due under any such agreement;
•the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•expenses to attract, hire and retain skilled personnel;
•the costs of operating as a public company;
•our ability to establish a commercially viable pricing structure and obtain approval for coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party and government payers;
•addressing any potential interruptions, delays and/or cost increases resulting from factors related to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and other geopolitical tensions, such as Russia's recent incursion into Ukraine;
•economic weakness, including inflation, or political instability in particular economies and markets;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate.
Since inception, we have not generated any product revenue and have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates, which are in various phases of preclinical and clinical development, and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products for the foreseeable future, if at all. It is likely that we will seek third-party collaborators for the future commercialization of our product candidates that are approved for
marketing. However, we may seek to commercialize our products at our own expense, which would require us to incur significant additional expenses for marketing, sales, manufacturing and distribution.
Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations from the sale of additional equity or debt financings, or other capital which comes in the form of strategic collaborations, licensing, or other arrangements. In the event that additional financing is required, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of equity or convertible debt securities, it may result in dilution to our existing stockholders. Debt financing or preferred equity financing, if available, may result in increased fixed payment obligations, and the existence of securities with rights that may be senior to those of our common stock. If we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations.
If we raise funds through strategic collaboration, licensing or other arrangements, we may relinquish significant rights or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions, increases in inflation expectations and the recent disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and other geopolitical tensions, such as Russia’s recent incursion into Ukraine. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Material Cash Requirements
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
In addition, we entered into a lease agreement with a third party to build out our labs in Birmingham, Alabama for an aggregate expected cost of $4.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, $0.2 million in expenses have been incurred. For more information on the lease agreement, see Note 14 of our financial statements.
Except as disclosed in the table above, we have no long-term debt or capital leases and no material non-cancelable purchase commitments with service providers, as we have generally contracted on a cancelable, purchase-order basis. We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with equipment and reagent vendors, CROs, CMOs and other third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts are cancelable by us upon prior notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments are not included in the preceding table as the amount and timing of such payments are not known.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods below (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities was $13.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to our net loss of $14.7 million and decreases in our accrued expenses and other current liabilities along with prepaid expenses mainly due to
lower legal accruals and prepayments as a result of the completion of the IPO, partially offset by $2.2 million in stock-based compensation due to increased employee headcount resulting from growth in our business.
Cash used in operating activities was $7.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to our net loss of $8.6 million offset by increases in our operating assets and liabilities of $0.6 million and increases in non-cash charges of $0.8 million. Increases in our operating assets and liabilities consisted primarily of $0.8 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities due to increased legal expenses related to preparing for the IPO. Increases in our non-cash charges consisted primarily of $0.4 million in stock-based compensation due to higher employee headcount as the Company expanded.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities was $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to construction in progress activity in relation to leasehold improvements to the Alabama leased space.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $33.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to proceeds received from the issuance and sale of common stock in our IPO.
Cash provided by financing activities was $24.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the issuance of Series A convertible preferred stock.
Critical Accounting Estimates
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based on our financial statements, which are prepared in accordance with US GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates.
Critical Accounting Policies
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our financial statements located in “Part I - Financial Information, Item 1. Financial Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have listed below our critical accounting estimates that we believe to have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting estimates have not differed materially from actual results.
Research and Development Costs
We expense all costs incurred in performing research and development activities. Research and development expenses include salaries and benefits, stock-based compensation expense, lab supplies and facility costs, as well as fees paid to nonemployees and entities that conduct certain research and development activities on the Company’s behalf and expenses incurred in connection with license agreements. Non-refundable advance payments for goods or services that will be used for rendered or future research and development activities are deferred and amortized over the period that the goods are delivered, or the related services are performed, subject to an assessment of recoverability.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or the amount of prepaid expenses accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for our stock-based compensation as an expense in the statements of operations based on the awards’ grant date fair values. We account for forfeitures as they occur by reversing any expense recognized for unvested awards.
We estimate the fair value of options granted using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires inputs based on certain subjective assumptions, including (a) the expected stock price volatility, (b) the calculation of expected term of the award, (c) the risk-free interest rate and (d) expected dividends. Due to the lack of a public market for our common stock and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption. The computation of expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of a representative group of companies with similar characteristics to us, including stage of product development and life science industry focus. We use the simplified method as allowed by the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, Staff Accounting Bulletin, or SAB, No. 107, Share-Based Payment, to calculate the expected term for options granted to employees, as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. The risk-free interest rate is based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock. The fair value of stock-based payments is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period which is generally the vesting period. In the periods prior to the IPO, the determination of fair value of our common stock required significant judgment. In the periods following the IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined based on the quoted market price of our common stock.
Prior to our IPO, there was no public market for our common stock, and consequently, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our Board of Directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering third-party valuations of our common stock as well as our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent third-party valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We qualify as an EGC, as defined in the JOBS Act. As an EGC, we may take advantage of specified reduced disclosure and other requirements that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies, including reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements, exemption from the requirements to hold non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation and golden parachute payments and exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting.
We may take advantage of these exemptions until December 31, 2026 or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an EGC earlier if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue, we have more than $700.0 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates (and we have been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed one annual report on Form 10-K) or we issue more than $1.0 billion of non-convertible debt securities over a three-year period. For so long as we remain an EGC, we are permitted, and intend, to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not EGCs. We may choose to take advantage of some, but not all, of the available exemptions.
In addition, the JOBS Act provides that an EGC can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an EGC to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected not to “opt out” of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we will adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard and will do so until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an EGC. Therefore, the reported results of operations contained in our financial statements may not be directly comparable to those of other public companies.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates was less than $700 million at the closing of the IPO and our annual revenue for 2020 was less than $100 million. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million.
If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an EGC, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to EGCs, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.