Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors,” our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company with a pipeline of novel biologic therapeutic candidates, developed using our protein engineering expertise and proprietary sdAb platform. Our sdAb platform allows us to pursue validated targets with clinical promise, but where other antibody and biologic based approaches have failed. Highly modular, our sdAbs can be combined with precise valencies and multiple specificities, creating therapeutic candidates designed to be capable of enhanced cell signaling, conditional activation or combined synergistic functions.
We currently have four programs in ongoing clinical trials. Three of these programs are for the treatment of various cancers, and one for the treatment of AATD. INBRX-101 is an optimized, recombinant AAT augmentation therapy candidate for AATD. In October 2021, we announced interim results from the Phase 1 clinical trial. The data from the SAD cohorts revealed the potential to achieve normal AAT levels with monthly dosing and also showed a favorable safety and tolerability profile with no drug-related severe or serious adverse events at doses up to and including 120 mg/kg single dose and 80 mg/kg multi-dose administered intravenously.
Our most advanced therapeutic candidate, INBRX-109, is a tetravalent DR5 agonist currently being evaluated in patients diagnosed with difficult-to-treat cancers, such as chondrosarcoma, mesothelioma and pancreatic adenocarcinoma. We submitted an amended Investigational New Drug Application, or IND, to the FDA for INBRX-109 in April 2021 and initiated a potentially registration-enabling trial evaluating INBRX-109 in patients diagnosed with conventional chondrosarcoma in June 2021. INBRX-106 is a hexavalent OX40 agonist, currently being investigated as a single agent and in combination with Keytruda, a PD-1 blocking checkpoint inhibitor, in patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors. Both of the INBRX-109 and INBRX-106 programs are designed to achieve target agonism through precise control of therapeutic valency. INBRX-105 is a conditional 4-1BB agonist that is currently being investigated as a single agent and in combination with Keytruda in patients with locally advanced or metastatic solid tumors. We anticipate additional data releases from all four of our clinical programs over the next year.
We have developed a diverse pipeline of therapeutic candidates that are specifically designed to leverage the power of our core sdAb platform and protein engineering expertise, as shown below:
INBRX-101 INBRX-109 INBRX-106 INBRX-105
AAT-Fc fusion protein Tetravalent DR5 agonist Hexavalent OX40 agonist PD-L1x4-1BB tetravalent conditional agonist
__________________
* Commercialization and development rights outside of the United States and Canada, subject to an option agreement with Chiesi
** Third party partnership with Transcenta, currently in place for development and commercialization in China, Hong Kong, Macau and/or Taiwan.
*** Third party partnership with Elpiscience, currently in place for development and commercialization in China, Hong Kong, Macau and/or Taiwan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
In August 2020, we completed our IPO of 8,050,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $17.00 per share, which included the exercise in full by the underwriters of their option to purchase 1,050,000 additional shares of our common stock. Our aggregate net proceeds from the offering were $125.9 million, net of underwriting discounts, commissions and offering costs.
Other sources of capital raised to fund our operations have been comprised of the sale of equity securities, payments received from commercial partners for licensing rights to our therapeutic candidates under development and grants, the 2020 Loan Agreement with Oxford, including $10.0 million of gross proceeds borrowed in July 2020, and
proceeds from the sale and issuance of convertible promissory notes in May 2019 and April 2020, or the 2019 Note and the 2020 Notes, respectively. In November 2020 and June 2021, we amended the 2020 Loan Agreement which provided for two additional tranches of term loans, including $20.0 million of gross proceeds received in November 2020, and an additional $40.0 million of gross proceeds in June 2021. In February 2022, we further amended the 2020 Loan Agreement which provided for four additional tranches of term loans, including $40.0 million of gross proceeds received in February 2022, with an additional $90.0 million to be funded in three future tranches.
In September 2021, we entered into the Sales Agreement, with the Sales Agent, under which we may, from time to time, sell shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $200.0 million through the Sales Agent. Sales of our common stock made pursuant to the Sales Agreement will be made under our $400.0 million Shelf Registration on Form S-3ASR, which became automatically effective upon filing on September 3, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we have sold 921,042 shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement for net proceeds of $40.2 million, after deducting commissions.
Future Funding Requirements
Since our inception, we have devoted substantially all of our efforts to therapeutic drug discovery and development, conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, enabling manufacturing activities in support of our therapeutic candidates, hiring to support our research and development activities and financial reporting capabilities, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, and raising capital to support and expand these activities. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
Our net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $81.8 million and $76.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $227.1 million and cash and cash equivalents of $131.3 million. Based upon our current operating plans, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months from the date these consolidated financial statements are issued. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement that involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary materially. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could deplete our capital resources sooner than we expect.
The process of conducting preclinical studies and testing product candidates in clinical trials is costly, and the timing of progress and expenses in these studies and trials is uncertain. We expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect our research and development expenses to increase as we continue our development of, and seek marketing approvals for, our therapeutic candidates (especially as we move more candidates from preclinical to clinical development as well as study candidates in later stages of clinical development), and begin to commercialize any approved products, if ever. If we elect to proceed with the commercialization of any of our product candidates, we would incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution. We also expect our general and administrative expenses and losses to increase as we hire additional personnel and incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, and compliance costs, and as we incur increased costs from investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including strategic licensing and collaboration or other similar agreements. However, there can be no assurance as to the availability or terms upon which such finances or capital might be available in the future. If we are unable to secure adequate additional funding, we will need to reevaluate our operating plan and may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, delay, scale back or eliminate some or all of our development programs, or relinquish rights to our intellectual property on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. These actions could materially impact our business, results of operations, financial condition, and prospects.
Our future liquidity and capital funding requirements will depend on numerous factors, including:
•the outcome, costs and timing of preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current or future therapeutic candidates;
•whether and when we are able to obtain marketing approval to market any of our therapeutic candidates;
•our ability to successfully commercialize any therapeutic candidates that receive marketing approval;
•the emergence and effect of competing or complementary therapeutics or therapeutic candidates;
•our ability to maintain, expand and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with the licensing, filing, prosecution, defense and enforcement of any patents or other intellectual property rights;
•our ability to retain our current employees and the need and ability to hire additional management and scientific and medical personnel;
•the terms and timing of any strategic licensing, collaboration or other similar agreement that we have or may establish;
•our ability to repay, refinance or restructure our indebtedness when payment is due, including in the event such indebtedness is accelerated;
•the valuation of our capital stock; and
•the continuing or future effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and related uncertainties on capital and financial markets.
We do not own or operate manufacturing facilities for the production of any of our therapeutic candidates, nor do we have plans to develop our own manufacturing operations in the foreseeable future. We currently rely on a limited number of third-party contract manufacturers for all of our required raw materials, antibodies, and other biologics for our preclinical research, clinical trials, and if and when applicable, commercial product, and employ internal resources to manage our manufacturing relationships with these third parties.
Commitments
Our material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations primarily relate to our lease obligations, debt, and services provided by our CROs and CDMOs.
We have two leases for our laboratory and office space, which expire in 2025, with an option to extend an additional five years. As of December 31, 2021, we have future minimum rental obligations under these leases of $7.7 million, of which $2.2 million and $5.5 million are current and non-current, respectively. For more information regarding these lease agreements, refer to Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements.
Under the Amended 2020 Loan Agreement, we are required to make only interest payments through 2024, with all principal payments and final fee payments beginning in 2025. As of December 31, 2021, we have an obligation of $96.1 million of long-term debt, including interest, of which $5.7 million and $90.4 million are current and non-current, respectively. For more information regarding the 2020 Loan Agreement, refer to Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs related to our ongoing preclinical studies and clinical trials with CDMOs for clinical supplies and manufacturing scale-up activities. These contracts are generally cancellable, with notice, at our option. We have recorded accrued expenses of approximately $7.4 million in our consolidated balance sheets for expenditures incurred by CROs and CDMOs as of December 31, 2021.
While these contracts are generally cancellable, some may contain specific activities that involve one or more non-cancellable commitments, including minimum purchase commitments, binding annual forecasts, and capital equipment investments. Additionally, depending on the timing and reasoning of the exit, certain termination penalties may apply and can range from the cost of work performed to date up to twelve months of future committed manufacturing costs. As of December 31, 2021, the non-cancellable portion of these contracts total in aggregate, excluding amounts recorded in accounts payable and accrued expenses as of this date, approximately $2.4 million.
License and Collaboration Agreements
Celgene Agreement
On July 1, 2013, we entered into the Celgene Agreement, pursuant to which we granted Celgene the Celgene Licensed Intellectual Property. Per the terms of the Celgene Agreement, Celgene is operationally and financially responsible for the development, manufacturing and commercialization activities of Celgene Licensed Intellectual Property and any additional related antibodies covered by the Celgene Agreement.
As payment for the license granted in the Celgene Agreement, we may be eligible to receive development and regulatory milestones of an aggregate of $934.1 million, assuming the achievement of all potential milestones in the Celgene Agreement, as well as percentage tiered royalties based on future worldwide sales, with rates ranging between the high single-digits and low teens, subject to potential reduction when and if comparable third party products attain certain levels of competitive market share (on a country-by-country basis) and, subject to certain limitations, payments to third parties for third-party intellectual property rights. We are obligated to pay 2% of future amounts received under the Celgene Agreement to advisors who assisted us with the negotiations and other matters in connection with the Celgene Agreement.
2seventy bio Agreements
On December 20, 2018, we entered into an exclusive license agreement with bluebird to research, develop and commercialize CAR T-cell therapies using our proprietary sdAb platform. In November 2021, bluebird assigned the 2018 2seventy Agreement to its affiliate 2seventy, in connection with an internal restructuring and subsequent spin-out of 2seventy. Under the terms of this license agreement, we will provide 2seventy the exclusive worldwide rights to develop, manufacture and commercialize certain cell therapy products containing sdAbs directed to various cancer targets. In January 2019, we received a $7.0 million payment and pursuant to the license agreement, we are entitled to receive developmental milestone payments of up to an aggregate of $51.5 million per therapeutic, as well as percentage tiered royalties on future product sales with rates in the mid-single digits. In August 2021, we received a $2.0 million milestone payment under this agreement.
On June 9, 2020, we entered into the 2020 2seventy Agreement, was also assigned to 2seventy in November 2021 in connection with bluebird’s internal restructuring and subsequent spin-out of 2seventy. We received a non-refundable upfront option fee of $0.2 million in connection with each of the two initial programs, or $0.4 million in aggregate, and we are entitled to an upfront option fee for each additional program. We also granted an option in which 2seventy may acquire an exclusive license with respect to all binders and cell therapy products developed under the 2020 2seventy Agreement, which entitles us to additional fees upon exercise of the option. We are also entitled to receive certain developmental milestone payments of up to an aggregate of $51.5 million per therapeutic, as well as percentage tiered royalties on future product sales with rates in the mid-single-digits.
In May 2021, pursuant to the option extension terms in the 2020 2seventy Agreement, bluebird requested to extend the option term for one of the initial programs by an additional six months in exchange for an option extension fee of $0.1 million. In August 2021, pursuant to the option exercise terms in the agreement, bluebird exercised its option to exclusively license one of the initial programs in exchange for an option exercise fee of $2.1 million, the payment of which was received in October 2021.
Chiesi
In May 2019, we entered into the Chiesi Option Agreement. Under this agreement, we granted to Chiesi an exclusive option to obtain an exclusive license to develop and commercialize INBRX-101 outside of the United States and Canada. Under the terms of the Chiesi Option Agreement, we received a one-time, non-refundable option initiation payment of $10.0 million in August 2019. Pursuant to the Chiesi Option Agreement, we are performing research and development services for Chiesi during the option period, which will continue (unless the Chiesi Option Agreement is terminated earlier by the Chiesi or the Company) until 60 days following the last to occur of (i) the Company’s delivery to Chiesi of the trial phase data for the first Phase I Clinical Trial, (ii) the Company’s delivery to Chiesi of the finalized minutes from the definitive FDA scientific advice meeting conducted following completion of such Phase I Clinical Trial, and (iii) the Company’s delivery to Chiesi of the finalized minutes from the definitive parallel EMA-HTA scientific advice meeting conducted following completion of such Phase I Clinical Trial.
If Chiesi chooses to exercise its option under the Chiesi Option Agreement, we will receive a one-time, non-refundable fee of $12.5 million upon the effective date of the definitive agreement granting Chiesi the exclusive license. If the option is exercised, under the license agreement, we may be entitled to receive specified milestone payments of up to $122.5 million, as well as royalties on future product sales.
Other Collaboration Agreements
In addition to these contracts, we have entered into strategic collaborations with other third parties, including Phylaxis BioScience, LLC, or Phylaxis, Transcenta, and Elpiscience. For more information regarding these agreements, refer to Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, all of our revenue has been derived from licenses with collaboration partners and grant awards. We have not generated any revenue from the commercial sale of approved therapeutic products, and we expect our revenue for the next several years will be derived primarily from payments under our current and any future grant awards and agreements with our collaboration partners.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
To date, our research and development expenses have related primarily to research activities, including our discovery efforts, and preclinical and clinical development and the manufacturing of our therapeutic candidates. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are capitalized until the goods or services are received. We do not track our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they primarily relate to personnel, early research and consumable costs, which are deployed across multiple projects under development.
Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•External expenses, consisting of:
◦expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical development of our programs;
◦clinical trials of our therapeutic candidates, including under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and CROs;
◦expenses associated with manufacturing our contract development and manufacturing therapeutic candidates including under agreements with CDMOs; and
◦other external expenses, such as laboratory services related to our discovery and development programs and other shared services, and
•Internal expenses, consisting of:
◦salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
◦facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for depreciation and amortization, rent and maintenance of facilities; and
◦other internal expenses, such as laboratory supplies and other shared research and development costs.
We expect that research and development expense will continue to increase over the next several years as we continue development of our therapeutic candidates currently in clinical stage development, support our preclinical programs, and continue to discover new therapeutic candidates, as well as increase our headcount. In particular, clinical development of our therapeutic candidates, as opposed to preclinical development, generally has higher development costs, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. Moreover, the costs associated with our CDMOs to manufacture our therapeutic candidates and future commercial products is also much more costly as compared to early stage preclinical development. We cannot determine with certainty the timing of initiation, the duration or the completion costs of current or future preclinical studies and clinical trials of our therapeutic candidates due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development. Preclinical
and clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations. We anticipate that we will make determinations as to which therapeutic candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each therapeutic candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the results of ongoing and future preclinical studies and clinical trials, regulatory developments and our ongoing assessments as to each therapeutic candidate’s commercial potential. We will need substantial additional capital in the future to support these efforts. In addition, we cannot forecast which therapeutic candidates may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Our clinical development costs may vary significantly based on factors such as:
•per patient trial costs;
•the number of trials required for approval;
•the number of sites included in the trials;
•the countries in which the trials are conducted
•the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
•the number of patients that participate in the trials;
•the number of doses that patients receive;
•the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
•potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
•the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow-up;
•the cost and timing of manufacturing of our therapeutic candidates;
•the phase and development of our therapeutic candidates;
•the efficacy and safety profile of our therapeutic candidates; and
•uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
G&A expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel engaged in G&A functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with accounting and audit services, legal services, commercial and business development and investor relations as well as consulting expense under agreements with third parties, such as consultants and contractors; and
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for depreciation and amortization, rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and supplies.
We expect our G&A expenses will continue to increase over the next several years as we continue to increase our headcount and incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, and compliance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with operating as a public company.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest expense on our debt from Oxford and, prior to conversion, interest expense related to the amortization of the debt discount related to the 2019 Note and the 2020 Notes. Other income (expense) also consists of gains or losses on the change in fair value of derivative liabilities and gains or losses on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our consolidated results of operations for each of the periods indicated (in thousands, except percentages):
License Fee Revenue
License fee revenue decreased by $5.7 million to $7.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $2.0 million upon the achievement of a milestone under our 2018 2seventy Agreement. Additionally, we recognized an additional $0.1 million and $2.1 million upon the extension of an option and the exercise of an option, respectively, under our 2020 2seventy Agreement. In addition, approximately $2.4 million of license fee revenue recognized was related to our agreements with Phylaxis, while approximately $0.5 million of license fee revenue recognized was related to our effort to satisfy the performance obligation relative to the total expense estimated to be incurred during the option period under our option agreement with Chiesi.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, $7.4 million of license fee revenue earned was related to our option agreement with Chiesi. Additionally, we achieved a milestone under our agreement with Elpiscience and recognized $2.0 million of revenue related to this agreement. Additionally, we recognized $2.0 million of revenue under our agreements with Phylaxis, $0.4 million under our 2020 2seventy Agreement, and another $1.1 million related to other license revenue from non-affiliates.
Grant Revenue
Grant revenue remained consistent, with $0.1 million of revenue earned during each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Grant revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of revenue earned under our grant with the Department of Defense, or DoD, which was awarded in February 2021. Grant revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of revenue earned under our prior grant with the DoD, which was awarded in September 2018 and concluded in September 2020.
Research and Development Expense
The following table sets forth the primary external and internal research and development expenses (in thousands, except percentages):
Research and development expense decreased by $2.1 million to $71.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $73.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The overall decrease in research and development expense was primarily due to the following factors:
•clinical trial expense increased by $11.3 million, which was primarily attributable to increased CRO costs from the progression of our Phase 1 trials and initiation of our Phase 2 trial;
•contract manufacturing expense decreased by $28.3 million, which was primarily attributable to the timing of work performed by our CDMO partners for the formulation and manufacturing of our INBRX-101 and INBRX-109 therapeutic candidates during the year ended December 31, 2020;
•preclinical expense increased by $1.9 million, which was primarily attributable to the initiation of additional preclinical studies;
•personnel-related expense increased by $11.5 million, which was primarily attributable to an overall increase in our headcount, certain salary adjustments, and the issuance of additional stock options;
•facilities expense increased by $0.6 million, which was primarily attributable to an increase in depreciable equipment and an increase in repairs and maintenance expenses; and
•other research and development expenses increased by $1.0 million which was primarily attributable to an increase in the purchase of lab supplies in relation to our increased preclinical lab activity.
G&A Expense
G&A expense increased by $5.6 million to $12.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Personnel-related expenses increased by $3.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased headcount during the period, as well as certain salary adjustments, and additional stock-based compensation expense from the issuance of stock options. We also incurred an increase of $1.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 in legal fees related to patents as a result of the Company’s expanding intellectual property portfolio and an increase of $0.2 million of other legal fees during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company incurred an increase in other costs of approximately $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 associated with expenses of operating as a public company following our IPO in August 2020.
Other Income (Expense)
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net, decreased by $5.6 million to $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $5.4 million of interest related to interest paid and the amortization of debt discounts related to the Amended 2020 Loan Agreement with Oxford. Interest expense was offset in part by $0.2 million of interest income.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, $7.8 million of the total interest expense was related to accrual of interest and amortization of debt discounts on the 2019 Note and the 2020 Notes through their conversion date, in addition to $2.2 million of debt discounts on the 2019 Note and the 2020 Notes accelerated upon the conversion in August 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, $0.9 million of the total interest expense was related to the Amended 2020 Loan Agreement with Oxford.
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded no gain or loss related to the change in fair value of warrant liabilities since they no longer existed and were reclassified into equity prior to the beginning of the period. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a loss on fair value of warrant liabilities of approximately $24,000 upon the remeasurement and reclassification of the warrants into equity following our IPO.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded no gain or loss related to the change in fair value of derivative liabilities since they were already extinguished at the beginning of the period. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a gain of approximately $2.7 million related to the change in fair value of derivative liabilities upon the revaluation of the derivative to zero during the period.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense remained consistent with approximately $2,000 and $3,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have applied a 100% valuation allowance against our federal deferred tax assets since it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Loss on Equity Method Investment
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded no loss on our equity method investment since it was already written down to zero prior to the beginning of the period.
During the third quarter of 2020, we entered into a joint venture with an entity affiliated with ArrowMark Partners, Phylaxis, and received a 10% equity interest in the company. Upon receipt of the equity interest, we established an equity method investment at fair value. The loss on equity method investment during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $0.5 million consists of our share of losses from our investment in Phylaxis, which reduced our equity investment to zero.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $80.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $81.8 million, adjusted for non-cash items including stock-based compensation expense of $15.0 million, accretion on our debt discount and the non-cash portion of interest expense related to our debt of $1.2 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.2 million, and non-cash lease expense of $1.5 million. Changes in
operating assets and liabilities also contributed to the cash used in operating activities, primarily related to increases in prepaid expenses of $4.0 million and other non-current assets of $1.6 million, as well as decreases in accounts payable of $4.6 million and in accrued expenses of $3.7 million, which are due to the timing of clinical and development activities which were paid during the year. Additionally, the operating lease liability decreased by $1.5 million as a result of lease payments made throughout the year. In addition, deferred revenue decreased by $1.7 million following the recognition of $0.5 million of previously deferred revenue related to our option agreement with Chiesi and $2.4 million of previously deferred revenue related to our agreements with Phylaxis, offset in part by the receipt of $1.25 million of additional deferred revenue under our Phylaxis agreements.
Net cash used in operating activities was $48.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of a net loss of $76.1 million, adjusted for non-cash items such as accretion on our debt discount and the non-cash portion of interest expense related to our debt of $10.2 million, stock-based compensation expense of $5.0 million, depreciation and amortization of $1.0 million, non-cash lease expense of $1.4 million, change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $2.7 million, and a loss on equity method investments of $0.5 million. Changes in operating assets and liabilities also contributed to the cash used in operating activities, primarily related to increases in accounts payable of $10.4 million and to accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $8.5 million due to an overall higher volume of clinical and development activities, and a decrease in prepaid expenses of $0.7 million. These were offset in part by a decrease in operating lease liability of $1.3 million and a decrease in deferred revenue of $5.6 million as a result of the recognition of $7.4 million of previously deferred revenue related to our option agreement with Chiesi and the addition of $2.3 million of deferred revenue related to our agreements with Phylaxis, adjusted for $0.5 million of non-cash deferred revenue related to the equity interest in Phylaxis.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.8 million and $1.4 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and was related to capital purchases, including laboratory equipment and leasehold improvements for our facility in La Jolla, California.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $83.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of net proceeds of $40.0 million from the Amended 2020 Loan Agreement and proceeds from our ATM offering of $40.2 million, offset in part by the payment of costs associated with the ATM offering of $0.4 million. In addition, we received proceeds of $4.0 million from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $166.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of the gross proceeds of $136.9 million from our IPO, offset in part by $11.0 million of costs associated with the offering, gross proceeds of $15.0 million from the sale and issuance of the 2020 Notes, and net proceeds of $29.9 million from the Amended 2020 Loan Agreement, consisting of $30.0 million in principal, net of $0.1 million in lender fees, further offset in part by $0.8 million of costs associated with the debt issuance. These proceeds were offset in part by the repayment of $3.6 million of principal and final payments on our previous loan and security agreement, as amended, or the 2015 Loan Agreement. During 2020, we also received $1.9 million in borrowings from the Paycheck Protection Program, or PPP Loan, which was subsequently repaid in full with principal payments of $1.9 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates and Policies
Our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, market and other conditions, and various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable. Although these estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact us in the future, the estimation process is, by its nature, uncertain given that estimates depend on events over which we may not have control. If market and other conditions change from those that we anticipate, our consolidated financial statements may be materially affected. In addition, if our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material effect in our consolidated financial statements. We review our estimates, judgments, and assumptions used in our accounting practices periodically and reflect the effects of
revisions in the period in which they are deemed to be necessary. We believe that these estimates are reasonable; however, our actual results may differ from these estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the following critical accounting policies and estimates have a higher degree of inherent uncertainty and require our most significant judgments:
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from our collaboration and licensing agreements with partners, as well as from grants. Billings to customers or payments received from customers are included in deferred revenue on the balance sheet until all revenue recognition criteria are met.
We recognize revenue when, or as, the promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements we conclude are within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC Topic 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the performance obligation(s) are satisfied. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and identifies those that are performance obligations. We recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when, or as, the performance obligation is satisfied.
Collaboration and License Agreements
We enter into collaborative agreements with partners that typically include one or more of the following: (i) license fees; (ii) nonrefundable up-front fees; (iii) payments for reimbursement of research costs; (iv) payments associated with achieving specific development, regulatory, or commercial milestones; and (v) royalties based on specified percentages of net product sales, if any. At the initiation of an agreement, we analyze each unit of account within the contract to determine if the counterparty is a customer in the context of the unit of account, in which case we apply the recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure requirements of ASC Topic 606. If a unit of account does not represent a transaction with a customer, it represents an arrangement with a collaborator subject to guidance under ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements, or ASC Topic 808.
In applying the principles of ASC Topic 606, we consider a variety of factors in determining the appropriate estimates and assumptions under these arrangements, such as whether the elements are distinct performance obligations, whether there are observable stand-alone prices, and whether any licenses are functional or symbolic. We evaluate each performance obligation to determine if it can be satisfied and recognized as revenue at a point in time or over time. Typically, license fees and non-refundable upfront fees are considered fixed, while milestone payments are identified as variable consideration which must be evaluated to determine if it is constrained and, therefore, excluded from the transaction price.
As of December 31, 2021, all collaboration and license revenue was within the scope of ASC Topic 808 and/or ASC Topic 606 and recognized accordingly.
See Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for additional information on our collaboration and license agreements.
Research and Development and Clinical Trial Accruals
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred and include the cost of compensation and related expenses, as well as expenses for third parties who conduct research and development on our behalf, pursuant to development and consulting agreements in place. Clinical trial costs, including costs associated with third-party contractors, are a significant component of research and development expense. We expense research and development costs based on work performed. In determining the amount to expense, management relies on estimates of total costs based on contract components completed, the enrollment of subjects, the completion of trials and other events. If applicable, costs incurred related to the purchase of in-process research and development for early-stage
products or products that are not commercially viable and ready for use, or have no alternative future use, are charged to expense in the period incurred. Costs incurred related to the licensing of products that have not yet received marketing approval to be marketed, or that are not commercially viable and ready for use, or have no alternative future use, are charged to expense in the period incurred.
Fair Value of Stock-Based Awards and Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We recognize compensation costs related to stock-based awards, including stock options, under our 2017 Employee, Director and Consultant Equity Incentive Plan to certain of our employees and certain members of our board of directors. The grant date fair value of the stock-based awards is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective awards.
We estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation, using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
•Fair Value of Common Stock-Our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by the applicable trading market on the date of the grant. Our board of directors intended all options granted to be exercisable at a price per share not less than the per share fair value of our common stock underlying those options on the grant date.
•Expected Term-We estimate the expected term of our stock options granted to employees and non-employee directors using the simplified method, whereby, the expected term equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. We utilize this method as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term.
•Expected Volatility-Due to the lack of company specific historical and implied volatility data, we based our estimate of expected volatility on the estimate and expected volatilities of a guideline group of publicly traded companies. For these analyses, we select companies with comparable characteristics to ours including enterprise value, risk profiles, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the stock-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of our stock-based awards. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate-For the determination of the risk-free interest rates we utilize the U.S. Treasury yield curve for instruments in effect at the time of measurement with a term commensurate with the expected term assumption.
•Expected Dividend-The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and do not have current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for information regarding certain of the specific assumptions we used in applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options granted in the periods discussed.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information with respect to recently issued accounting standards and the impact of these standards, if any, on our consolidated financial statements, refer to Note 1 in our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.