ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS OF INDIE
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to the “Company,” “we,” “us, or “our” refer to the business of indie and its subsidiaries prior to the consummation of the Transaction. Throughout this section, unless otherwise noted, “indie” refers to indie Semiconductor and its consolidated subsidiaries.
The following discussion and analysis provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read this discussion and analysis in conjunction with the accompanying audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Certain amounts may not foot due to rounding. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described under the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements except as required by law. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
OUR COMPANY
indie Semiconductor offers highly innovative automotive semiconductors and software solutions for Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (“ADAS”), autonomous vehicle, connected car, user experience and electrification applications. We focus on edge sensors across multiple modalities spanning LiDAR, radar, ultrasound and vision. These functions represent the core underpinnings of both electric and autonomous vehicles, while the advanced user interfaces are transforming the in-cabin experience to mirror and seamlessly connect to the mobile platforms we rely on every day. We are an approved vendor to Tier 1 automotive suppliers and our platforms can be found in marquee automotive manufacturers around the world. Headquartered in Aliso Viejo, California, indie has design centers and sales offices in Austin, Texas; Boston, Massachusetts; Detroit, Michigan; San Francisco and San Jose, California; Budapest, Hungary; Dresden, Germany; Edinburgh, Scotland; Haifa, Israel; Quebec, Canada; Tokyo, Japan and several locations throughout China.
We maintain design centers for our semiconductor engineers and designers in the United States, Scotland, Germany, Israel and China. We engage subcontractors to manufacture our products. These subcontractors, as well as the majority of our customers’ locations, are primarily in Asia. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately 62% and 81%, respectively, of our product revenues were recognized for shipments to customer locations in Asia.
Recent Acquisitions
TERAXION INC
In August 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire TERAXION INC, a Canadian corporation (“TeraXion”) from the existing stockholders of TeraXion (the “Acquisition”). The Acquisition was completed on October 12, 2021 and the total consideration paid for the acquisition consisted of (i) $75.3 million in cash, net of cash acquired; (ii) the issuance by indie of 5,805,144 shares of indie Class A common stock; and (iii) the assumption by indie of TeraXion options, which will become exercisable to purchase 1,542,332 shares of indie Class A common stock.
TeraXion produces low noise lasers, Bragg gratings and integrated photonic elements to address high-performance applications. More recently, TeraXion was an optical sensing reference design partner of indie, supporting next-generation Frequency Modulated Continuous Wave systems for automotive LiDAR. The addition of TeraXion is expected to be highly synergistic and we believe it will position us to accelerate mass market deployments of LiDAR platforms.
ON Design Israel
On October 1, 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement and completed the acquisition of ON Design Israel Ltd. (“ON Design Israel”), for $5.0 million in cash paid upon close (net of cash acquired), $7.5 million of cash in 2022 and up to $7.5 million of cash based on design win performance.
Symeo GmbH
On October 21, 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement with Analog Devices to acquire Symeo GmbH (“Symeo”) for $10.0 million in cash at closing, $10.0 million in cash in 2023 and an equity-based earn-out of up to 858,369 shares of indie Class A common stocks based on future revenue growth. The Symeo transaction closed on January 4, 2022.
The acquisition of ON Design Israel and Symeo will bring us engineering development teams with broad experience in millimeter wave technology and radar system implementation, respectively. We expect these combinations will accelerate our entry into the radar market and enable us to capture strategic opportunities among Tier 1 customers.
Reverse Recapitalization with Thunder Bridge Acquisition II
On June 10, 2021, we completed a series of transactions (the “Transaction”) with Thunder Bridge Acquisition II, Ltd (“TB2”) pursuant to the Master Transactions Agreement dated December 14, 2020, as amended on May 3, 2021 (the “MTA”). In connection with the Transaction, Thunder Bridge II Surviving Pubco, Inc, a Delaware corporation (“Surviving Pubco”), was formed to be the successor public company to TB2, TB2 was domesticated into a Delaware corporation and merged with and into and a merger subsidiary of Surviving Pubco. Additionally, we consummated a Private Investment in Public Entity (“PIPE”) financing, pursuant to which Surviving Pubco issued 15 million Class A common shares, generating net proceeds of $150 million as a result of the Transaction. Also on June 10, 2021, Surviving Pubco changed its name to indie Semiconductor, Inc., and listed our shares of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share on The Nasdaq Stock Market LLC under the symbol “INDI.”
The most significant change in our reported financial position and results of operations in comparison to the prior year is gross cash proceeds of $399.5 million from the Transaction, which includes $150.0 million in proceeds from the PIPE financing that was consummated in conjunction with the Transaction. The increase in cash was offset by transaction costs incurred in connection with the Transaction of approximately $43.5 million plus the retirement of indie’s long-term debt of $15.6 million. Approximately $29.8 million of the transaction costs and all of indie’s long-term debt were paid as of June 30, 2021. Approximately $21.8 million of the transaction costs paid as of June 30, 2021 were paid by TB2 as part of the closing of the Transaction. The remainder of the transaction costs were paid as of September 30, 2021.
Upon consummation of the Transaction, indie-designated directors were appointed to seven of the nine seats of the combined company’s board of directors; our Chief Executive Officer and President were appointed as the other two board members; our existing senior management became the senior management of the combined company; and the current stockholders of indie became the owners of approximately 26% of the outstanding shares of Class A common stock of the combined company. Accordingly, the Transaction is being accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, whereby indie is the acquirer for accounting and financial reporting purposes and Surviving Pubco, Inc is the legal acquirer. A reverse recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting, and the financial statements of the combined entity represent the continuation of the consolidated
financial statements of legacy ADK LLC in many respects. The shares remaining after redemptions, and the unrestricted net cash and cash equivalents on the closing of the Transaction, are being accounted for as a capital infusion to ADK LLC.
As a consequence of the Transaction, we became an SEC-registered, Nasdaq-listed company, which has required, and will continue to require us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We are now incurring additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative expenses.
Additionally, we expect our capital and operating expenditures will increase significantly in connection with ongoing activities as we invest additional working capital for various research and development projects, additional investments in equipment to meet increased project needs, and additional operating expenses to hire project managers, technicians, sales, partnership and customer service personnel, data scientists, trading teams, software engineers and administrative staff.
Our historical operations and statements of assets and liabilities may not be comparable to the operations and statements of assets and liabilities of the combined company as a result of the Transaction.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic (the “Pandemic”) and efforts to control its spread have significantly curtailed the movement of people, goods, and services worldwide. The duration and extent of the Pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, including the duration and severity of the Pandemic, the severity and transmission rates of new and more contagious and/or vaccine-resistant variants of COVID-19, and the actions taken to contain it or treat COVID-19, including the availability, distribution, rate of public acceptance and efficacy of vaccines for COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets. The Pandemic has already had an adverse effect on the global economy, and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the Pandemic remains unknown.
We experienced a decrease in customer demand and product shipments in the second quarter of fiscal year 2020. This decrease was primarily the result of closures or reduced capacity at customer manufacturing facilities in China. During the second half of fiscal year 2020, customer manufacturing facilities re-opened, and demand increased. As customer demand increased during the second half of fiscal year 2020 and continued through 2021, the semiconductor industry, and automotive semiconductors in particular, experienced material shortages and supply constraints. Given our reliance on third-party manufacturing suppliers, these industry dynamics have resulted in certain instances of extended production lead times, increased production and expedite costs, and delays in meeting increasing customer demand for our products, which if unabated, present a significant risk to us. In certain circumstances, we have increased order lead times, and placed purchase orders with suppliers based on our anticipated demand requirements in efforts to secure production capacity allocation. However, we cannot predict the duration or magnitude of the Pandemic or the full impact that it may have on our financial condition, operations, and workforce. We will continue to actively monitor the rapidly evolving situation related to the Pandemic and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of its employees and other third parties with whom we do business.
Results of Operations
Revenue
We design, develop and manufacture primarily analog, digital and mixed signal integrated circuits (“ICs”) together with software running on the embedded processors in the majority of the ICs. Our revenue represents both non-recurring engineering (“NRE”) fees for the development of ICs and prototypes and product sales, the sale of semiconductors under separate commercial supply arrangements.
Our revenues fluctuate in response to a combination of factors, including the following:
•our overall product mix and sales volumes;
•gains and losses in market share and design win traction;
•semiconductor content per vehicle;
•pace at which technology is adopted in our end markets;
•fluctuations in currency exchange rates that affect our prices;
•the stage of our products in their respective life cycles;
•the effects of competition and competitive pricing strategies;
•governmental regulations influencing our markets; and
•the global and regional economic cycles.
Product Revenue. Our product revenue is recognized when the customer obtains control of the product and is based on the contractual shipping terms of a contract. We provide an assurance-type warranty which is not sold separately and does not represent a separate performance obligation. Therefore, the estimated costs of warranty claims are generally accrued as cost of goods sold in the period the related revenue is recorded. Under limited circumstances, we may offer an extended limited warranty to customers for certain products. We accrue for known warranty and indemnification issues if a loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated. The majority of our product revenue originates from sales shipped to customer locations in Asia, and the United States.
Contract Revenue. Contract revenue is revenue earned from NRE services. Generally, our NRE contracts with our customers initially contain a single distinct performance obligation, which is to provide NRE design services for products based on the customer’s specifications. Generally, our contracts also include the optional purchase of products that may be exercised at stated prices subsequent to completion of NRE design services. We have determined that the option to purchase products is not a material right and have not allocated transaction price to this provision.
For NRE arrangements, we recognize revenue over time as services are provided based on the terms of the contract on an input basis, using costs incurred as the measure of progress. The costs incurred represent the most reliable measure of transfer of control to the customer. Revenue is deferred for amounts billed or received prior to delivery of the services.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of the cost of semiconductors purchased from subcontractors, including wafer fabrication, assembly, testing and packaging, board and device costs, manufacturing support costs, including labor and overhead associated with such purchases, final test yield fallout, inventory and warranty provisions, memory and component costs, and shipping costs. Cost of goods sold also includes compensation related to personnel associated with manufacturing and amortization of certain intangible assets acquired through the business combinations. Cost of goods sold does not include development costs incurred related to servicing our NRE services contracts, which are recorded to research and development and expensed as incurred.
Research and Development Expense
Costs related to research, design, and development of our products are expensed as incurred. Research and development expense consists primarily of pre-production costs related to the design and development of our products and technologies, including costs related to NRE services contracts with customers such as employee compensation, benefits and related costs of sustaining our engineering teams, project material costs, third party fees paid to consultants, prototype development expenses, other costs incurred in the product design and development process and amortization expenses for certain intangible assets acquired from the business combinations.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expense
Selling, general, and administrative costs include employee compensation, including compensation and benefits for executive, finance, accounting, legal, business operations and other administrative personnel. In addition, it includes marketing and advertising, outside legal, tax and accounting services, insurance, occupancy costs and related overhead based on headcount and amortization expenses for certain intangible assets acquired from the business combinations. Selling, general, and administrative costs are expensed as incurred.
Amortization for Intangible Assets Acquired from Business Combinations
As a result of the most recent business combinations, we acquired various intangible assets. The corresponding amortization expenses are included within Cost of goods sold, Research and development expenses, and Selling, general and administrative expenses based on their respective nature. Our acquired intangible assets with definite lives are amortized from the date of acquisition over periods ranging from two to seven years.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily consists of cash and non-cash interest under our term loan facilities, convertible notes and line of credit.
Other Income (Expense)
Other expense primarily comprises the change in the fair value of the SAFEs issued during 2020, warrants and earn-out liabilities issued as a result of the Transaction.
The conversion of the SAFEs in conjunction with the Transaction eliminated the need for remeasurement of the instruments and thereby eliminate the other expense or income related to such on June 10, 2021.
As of November 9, 2021, the first Earn-Out Milestone was achieved, which also eliminated the need for future remeasurement of the Earn-Out liabilities.
Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method in accounting for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect the estimated future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred tax expense or benefit is the result of changes in the deferred tax asset and liability. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets where it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We make estimates, assumptions, and judgments to determine our provision for our income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. We also assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets, if any, will be recovered from future taxable income, and to the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance.
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement. Interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits which, as of the date of this report, have not been material, are recognized within provision for income taxes.
Refer to Note 19, Income Tax, in our accompanying financial statements for additional detail.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $48.4 million, compared to $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $25.8 million or 114%, which was primarily driven by a $24.3 million increase in product revenue and a
$1.5 million increase in contract revenue. The increase in product revenue was due primarily to higher product volume (units sold) given the continued growth in demand from our customers globally. Change in product mix, which includes introduction of new products to the market, and increases in average selling price (“ASP”) also contributed to the increase in revenue year-over-year. The increase in contract revenue was due to increased NRE activities in the current year.
Operating expenses
Cost of goods sold for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $28.7 million, compared to $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $15.7 million or 120% was primarily due to a $9.5 million increase in production volume given the increase in revenue above, a $3.4 million increase due to an increase in material costs, and a $2.6 million increase due to a change in product mix.
Research and development (“R&D”) expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $58.1 million, compared to $22.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase of $36.1 million or 164% was primarily due to $13.5 million increase in personnel costs as we increased the number of employees working on product development, a $7.6 million increase in product development costs, a $9.7 million increase in share-based compensation expense, a $2.2 million increase in amortization expense related to R&D project license and acquired intangible assets from business combinations, and a $1.3 million increase in various outside professional services and equipment costs as we continue to expand produce development activities. We started recognizing share-based compensation expense in the current year as it required the consummation of the Transaction in June 2021 and implementation of the 2021 Omnibus Equity Plan in August 2021 to be recognized. We expect research and development expense to continue to increase due to the aforementioned business combinations and as we continue to grow our headcount organically to support pent-up customer demand.
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $36.4 million, compared to $6.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $29.6 million or 435% was primarily due to a $13.2 million increase in share-based compensation expense, a $10.5 million increase in outside professional fees, a $4.1 million increase in personnel costs due to an increase in headcounts and a $0.6 million increase in intangible asset amortization from business combinations. We started recognizing share-based compensation expense in the current year as it required the consummation of the Transaction in June 2021 and implementation of the 2021 Omnibus Equity Plan in August 2021 to be recognized. The increase in outside professional fees includes $3.6 million in acquisition related professional fees that is primarily for legal related services, $4.1 million in professional fees related to obligations as a publicly traded company, and $2.8 million in SPAC related transaction fees that is primarily for audit and tax related services. We expect selling, general, and administrative expense to continue to increase as we grow our headcount to support our global expansion and our obligations as a publicly traded company.
Other income (expense), net
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.2 million, compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Interest expense relate to the routine cash and non-cash interest expenses on outstanding debt obligations. All long-term debts historically held by indie at the time of the Transaction have been paid off as of June 30, 2021.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized gains (losses) from fair value remeasurement for SAFE’s, warrants, and contingent earn-out liabilities of $21.6 million, $(26.1) million, and $(38.8) million, respectively. These gains (losses) recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 represented the following:
i) SAFEs: Upon the closing of the Transaction on June 10, 2021, the SAFE holders converted their SAFEs to Class A common stock of indie. The gain of $21.6 million represents the decrease in fair value in SAFEs from December 31, 2020 to June 10, 2021. No changes in fair value of SAFEs were recorded after June 10, 2021.
ii) Warrants: Upon the consummation of the Transaction on June 10, 2021, we recognized warrant liability of $74.4 million and subsequently remeasured the warrant liability to the fair value of $100.5 million at the reporting date. The increase in fair value of our warrant liability of $26.1 million was primarily a result of the increase of the closing price of our Class A common stock to $11.99 per share on December 31, 2021 from $10.87 per share on June 10, 2021.
iii) Earn-out liability: Upon the consummation of the Transaction on June 10, 2021, we recognized earn-out liability of $119.8 million and subsequently remeasured the earn-out liability to the fair value of $158.5 million, or a year-to-date loss of $38.8 million, on November 9, 2021 when the first milestone was achieved. The total liability as of November 9, 2021 was reclassified to Additional Paid in Capital in our consolidated balance sheet. As of December 31, 2021, there was no liability remaining on the balance sheet.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized a net gain of $0.3 million on extinguishment of debt. The net gain was attributable to a gain of $1.9 million from the PPP loan as we received forgiveness from the SBA on May 10, 2021, partially offset by a loss of $1.6 million from the repayment of the Trinity loan on June 17, 2021.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
We evaluate our estimated annual ETR on a quarterly basis based on current and forecasted operating results. The relationship between our income tax provision or benefit and our pretax book income or loss can vary significantly from period to period considering, among other factors, the overall level of pretax book income or loss and changes in the blend of jurisdictional income or loss that is taxed at different rates and changes in valuation allowances. Consequently, our ETR may fluctuate significantly period to period and may make quarterly comparisons less than meaningful.
Income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of operations in Canada and the United Kingdom. Income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of operations in the United Kingdom.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company (“EGC”) such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest to occur of: (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenue; (2) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer,” which would occur if the market value of our equity securities held by nonaffiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter; (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period; and (4) the last day of the fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering, or December 31, 2024.
We may choose to early adopt any new or revised accounting standards whenever such early adoption is permitted for public companies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, we derive liquidity primarily from debt and equity financing activities as we have historically had negative cash flows from operations. On June 10, 2021, we completed the Transaction, which resulted in approximately $341.3 million of net cash proceeds. As of December 31, 2021, our balance of cash and cash equivalents was $219.1 million.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, working capital requirements related to inventory, accounts payable and accounts receivable, and general and administrative expenditures. In addition, from time to time, we use cash to fund our mergers and acquisitions as well as for purchases of various capital and software assets.
PPP Loan
In May 2020, we received gross proceeds of $1.9 million pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act as administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “SBA”). On May 10, 2021, the entire balance of the PPP Loan was forgiven by the SBA and lender. As a result, the Company recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt of $1,889, which represented the principal balance of $1,868 and accrued interest of $21, in the consolidated statement of operations.
Acquisitions
In October 2021, we completed the acquisition of TeraXion and On Design Israel, for which we made initial cash payments (net of cash acquired) of approximately $75.3 million and $5.0 million, respectively. We expect to pay up to an additional $15.0 million for the acquisition of ON Design Israel as part of the total closing consideration in 2022 and later. In October 2021, we also entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Symeo which will result in a total cash payment of $20.0 million as part of the overall closing consideration payable in accordance with the definitive agreement. The Symeo acquisition was approved and completed on January 4, 2022. See “Recent Acquisitions” above for further information.
We expect to continue to incur net operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. We also expect our research and development expenses, general and administrative expenses and capital expenditures will continue to increase as we continue to expand our operations, product offerings and customer base.
The following table summarizes our consolidated cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in the operating activities was $55.8 million, which included net loss of $118.6 million and adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash increases primarily consisted of $43.3 million of net losses resulting from change in fair values for SAFEs, warrants and earn-out liability, $22.9 million in share-based compensation expense and $6.0 million in depreciation and amortization. Changes in operating assets and liabilities from operations used $9.2 million of cash, primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid and other current assets and a decrease in accounts payable. This was offset by an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $21.2 million, mostly consisting of net loss of $98.4 million adjusted for certain non-cash items and changes in operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash increases primarily consisted of a $76.9 million loss from change in fair value of SAFEs and $2.7 million in depreciation and amortization. Changes in operating assets and liabilities from operations used $4.4 million of cash, primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable and prepaid and other current assets, and a decrease in deferred revenue.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $84.3 million and $0.8 million, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the decrease in cash was primarily due to the acquisition of TeraXion and OnDesign Israel for $75.3 million and $5.0 million, net of cash acquired, respectively, as well as an increase in cash used of $2.7 million for the purchase of capital expenditures. During the year ended December 31, 2020, our primary investing activities consisted of capital expenditures. We expect that we will make additional capital expenditures in the future, including licenses to various intangible assets, in order to support the future growth of our business.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $340.6 million, which was primarily attributed to $377.7 million net cash acquired from TB2 as we closed the Transaction on June 10, 2021 and $5.0 million of proceeds from issuance of SAFEs in April 2021. These increases in cash were partially offset by $19.9 million of transaction costs incurred in connection with the Transaction and $17.5 million repayment of long-term debt and related termination fees.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $33.5 million was primarily the result of $31.9 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt and SAFEs, and $6.2 million in proceeds from the sale of noncontrolling interest. Proceeds received from the sale of noncontrolling interest related to our Chinese subsidiary, Wuxi, which used the proceeds to fund operations. The increase was partially offset by $4.2 million of repayment of long-term debt.
Future Cash Obligations
Following is a summary of our contractual cash obligations as of December 31, 2021:
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments in applying our most critical accounting policies that can have a significant impact on the results we report in our financial statements. The SEC has defined critical accounting estimates as those that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on a registrant’s financial condition or results of operations. Based on this definition, our most critical accounting estimates include revenue recognition, which impacts the recording of net revenue; inventory valuation, which impacts the cost of goods sold and gross margin; business combinations, which impacts the fair value of acquired assets and assumed liabilities; goodwill and long-lived assets, which impacts the fair value of goodwill and intangible assets; warrants and earn-out liabilities valuations, which impacts the fair value of these financial instruments; and income taxes, which impacts the income tax provision. These policies and significant judgments involved are discussed further below. We have other significant accounting policies that do not generally require subjective estimates or judgments or would not have a material impact on our results of operations. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into contracts with customers that can include various combinations of products and services. As a result, our contracts may contain multiple performance obligations. We determine whether arrangements are distinct based on whether the customer can benefit from the product or service on its own or together with other resources that are readily available and whether our commitment to transfer the product or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other obligations in the contract.
In particular, we enter into engineering services contracts with customers that generally contain only one distinct performance obligation, which is design services for ICs based on agreed upon specifications. Engineering services contracts typically also include the purchase, at the customer’s option, of ICs at agreed upon prices subsequent to completion of ICs design services. We have determined that the option to purchase ICs is not a material right and has not allocated transaction price to this provision.
For ICs development arrangements, revenue is recognized over time as services are provided based on the terms of the contract on an input basis, using costs incurred as the measure of progress and is recorded as contract revenue in the consolidated statement of operations. The costs incurred represent the most reliable measure of transfer of control to the customer. Revenue is deferred for amounts billed or received prior to delivery of the services.
Inventory Valuation
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value on a first-in, first-out basis. Reserves for excess and obsolete inventory are established on a quarterly basis and are based on a detailed analysis of aged material, salability of our inventory, market conditions, and product life cycles. Once reserves are established, write-downs of inventory are considered permanent adjustments to the cost basis of inventory. Our reserves contain uncertainties because the calculation requires management to make assumptions and to apply judgment regarding historical experience, market conditions, and technological obsolescence. Changes in actual demand or market conditions could adversely impact our reserve calculations.
Warrants
We value our warrants by using the Black-Scholes-Merton formula and a Monte Carlo Simulations analysis. Calculating the fair value of warrants requires the input of subjective assumptions. Other reasonable assumptions could provide differing results. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly and actual amounts paid may be materially different from the liability’s estimated value.
Earn-Out Liabilities
We value our contingent earn-outs by using a Monte Carlo analysis in order to simulate the future path of our stock price over the earn-out period. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly and actual amounts paid may be materially different from the liability’s estimated value.
Income Taxes
The application of tax laws and regulations to calculate our tax liabilities is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment, and uncertainty in a multitude of jurisdictions. Tax laws and regulations themselves are subject to change as a result of changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, the evolution of regulations, and court rulings. We recognize potential liabilities for uncertain tax positions in the United States and other tax jurisdictions based on our estimate of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes and interest will be due. We record an amount as an estimate of probable additional income tax liability at the largest amount that we feel is more likely than not, based upon the technical merits of the position, to be sustained upon audit by the relevant tax authority.
Goodwill and Long-lived Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in a business combination. We test goodwill for impairment in accordance with the provisions of ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other, (“ASC 350”). Goodwill is tested for impairment at least annually at the reporting unit level or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill might be impaired. ASC 350 provides that an entity has the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, an entity determines it is not more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, then additional impairment testing is not required. However, if an entity concludes otherwise, then it is required to perform an impairment test. The impairment test involves comparing the estimated fair value of a reporting unit with its book value, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value exceeds book value, goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If, however, the fair value of the reporting unit is less than book value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the amount that the book value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit.
Long-lived assets to be held and used, including identifiable intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be fully recoverable. These events or changes in circumstances may include a significant deterioration of operating results, changes in business plans or changes in anticipated future cash flows. If an impairment indicator is present, we evaluate recoverability by a comparison of the carrying amount of the assets or asset group to future undiscounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the lowest level of asset group. If the assets or asset group are impaired, the impairment recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally determined by estimates of discounted cash flows. The discount rate used in any estimate of discounted cash flows would be the rate required for similar investment of like risk.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of the purchase consideration of a business acquisition to the tangible assets, liabilities, and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. IPR&D is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. When an IPR&D project is completed, the IPR&D is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and amortized over the asset’s estimated useful life. Our valuation of acquired assets and assumed liabilities requires significant estimates, especially with respect to intangible assets. The valuation of intangible assets, in particular, requires that we use valuation techniques such as the income approach. The income approach includes the use of a discounted cash flow model, which includes discounted cash flow scenarios and requires the following significant estimates: future expected revenue, expenses, capital expenditures and other costs, and discount rates. We estimate the fair value based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Acquisition-related expenses are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
For information regarding new accounting pronouncements, and the impact of these pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements, if any, see Note 2 to in our accompanying financial statements.