Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion along with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including those discussed under “Risk Factors.” Our actual results, performance and achievements may differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” We have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Overview
We are a pre-clinical biotechnology company developing a novel and patented systemically-administered anti-cancer and anti-viral immunotherapy. We have evolved from more than a century of immunotherapy advances. Our approach is based on the hypothesis that efficient activation of both innate and adaptive immune cells and associated anti-tumor and anti-viral immune responses will require a multi-targeted package of immune system activating signals that can be administered safely intravenously. Our patented technology is composed of single strains of attenuated and killed, non-pathogenic, Gram-negative bacteria, with reduced i.v. toxicity, but largely uncompromised ability to prime or activate many of the cellular components of innate and adaptive immunity. This approach has led to broad anti-tumor and anti-viral activity, including safe, durable anti-tumor response synergy with each of five different classes of existing agents, including checkpoint therapy, targeted antibody therapy and low-dose chemotherapy in pre-clinical models. Tumor eradication by our technology has demonstrated activation of both innate and adaptive immunological memory and, importantly, does not require provision of or targeting a tumor antigen in pre-clinical models. We have carried out successful GMP manufacturing of our lead clinical candidate, Decoy20, and completed other IND-enabling studies. For further information regarding our business and operations, see “Item 1. Business.”
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on our Operations
The outbreak of a novel coronavirus (COVID-19) originated in Wuhan, China in December 2019. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting the United States and global economies and may affect our operations and those of third parties on which we rely, including by causing disruptions in the supply of our product candidates and the conduct of current and future clinical trials. For example, the pandemic has caused our GMP process to take longer than expected. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic may affect the operations of the FDA and other health authorities, which could result in delays of reviews and approvals, including with respect to our product candidates. Additionally, while the potential economic impact brought by, and the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic is difficult to assess or predict, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the global financial markets may reduce our ability to access capital, which could negatively impact our short-term and long-term liquidity. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic is highly uncertain and subject to change. While it is unknown how long these conditions will last and what the complete financial effect will be to us, capital raise efforts and additional development of our technologies may be negatively affected.
Recent Events
Decoy Merger
On August 3, 2021, we completed our merger with Decoy following the satisfaction or waiver of the conditions set forth in the Merger Agreement, dated as of March 15, 2021 among the Company, Decoy, Intec Israel, Domestication Merger Sub, and Merger Sub, pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into Decoy, with Decoy surviving as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company and the business conducted by Decoy became the business conducted by the combined company.
Previously, on July 27, 2021, we, Intec Israel and Domestication Merger Sub completed the previously announced domestication merger pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Domestication Merger Agreement, whereby Domestication Merger Sub merged with and into Intec Israel, with Intec Israel being the surviving entity and a wholly-owned subsidiary of ours. At the time of the Domestication Merger, Intec Israel continued to possess all of its assets, rights, powers and property as constituted immediately prior to the Domestication Merger and continued to be subject to all of its debts, liabilities and obligations as constituted immediately prior to the Domestication Merger.
Also, in connection with the Merger, we changed our name from “Intec Parent, Inc.” to “Indaptus Therapeutics, Inc.”.
At the effective time of the Merger, each outstanding share of Decoy common stock, par value $0.001 per share (including shares issuable upon the conversion of Decoy SAFEs (Simple Agreements for Future Equity) and Decoy preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share, into Decoy common stock) converted into 2.654353395 shares of our common stock, par value $0.01 per share. In addition, at the effective time of the Merger, each outstanding and unexercised Decoy stock option converted into a stock option exercisable for that number of our shares of common stock subject to such option and the exercise price being appropriately adjusted to reflect the exchange ratio. Immediately following closing of the Merger there were 5,405,970 shares of our common stock outstanding, with pre-merger Decoy shareholders owning approximately 65.6% and pre-merger Intec Israel shareholders owning approximately 34.4% of the Company. The figures above do not give effect to shares issuable upon the exercise of outstanding our warrants or options.
Following completion of the Merger, our shares of common stock commenced trading at market open on August 4, 2021, on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the name “Indaptus Therapeutics, Inc.” and ticker symbol “INDP” and under the new CUSIP 45339J 105.
For accounting purposes, Decoy is considered to have acquired Indaptus based on the terms of the Merger and an analysis of the criteria outlined in Accounting Standards Codification 805. The Merger has been accounted for as a reverse merger transaction rather than a business combination, as the net assets acquired/assumed by Decoy do not meet the definition of a business under U.S. GAAP. Accordingly, the historical financial statements of Decoy became the historical financial statements of the combined company upon the consummation of the Merger and the net assets acquired in connection with the Merger were recorded at their estimated fair market value as of August 3, 2021, the date of completion of the Merger.
Winding Down of Accordion Pill Business
In connection with the completion of the Merger, on August 4, 2021, our board determined to wind down the Accordion Pill business of Intec Israel which was completed as of the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements.
In connection with the winding down, we laid off all our employees, we terminated our contracts with counterparties and the sale of our Accordion Pill related assets, including the termination of the Process Development Agreement between Intec Israel and LTS Lohmann Therapie Systeme AG, and the termination of the unprotected lease agreement between Intec Israel and its landlord for the lease of offices located in Jerusalem, Israel.
Private Placement
In connection with the Merger, on July 23, 2021, or the Signing Date, we entered into a securities purchase agreement, or the Purchase Agreement, with a certain institutional investor, or the Purchaser, pursuant to which we agreed to sell and issue, in a private placement, or the Private Placement, a pre-funded warrant to purchase up to 2,727,273 shares of our common stock, or the Pre-funded Warrant, and a warrant to purchase up to 2,727,273 of our common stock at a purchase price of $10.99 per Pre-funded Warrant and associated Warrant, for aggregate gross proceeds to us of approximately $30.0 million, before deducting the placement agent’s fees and other offering expenses payable by the Company. The Warrant has a term of five and one-half years, is exercisable immediately following the issuance date and has an exercise price of $11.00 per share, subject to adjustment as set forth therein.
On August 3, 2021, the Private Placement closed and in September 2021, the Pre-Funded Warrants were fully exercised. In addition, we issued to the placement agent a warrant to purchase 136,364 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $13.75.
In connection with the Purchase Agreement, we entered into a registration rights agreement, or the Registration Rights Agreement, with the Purchaser requiring us to file a resale registration statement, or the Resale Registration Statement, with the SEC to register for resale of the shares of our common stock issuable upon exercise of the Pre-Funded Warrant and Warrant. We subsequently filed a registration statement registering for resale the shares of our common stock issuable upon exercise of the Pre-Funded Warrant and Warrant which became effective on September 29, 2021.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. Research and development expenses consist primarily of fees paid to contract research organizations, or CROs, and contract manufacturing organizations, or CMOs, as well as compensation expenses for certain employees involved in the planning, managing, and analyzing the work of the CROs and CMOs.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to ramp up our clinical development activities and incur expenses associated with hiring additional personnel to support our research and development efforts. Our expenditures on future nonclinical and clinical development programs are subject to numerous uncertainties in timing and cost to completion. The duration, costs and timing of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials and development of product candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including:
● the timing and receipt of regulatory approvals;
● the scope, rate of progress and expenses of pre-clinical studies and clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● potential safety monitoring and other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
● significant and changing government regulation.
The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain FDA and other regulatory approval is costly and time consuming and the successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain. The risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development projects are discussed more fully in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.” As a result of these risks and uncertainties, we are unable to determine with any degree of certainty the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenues from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include compensation, employee benefits, and stock-based compensation for executive management, finance administration and human resources, facility costs (including rent), professional service fees, and other general overhead costs, including depreciation, to support our operations.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we continue to increase our headcount to support our research and development activities and operations generally, the growth of our business and, if any of our product candidates receive marketing approval, commercialization activities. We also expect to continue to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, additional director and officer insurance expenses, investor relations activities and other administrative and professional services.
Other Income, Net
Other income includes interest earned on deposits and other items of income, expense, gain and loss that are incidental to the core operations of the Company.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year ended December 31, 2020
The following tables sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and the relative dollar and percentage change between the two years.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to approximately $2.5 million, a decrease of $0.1 million, or approximately 5%, compared to approximately $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Research and development expenses decreased in the year ended December 31, 2021 over 2020 primarily as a result of decreased manufacturing and characterization of Decoy20 expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020 that were offset by the increase of salaries and share-based compensation in 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to approximately $5.2 million, an increase of $4.2 million, or approximately 451%, compared to approximately $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses increased significantly in the year ended December 31, 2021 over 2020 as a result of increased payroll and related expenses, stock-based compensation expense for stock options issued in August 2021 and professional fees associated with being a public company following the Merger.
Other Income
Interest income has not been significant due to low interest rates on balances.
Liquidity and Resources
Since our inception, we have funded our operations primarily through public and private offerings of our equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $39.1 million. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $1.6 million.
In August 2021, we sold a Pre-funded Warrant to purchase 2,727,273 of our common stock and a Warrant to purchase 2,727,273 of our common stock in a private placement. The Warrant is exercisable at an exercise price of $11.00 per share. In September 2021, the Pre-funded Warrant was fully exercised at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. The Pre-funded Warrant and the Warrant were sold together at a combined price of $11.00, including the pre-funded exercise price. The total net proceeds were approximately $27.3 million, after deducting placement agent fees and offering expenses in the amount of approximately $2.7 million.
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $11.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with net cash used in operating activities of approximately $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in general and administrative expenses and effects of the Merger and changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was approximately $48.3 million, which was primarily provided by the $27.3 million net proceeds received from the closing of the Private Placement in August 2021, $15.7 million net proceeds from Merger and the sale of additional SAFEs in the aggregate amount of $5.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Current Outlook
Following the Private Placement that closed in August 2021, we believe that we have adequate cash to fund our ongoing activities for more than one year from the date we filed this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We are closely monitoring ongoing developments in connection with the COVID-19 pandemic. As of the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may materially impact our financial condition, liquidity, or results of operations is uncertain.
Developing drugs, conducting clinical trials, obtaining commercial manufacturing capabilities and commercializing products is expensive and we will need to raise substantial additional funds to achieve our strategic objectives. We will require significant additional financing in the future to fund our operations, including if and when we progress into additional clinical trials, obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates, obtain commercial manufacturing capabilities and commercialize one or more of our product candidates. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
● the progress and costs of our preparations for clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● the scope, prioritization and number of clinical trials and other research and development programs;
● the amount of revenues we receive under future licensing, collaboration, development and commercialization arrangements with respect to our product candidates;
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian invasion of Ukraine;
● the costs of the development and expansion of our operational infrastructure;
● the costs and timing of obtaining regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates;
● the ability of us, or our collaborators, to achieve development milestones, marketing approval and other events or developments under our potential future licensing agreements;
● the costs of filing, prosecuting, enforcing and defending patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the costs and timing of securing manufacturing arrangements for clinical or commercial production;
● the costs of contracting with third parties to provide sales and marketing capabilities for us or establishing such capabilities ourselves;
● the costs of acquiring or undertaking development and commercialization efforts for any future products, product candidates or technology;
● the magnitude of our general and administrative expenses;
● market conditions; and
● any cost that we may incur under future in- and out-licensing arrangements relating to one or more of our product candidates.
Until we can generate significant recurring revenues, we expect to satisfy our future cash needs through capital raising. We cannot be certain that additional funding will be available to us on acceptable terms, if at all. If funds are not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate research or development programs and other operations and make necessary change to our operations to reduce the level of our expenditures in line with available resources.
Contractual Obligations
Operating lease payments represent our commitment for future rent made under non-cancelable lease for our offices in San Diego, CA. The total future payments for our operating lease obligation at December 31, 2021 are approximately $178,000, of which approximately $96,000 is due in the next twelve months and the remaining payments are due over the following year. For additional details regarding our leases, see Note 7 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have had or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
This discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these condensed consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of our assets, liabilities and expenses. Significant accounting policies employed by us, including the use of estimates, are presented in the notes to our annual financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We periodically evaluate our estimates, which are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our subjective or complex judgments, resulting in the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. If actual performance should differ from historical experience or if the underlying assumptions were to change, our financial condition and results of operations may be materially impacted.
We believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Accounting for Research and Development Costs
We record the costs associated with services provided by CROs and CMOs as they are incurred. Though the scope and timing of work are generally based on signed agreements, some judgement is involved in determining periodic expenses because payment flows do not always match the periods over which services and materials are provided to us. As a result, our management is required to make estimates of services received and efforts expended pursuant to agreements established with these third-parties at each period-end date. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $2.5 million of research and development expenses. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded an accrued liability of $0.1 million for expenses incurred, but not yet invoiced, and a prepaid expense of $0.1 million for payments made that relate to future periods. Over or under estimating the services received or efforts expended could cause us to overstate or understate research and development expenses incurred within a reporting period, and related accrued and prepaid expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and record the expense related to stock-based payment awards based on the fair value of those awards on the date of grant. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton, or Black-Scholes, option pricing model to establish the fair value. We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period of the individual grant, generally equal to the vesting period, on a straight-line basis. The Black Scholes model requires that our management make certain estimates regarding the expected stock price volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate, and dividend yield to derive an estimated fair value. The use of different assumptions would increase or decrease the related determination of fair value, increasing or decreasing the compensation expense related to a particular stock-based award.
Trend Information
We are a development stage company and it is not possible for us to predict with any degree of accuracy the outcome of our research and development efforts. As such, it is not possible for us to predict with any degree of accuracy any significant trends, uncertainties, demands, commitments or events that are reasonably likely to have a material effect on our net loss, liquidity or capital resources, or that would cause financial information to not necessarily be indicative of future operating results or financial condition. However, to the extent possible, certain trends, uncertainties, demands, commitments and events are in this “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Certain recently issued accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report.