ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the sections titled “Risk Factors” and “Information Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Report.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Final Prospectus dated October 26, 2021 and filed with the SEC pursuant to Rule 424(b)(4) on October 27, 2021.
Overview
We have pioneered a new category of software, the Intelligent Data Management Cloud, or IDMC. IDMC is our AI-powered platform that connects, manages, and unifies data across any multi-cloud, hybrid system, empowering enterprises to modernize and advance their data strategies.
On October 29, 2021, Informatica completed its initial public offering (the “IPO”), in which we issued and sold 29,000,000 shares of our Class A common stock at $29.00 per share. On November 10, 2021, we issued and sold an additional 4,350,000 shares of Class A common stock in connection with a full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares granted in the IPO. We received net proceeds from the IPO of $915.7 million after deducting the underwriters’ discounts and commission.
We generate revenues from the sale of software products and related maintenance and professional services. The vast majority of our software revenue consists of fees generated through the sale of our subscription-based products and related support agreements for our subscription products. We have pivoted our business to focus on subscription revenue and have consequently grown our subscription revenue, which was $747.7 million,
- 71 -
$593.8 million, and $471.7 million in 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Over this period, our subscription revenue as a percentage of total software revenue was 96%, 90%, and 77% for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Our subscription products can be purchased individually as distinct product families or together as a tightly integrated platform to support complex data management needs and certain customer journeys. Our subscription products are sold through contracts primarily with a one-, two- or three-year term, with an average contract term slightly over two years as of December 31, 2021. Substantially all of our subscription customers pay us annual fees in advance at the start of each contract year. We recognize revenue from our cloud-based subscription products on a ratable basis over the contract term. We generally recognize the majority of the revenue from our subscription-based on-premises licenses at the start of the contract term. The remaining portion of on-premises subscription fees attributable to related support services are generally recognized on a ratable basis over the contract term.
We generate additional software revenue from the sale of perpetual licenses. Consistent with our business transformation strategy and focus on subscription revenue, our perpetual license revenue has decreased. The perpetual license revenue as a percentage of total revenue was 4%, 10%, and 23%, for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Our maintenance and professional services revenues consist of recurring maintenance fees related to perpetual licenses and one-time professional services fees, respectively. Our recurring maintenance fees grant our customers access to software updates and support for our perpetual license products. We recognized $558.5 million, $560.9 million, and $572.1 million of maintenance revenue in fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
We generate professional services revenues through one-time fees associated with implementation, education, and consulting services related to our software products.
We market and sell our subscription products primarily through our global direct sales team, which is enhanced by our relationships and collaboration with our partners that include global system integrators such as Deloitte and Accenture, hyperscale cloud platform providers such as AWS, Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud Platform, and channel partners. Our sales organization consists of sales development, inside sales, and field sales personnel and is generally organized by region, the size of prospective customers and certain industry verticals. Cloud hyperscalers help us amplify our commercial reach when we jointly engage in cloud modernization efforts or when customers purchase our products via the hyperscaler product marketplaces. In addition, our global system integrator partners provide implementation services for our products for customers as part of their support of broader, overall cloud modernization initiatives.
Historically, we have focused our selling efforts on executives such as chief information officers (CIOs) and chief data officers (CDOs) who are often making decisions to purchase our products for their most important business initiatives. CIOs adopt our platform as part of their cloud migration journey, application modernization efforts, and business 360 initiatives. CDOs purchase our products as part of their overall data governance, access, and security strategies in order to democratize data access for everyone across the company. We recently expanded our go-to-market efforts to focus more on departmental line of business customers.
We employ a “land and expand” model to increase sales to our existing customer base. Once customers have purchased one of our products-for example, Data Integration-they often identify additional use cases for our software and expand their use of our products accordingly. For example, as a customer seeks to expand the distribution of data-centric reports powered by our data integration solutions to a broader set of internal or external users, enhanced levels of data quality and control may be required, prompting the purchase of our Data Quality and Data Governance families of products. We also market our cloud products to our large installed base of perpetual license customers, enabling them to advance their cloud modernization efforts to migrate existing processes and net new workloads from costly-to-maintain internal IT infrastructure to lower-cost elastic cloud architecture. In 2020, we also introduced a new consumption-based pricing model to provide customers greater flexibility regarding trial, use and consumption of a broad array of our cloud-based services. The effectiveness of our land and expand strategy is evidenced by our Subscription Net Retention Rate (NRR), which was 114%, 114%, and 113% as of the December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
- 72 -
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 5,700 customers7 in a wide variety of industries located in over 100 countries and territories. Approximately 67%, 67% and 68% of our total revenues for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, were from our North America region, which we define as the United States and Canada.
Purchasing patterns for our products have followed quarterly and seasonal trends that we expect to continue. We typically sell a substantial portion of our software product licenses and services in the last month of each quarter, and demand for our software products and professional services are generally highest in the fourth quarter and lowest in the first quarter of each year.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the growth of our business and our future success are dependent upon many factors, including those described below. While each of these factors presents significant opportunities for us, these factors also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain the growth of our business and improve our results of operations.
Continued Adoption of our Subscription Products. Our success will largely depend on customers’ continued uptake of our subscription offerings. Our success will also largely depend on the value businesses place on data management as part of their overall digital transformation initiatives and the timing and willingness of businesses to move their data and workloads to the cloud. As companies from all industries continue to shift to subscription and cloud-based services, we believe demand for our platform and subscription-based products will increase. Total subscription ARR was $802.3 million, $607.2 million and $445.8 million at December 31, 2021, December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, respectively, representing growth of 32% in 2021 and 36% in 2020. At December 31, 2021, Subscription ARR represented 59% of total ARR, Cloud ARR (which is the total ARR derived from hosted products) represented 40% and 23% of Subscription ARR and total ARR, respectively. At December 31, 2020, Subscription ARR represented 52% of total ARR, and Cloud ARR (which is the total ARR derived from hosted products) represented 37% and 20% of Subscription ARR and total ARR, respectively. At December 31, 2021, our $802.3 million of Subscription ARR was comprised of $317.0 million in Cloud ARR, $121.9 million in PowerCenter-related product ARR and $363.7 million in ARR from non-PowerCenter self-managed products. Cloud ARR grew at a rate of 40% for the year ended December 31, 2021. Many of our new subscription products were architected to be deployed in the cloud, and we intend to make the remainder of our subscription products available in the cloud to meet the demands of our customers. In addition, we assist our customers with migrations of their Informatica on-premises data integration and MDM installations to our corresponding cloud solutions. For the period starting in our fourth fiscal quarter of 2020 and ended December 31, 2021, we have entered into agreements to migrate a total of approximately $10.8 million of maintenance ARR, which has converted into approximately $21.0 million in Cloud ARR. Our future growth will depend in part on our ability to develop new market-leading cloud products to expand the offerings in our platform.
New Customer Acquisition. Our future growth depends on our ability to acquire new customers. Our ability to acquire new customers is demonstrated by the fact that 55% of our subscription customers as of December 31, 2021 did not have a prior maintenance contract with us. In addition, our ability to attract new customers will depend in part on our ability to continue to compete effectively against a variety of different vendors who offer existing data management products, as well as our ability to convert companies into paying customers who are using hand-coded, custom-built solutions. Additionally, we will continue to rely on our sales and marketing team to effectively and efficiently identify and engage with prospective customers, increase brand awareness, and drive adoption of our products. We have recently added a dedicated inside sales team to our go-to-market strategy that is focused on growing adoption of our products by targeting key business personnel adjacent to technical roles, as well as small- and mid-market organizations, which represents a new addressable customer base for us. We will continue to make investments in sales and marketing to grow our total customer base, with a focus on targeting these new buyers.
Expansion Within our Customer Base. Our business depends, in part, on our ability to expand within our large existing customer base by adding new products, addressing cloud modernization initiatives, and growing with our customers’ overall data footprint. We have successfully expanded our existing customers’ adoption of our platform through upselling and cross-selling, as evidenced by our Subscription NRR, which was 114%, 114%, and
7 We compute the number of customers by assessing when we have a subscription contract or perpetual license maintenance contract sold to a unique entity. If we sell to several different divisions, segments or subsidiaries inside a company, we count each division, segment or subsidiary as a separate customer. If a customer has both a maintenance contract and a subscription contract, we count this as a single customer.
- 73 -
113% as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We increased the average subscription ARR per subscription customer by approximately 60% from December 31, 2019 to December 31, 2021, from $139 thousand to $221 thousand. We continuously focus on increasing the value our customers derive from our platform and often become a strategic vendor to them in the process. For example, as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had 153, 104 and 66 customers individually with over $1 million in Subscription ARR each, respectively.
Retention of Existing Customers. Our business also depends, in part, on our ability to retain our existing customer base. We typically enjoy a high customer renewal rate, which we attribute to the fact that our products are embedded in mission-critical applications, as well as the fact that we have an expansive product portfolio and world-class customer success organization. For example, in 2021 and 2020, we achieved a subscription renewal rate8 of 92% and 92%, and a maintenance renewal rate9 of 95% and 95%, respectively. We intend to continue investing in our products and customer success organization to maintain these compelling retention rates.
Investment in Go-to-Market Efforts. Our business and results of operations will also be significantly affected by our success in strengthening our relationships with strategic partners, including cloud hyperscalers, including AWS, Google Cloud Platform, Microsoft Azure, cloud partners such as Snowflake and Databricks, global system integrators, including Deloitte, Accenture and Cognizant, and value-added resellers and distributors. We believe further developing these key strategic relationships will help us scale and enhance co-selling of our products and services with these partners. We plan to continue to strengthen and expand our network of strategic partners to increase sales to both new and existing customers and offer new and existing products on partner marketplaces. We believe that investing in sales enablement and co-selling efforts with our strategic partners will broaden our distribution footprint globally and extend and improve our engagement with a broad set of prospective customers.
Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following unaudited key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measure to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions:
Key Business Metrics
Annual Recurring Revenue
Annual Recurring Revenue (ARR) represents the expected annual billing amounts from all active maintenance and subscription agreements. ARR is calculated based on the contract Monthly Recurring Revenue (MRR) multiplied by 12. MRR is calculated based on the accounting adjusted total contract value divided by the
8 We compute the subscription renewal rate by assessing the value of annual subscription contracts that expire at the end of each period (denominator) and comparing this to the amount that we renew for that set of expiring contracts (numerator). We typically allow for a grace period of up to six months past the original contract expiration quarter during which we engage in the renewal process before we report the contract as lost /inactive. This grace-period renewal amount has been an immaterial portion over the last three years. If there is an actual cancellation for a subscription contract, we count that amount as removed from the numerator in that period.
9 We compute the maintenance renewal rate by assessing the value of annual maintenance contracts for perpetual licenses that expire at the end of each period (denominator) and comparing this to the amount that we renew for that set of expiring contracts (numerator). We typically allow for a grace period of up to six months past the original contract expiration quarter during which we engage in the renewal process before we report the contract as lost /inactive. This grace-period renewal amount has been an immaterial portion over the last three years. If there is an actual cancellation for a maintenance contract, we count that amount as removed from the numerator in that period. If a customer cancels a maintenance contract and migrates the underlying product to one of our cloud products, this loss of maintenance would be counted as a cancellation and reduce our maintenance renewal rate.
- 74 -
number of months of the agreement based on the start and end dates of each contracted line item. The aggregate ARR calculated at the end of each reported period represents the value of all contracts that are active as of the end of the period, including those contracts that have expired but are still under negotiation for renewal. We typically allow for a grace period of up to 6 months past the original contract expiration quarter during which we engage in the renewal process before we report the contract as lost /inactive. This grace-period ARR amount has been less than 2% of the reported ARR in each period presented. If there is an actual cancellation of an ARR contract, we remove that ARR value at that time.
We believe ARR is an important metric for understanding our business since it tracks the annualized cash value collected over a 12-month period for all our recurring contracts, irrespective of whether it is a maintenance contract on a perpetual license, a ratable cloud contract, or an on-premises term-based subscription license.
Maintenance Annual Recurring Revenue
Maintenance Annual Recurring Revenue represents the portion of ARR only attributable to our maintenance contracts.
We believe that Maintenance ARR is a helpful metric for understanding our business since it represents the approximate annualized cash value collected over a 12-month period for all our maintenance contracts. Maintenance ARR includes maintenance contracts supporting our on-premises perpetual licenses. Maintenance ARR should be viewed independently of maintenance revenue and deferred revenue related to our maintenance contracts and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items.
Subscription Annual Recurring Revenue
Subscription ARR represents the portion of ARR only attributable to our subscription contracts.
We believe that Subscription ARR is a helpful metric for understanding our business since it represents the approximate annualized cash value collected over a 12-month period for all our recurring subscription contracts. Subscription ARR excludes maintenance contracts on our perpetual licenses to provide information regarding the period-to-period performance and overall size and scale of our subscription business as we continue to focus our efforts on subscription-based licensing. Subscription ARR should be viewed independently of subscription revenue and deferred revenue related to our subscription contracts and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items.
Cloud Annual Recurring Revenue
Cloud ARR represents the portion of ARR that is attributable to our hosted cloud contracts.
We believe that Cloud ARR is a helpful metric for understanding our business since it represents the approximate annualized cash value collected over a 12-month period for all our recurring Cloud contracts. Cloud ARR is a subset of our overall Subscription ARR, and by providing this breakdown of Cloud ARR, it provides visibility on the size and growth rate of our Cloud ARR within our overall Subscription ARR. Cloud ARR should be viewed independently of subscription revenue and deferred revenue related to our subscription contracts and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items.
Subscription Net Retention Rate
Subscription NRR compares the contract value for Subscription ARR from the same set of customers at the end of a period compared to the prior year. We treat divisions, segments or subsidiaries inside companies as separate customers. To calculate our Subscription NRR for a particular period, we first establish the Subscription ARR value at the end of the prior year period. We subsequently measure the Subscription ARR value at the end of the current period from the same cohort of customers. The net retention rate is then calculated by dividing the aggregate Subscription ARR in the current period by the prior year period. An increase in the Subscription NRR occurs as a result of price increases on existing contracts, higher consumption of existing products, and sales of additional new subscription products to existing customers exceeding losses from subscription contracts due to cancellations.
- 75 -
We believe Subscription NRR is an important metric for understanding our business since it measures the rate at which we are able to sell additional products into our subscription customer base. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, our Subscription NRR was 114% and 114%, respectively.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
In addition to our results determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP), we believe the following non-GAAP measure is useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measure as tools for comparison. A reconciliation is provided below for our non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of this non-GAAP financial measure to its most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, and not to rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as GAAP net loss as adjusted for income tax (benefit) expense, interest income, interest expense, loss on debt refinancing, other income (expense), net, stock-based compensation, amortization of intangibles, equity compensation related payments, one-time fees related to acquisitions, costs related to discrete payments for legal settlements, restructuring costs and executive severance, one-time impairment on restructured facilities, sponsor-related costs and depreciation. Equity compensation payments are related to the repurchase of employee stock options.
We believe adjusted EBITDA is an important metric for understanding our business to assess our relative profitability adjusted for balance sheet debt levels.
- 76 -
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted worldwide economic activity and financial markets and significantly increased economic volatility and uncertainty. For instance, many governments, including at the local, state, and federal level in the United States and elsewhere around the world, have been prompted to take unprecedented steps, including, but not limited to, travel restrictions, closure of businesses, social distancing requirements, and mandatory quarantines. During this time, we have taken precautionary measures intended to minimize the risk of the virus to our employees, our customers, and the communities in which we operate. These measures included a suspension of all non-essential travel and the temporary closure of all of our major offices to non-essential employees, which necessitated the shift to remote work arrangements for most of our employees.
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic contributed to decreases in certain of our operating expenses, particularly in our travel and entertainment expenses and event spending. We expect these expenses to increase as the COVID-19 pandemic subsides but that they will remain lower than they were before the COVID-19 pandemic, as we expect certain sales and marketing efforts and events will be increasingly virtual going forward. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic also had an adverse impact on revenues, which was partially offset by the savings in travel and entertainment expenses. In response to this decrease in our revenue, we also shifted our go-to-market strategy in certain markets, including smaller countries within APAC and Europe, reducing our direct sales headcount and instead aligning with local channel partners for distribution.
While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic depends on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time, such as the extent and effectiveness of containment actions, it has already had an adverse effect on the global economy and the ultimate societal and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic remains unknown. In particular, the ongoing conditions caused by this pandemic may affect the rate of global information technology spending and could adversely affect our business for future periods by lengthening our sales cycles, reducing customer spending, negatively impacting collections of accounts receivable, causing some of our customers to go out of business, limiting the ability of our direct sales force to travel to existing and potential customers’ sites and limiting the ability of our professional services team to perform on-site work. Additionally, the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to impact our operations outside the United States even if local containment efforts are successful. Refer to the section titled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Components of Results of Operations
Software Revenues
Subscription Revenues. Subscription revenues consist of revenues from customers under subscription cloud services, subscription-based on-premises licenses, and related support services. Revenues from our cloud-based subscription products are recognized over time on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer or on the date the contractual term commences, if later. The majority of the revenues from our subscription-based on-premises licenses is recognized at a point in time upon transfer of control of the license to the customer, similar to perpetual licenses. Support services sold with subscription-based on-premises licenses are recognized over time on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date the service is made available to the customer. In general, subscription contracts are one to three years in length, with an average contract duration slightly greater than two years in 2021, and the related fees are typically billed annually in advance in equal installments across the term of the contracts.
Perpetual License Revenues. Perpetual license revenues are revenues from customers and partners for sales of our software under on-premises perpetual licenses. Revenue from our perpetual license products is generally recognized at a point in time upon transfer of control of the license to the customer, which is typically upon making the software available to our customers. We expect revenue from perpetual licenses to be less than 5% of total revenues going forward, as we focus the majority of our product development spending on pure cloud products and our go-to-market efforts on subscription-based licensing for software sales. While we continue to offer our perpetual licenses to select customers and geographies, we disincentivize our sales force from selling our perpetual licenses in favor of our subscription-based offerings.
Service Revenues
Maintenance Revenues. Maintenance revenue, which consists of fees for ongoing support and product updates for our perpetual licenses, is recognized ratably over the term of the contract, typically one year.
- 77 -
Maintenance contracts are generally billed annually in advance. We expect our maintenance revenues to gradually decrease over time as our customers transition to our subscription-based licensing model and adopt our cloud-based products.
Professional Services Revenues. Professional services revenues consist of one-time fees associated with implementation, education, and consulting services related to our software products. Consulting revenues are primarily related to configuration, installation, and implementation of our products. These services are generally performed on a time-and-materials basis and, accordingly, revenues are recognized as the services are performed. Consulting services, if included as part of the software arrangement, generally do not entail significant modification or customization of the software and hence, such services are not considered essential to the functionality of the software. Education service revenues are generated from classes offered at our headquarters, sales and training offices, customer locations, and on-line. Revenues are recognized as the classes are delivered or when the subscription period ends.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of Software Revenues. Our cost of software revenues is a combination of costs of subscription revenues and perpetual licenses. Cost of subscription revenues consists primarily of fees paid to third party vendors for hosting services related to our subscription services, internal personnel-related expenses to operate and secure our hosting infrastructure, and royalties paid to postal authorities for address data and other vendors that provide content for our data-as-a-service offerings. In addition, these expenses include costs which are personnel-related expenses from our IT, Facilities and Procurement functions and expenses related to occupancy and enterprise systems allocated based on headcount (Shared Costs). Cost of perpetual license revenues consists primarily of software royalties payable to third parties.
Cost of Maintenance and Professional Services Revenues. Our cost of service revenues is a combination of costs of maintenance, consulting and education services revenues. Our cost of maintenance revenues consists primarily of costs associated with customer service personnel-related expenses and royalty fees for maintenance related to third-party software providers. Cost of consulting revenues consists primarily of personnel-related expenses, including employee costs, subcontractor costs and travel, entertainment, Shared Costs, and other expenses. Cost of education services revenues consists primarily of the costs of providing education classes and materials at our headquarters, sales and training offices and customer locations.
Amortization of Acquired Technology. Amortization of acquired technology is the amortization of technologies recorded primarily as a result of the 2015 Privatization Transaction and, to a lesser extent, from business acquisitions and acquired technology licenses.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation as well as consulting services, travel expenses, Shared Costs, software expenses associated with the development of new products, enhancement and localization of existing products, and quality assurance and development of documentation for our products. All software development costs for software intended to be marketed to customers have been expensed in the period incurred since the costs incurred subsequent to the establishment of technological feasibility have not been significant. We believe that continued investment in our products is important for our growth and, as such, expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future, but are expected to be relatively consistent as a percentage of revenue.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including commissions, stock-based compensation and bonuses, as well as costs of public relations, seminars, marketing programs, lead generation, travel and entertainment, trade shows, software expenses, outside services and Shared Costs. Although we shifted our go-to-market strategy within APAC and EMEA in 2020, reducing our direct sales headcount to align with local channel partners for distribution, we expect to make significant investments going forward as we expand our customer acquisition and retention efforts, and to support the growth of our subscription products, and
- 78 -
therefore expect sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars but may vary as a percentage of revenue for the foreseeable future.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses (including stock-based compensation) for finance, human resources, legal, and general management, as well as professional service expenses associated with recruiting, legal, tax and accounting services, travel expenses and Shared Costs. We expect to incur ongoing costs as a result of operating as a public company, including costs related to compliance and reporting obligations of public companies, and increased costs for insurance, investor relations, and professional services. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future but may vary as a percentage of revenue.
Acquisition, Litigation Settlement, and Other Charges
Acquisition, litigation settlement and other charges consist of amortization of intangible assets, acquisition, litigation settlement and other charges and restructuring charges. Amortization of intangible assets is the amortization of customer relationships, and trade names and trademarks recorded as a result of the 2015 Privatization Transaction and, to a lesser extent, acquired through business acquisitions. Acquisition, litigation settlement and other charges relate to the legal and other related costs incurred on settlement(s) and acquisitions made by the Company. The restructuring charges relate to our reorganization activities related to our workforce and from the closing of certain facilities.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
Interest and other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest expense, interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents, short-term investments, mark-to-market gains and losses on interest rate swaps, unrealized gain and loss on Euro term loan, foreign exchange transaction gains and losses and rental income.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, income tax expense or benefit is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the Company’s consolidated financial statements or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of currently enacted tax laws. We evaluate the realization of deferred tax assets based on all available evidence and establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that they will not be realized.
- 79 -
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data for the periods indicated (in thousands):
- 80 -
The following table presents certain financial data for the periods indicated as a percentage of total revenues:
- 81 -
Comparison of Fiscal Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our revenues (in thousands, except percentages):
Total revenues increased by 9% to $1,444.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,323.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a 18% increase in software revenues, which represents 54% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Software Revenues
Our subscription revenues increased to $747.7 million (or 52% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $593.8 million (or 45% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in subscription revenues of $153.9 million (or 26%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to an increase in our subscription customers and continued expansion within existing customers.
We expect the mix of subscription revenues as compared to total software revenues to continue to increase from prior year levels due to our prioritization of subscription revenues, growing installed customer base, a large number of multi-year subscription sales, and an anticipated increase in demand for subscription offerings.
Our perpetual license revenues decreased to $29.3 million (or 2% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $63.1 million (or 5% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in perpetual license revenues of $33.8 million (or 54%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a decrease in the number of transactions and average transaction price of our software under perpetual licenses as we have focused our sales efforts on our subscription offerings and expanded our cloud business.
We expect perpetual license revenues and the mix of perpetual license revenues as compared to total software revenues to continue to decrease in future periods.
Maintenance and Professional Services Revenues
Maintenance revenues decreased to $558.5 million (or 39% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $560.9 million (or 42% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $2.4 million (or 0%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to non-renewals and declining sales of perpetual licenses offset by maintenance on new perpetual license sales, uplifts upon renewal, and a favorable foreign currency impact of $7.3 million. We expect maintenance revenues to continue to decrease gradually in dollar value and as a percentage of total revenue due to the continued lower expected sales of new perpetual licenses as we sell a greater mix of new cloud and other subscription-based offerings relative to perpetual licenses.
Professional services revenues increased to $108.6 million (or 8% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $105.3 million (or 8% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $3.3 million (or 3%) in professional services revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021
- 82 -
compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by an increase in the demand for our consulting and education offerings.
Cost of Revenues
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our cost of revenues (in thousands, except percentages):
Cost of Software Revenues
Cost of software revenues increased to $85.7 million (or 11% of software revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $58.3 million (or 9% of software revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $27.4 million (or 47%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a $15.9 million increase in fees paid to third party vendors for hosting services related to our subscription services, a $3.9 million increase in personnel-related expenses as we continue to scale up our hosted infrastructure support teams, a $3.5 million increase in Shared Costs related to occupancy and enterprise systems allocated based on headcount, a $1.2 million increase in royalty fees, and a $2.9 million increase in other expenses.
Cost of Maintenance and Professional Services Revenues
Cost of maintenance and professional services revenues increased to $172.8 million (or 26% of maintenance and professional services revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $161.2 million (or 24% of maintenance and professional services revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $11.6 million (or 7%) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an $11.6 million increase in personnel-related expenses mainly driven by an increase in headcount, a $2.4 million increase in Shared Costs related to occupancy and enterprise systems allocated based on headcount, a $1.2 million increase in other expenses, partially offset by a $2.0 million decrease in outside services, and a $1.6 million decrease in travel, entertainment and other expenses due to pandemic-related travel restrictions.
Amortization of Acquired Technology
Amortization of acquired technology decreased to $73.5 million (or 5% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $98.5 million (or 7% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $25.0 million (or 25%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a decrease in the amortization of acquired technology primarily from the 2015 Privatization Transaction, as components of the technology become fully amortized.
- 83 -
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our research and development expenses (in thousands, except percentages):
Research and development expenses increased to $260.7 million (or 18% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $230.2 million (or 17% of total revenues) for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $30.5 million (or 13%) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a $27.2 million increase in personnel-related expenses (including stock-based compensation of $8.6 million) mainly driven by an increase in headcount and higher stock-based compensation expense primarily on certain performance-based options which vested upon the completion of our IPO and new restricted stock units issued during 2021, an $7.8 million increase in software and other expenses, and a $1.7 million increase in consulting services; partially offset by a $5.5 million decrease in Shared Costs related to occupancy and enterprise systems, and a $0.7 million decrease in travel expense due to pandemic-related travel restrictions.
Sales and Marketing
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our sales and marketing expenses (in thousands, except percentages):
Sales and marketing expenses increased to $496.8 million (or 34% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $451.8 million (or 34% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $45.0 million (or 10%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a $35.4 million increase in personnel-related expenses (including stock-based compensation of $9.9 million) mainly driven by increases in headcount, commissions expense and higher stock-based compensation recognized primarily on certain performance-based options which upon the completion of our IPO and new restricted stock units issued during 2021, a $7.2 million increase in marketing expense related to our IPO, a $5.3 million increase in Shared Costs related to occupancy and enterprise systems, a $1.7 million increase in outside services; partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in travel expense due to pandemic-related travel restrictions. and a $0.9 million decrease in software and other expenses.
General and Administrative
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our general and administrative expenses (in thousands, except percentages):
General and administrative expenses increased to $122.1 million (or 8% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $93.5 million (or 7% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of 28.6 million (or 31%) was primarily due to a $16.7 million increase in outside services, an $10.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses mainly driven by a $9.9 million increase in stock-based compensation recognized primarily on certain performance-based options which vested upon the completion of our IPO and new restricted stock units issued during 2021, and a $2.4 million increase in Shared Costs related to occupancy and enterprise systems; partially offset by a $1.2 million decrease in other administrative expenses.
- 84 -
Other Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our amortization of intangible assets, acquisition, litigation, and other charges and restructuring charges (in thousands, except percentages):
Amortization of intangible assets decreased to $172.4 million (or 12% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $189.3 million (or 14% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $16.9 million (or 9%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to a decrease in the amortization of our intangible assets primarily from the 2015 Privatization Transaction, as the components of the intangible assets become fully amortized.
Restructuring, acquisition, and other charges decreased to $0.1 million (0% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $19.5 million (1% of total revenues) during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $19.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the reorganization activities related to our workforce reduction, which resulted in the elimination of approximately 300 employees, or 6% of the total workforce and closure of several offices both inside and outside of the United States during 2020, as well as the legal and other related cost incurred on two acquisitions that we completed during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest and Other Income (Expense), Net
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our interest and other income, net (in thousands, except percentages):
The increase in interest and other income (expense), net, of $75.2 million (or 36%) for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to an increase of approximately $133.4 million of revaluation gain on the Euro Term Loan resulting from the U.S. dollar appreciating against the Euro, a decrease of $17.0 million in interest expense primarily due to a decrease in the debt balance associated with the debt repayment and lower interest rates as a result of debt refinancing in October 2021, and a decrease of $6.5 million in loss on debt refinancing from higher 2020 refinancing costs. These increases were partially offset by an increase of foreign exchange loss balances by $77.8 million, a $2.9 million increase in loss on liquidation of subsidiaries and a $1.0 million decrease in interest on certain tax refunds received.
Income Taxes
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our provision (benefit) for income taxes (in thousands, except percentages):
- 85 -
The Company’s effective tax benefit was (32)% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The effective tax benefit was higher than the United States statutory rate of 21%, primarily due to establishment of a valuation allowance on its disallowed interest expense deferred tax asset and withholding taxes, partially offset by a benefit from the IRS audit settlement.
The Company’s effective tax rate was 12% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rates were lower than the Luxembourg statutory rate of 25%, primarily due to U.S. earnings taxed at lower tax rates under the Tax Cuts and Jobs Acts enacted on December 22, 2017.
ASC 740, Income Taxes, provides for the recognition of deferred tax assets if realization of such assets is more likely than not. In assessing the need for any additional valuation allowance for the year ended December 31, 2021, we considered all available evidence both positive and negative, legislative developments, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income, and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies.
As a result of this analysis for the year ended December 31, 2021, management believes it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets of $261.6 million will be realized (except for the disallowed business interest expenses under Sec. 163(j), the net California deferred tax assets and operating losses in certain foreign jurisdictions).
- 86 -
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables summarize our selected unaudited quarterly consolidated statements of operations data, the percentage of revenues that each line item represents, and the key business metrics for each of the eight quarters in the period ended December 31, 2021. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as our audited annual consolidated financial statements and reflects, in the opinion of management, all adjustments of a normal, recurring nature that are necessary for the fair statement of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report. Historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for the full fiscal year or any other period.
Consolidated Statements of Operations Data
- 87 -
(1)Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
- 88 -
Percentage of Revenue Data
Seasonal Trends
Purchasing patterns for our products have followed quarterly and seasonal trends that we expect to continue. We typically sell a substantial portion of our software product licenses and services in the last month of each quarter, and demand for our software products and professional services are generally highest in the fourth quarter and lowest in the first quarter of each year.
Quarterly Changes in Revenue
Subscription revenue generally increased as a percentage of total revenue for the quarters presented primarily due to introduction of new subscription and cloud products, increased consumption of our products by existing customers and the addition of new customers. Perpetual license revenue as a percentage of total revenue has generally declined due to our shift to subscription model.
- 89 -
Quarterly Changes in Cost of Revenue
Changes in cost of revenue have generally corresponded with our revenue growth. Increases are primarily due to third party hosting service costs and increased personnel-related expenses resulting from increased headcount, offset by decreases in amortization of acquired technology.
Quarterly Changes in Operating Expenses
Operating expenses have fluctuated in each of the prior eight quarters presented primarily due to increased personnel related costs and other related costs to support our growth, offset by pandemic-related savings from reduced business travel and the virtualization or cancellation of customer and employee events. We intend to continue to make investments in research and development as we add features and enhance our product. We also intend to invest in our sales and marketing organization to drive future revenue growth.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our quarterly consolidated financial data, we use the following key business metrics and non-GAAP financial measure to help us evaluate our business and operating performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions:
See the section titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Key Business Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for a description of Annual Recurring Revenue, Maintenance Annual Recurring Revenue, Subscription Annual Recurring Revenue, Cloud Annual Recurring Revenue, Subscription Net Retention Rate and Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define adjusted EBITDA as GAAP net loss as adjusted for income tax expense (benefit), interest income, interest expense, loss on debt refinancing, other income (expense), net, stock-based compensation, amortization of intangibles, equity compensation related payments, one-time fees related to acquisitions, restructuring costs and executive severance, sponsor-related costs and depreciation. Equity compensation payments are related to the repurchase of employee stock options.
- 90 -
- 91 -
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through cash flows from operations and debt financing. As of December 31, 2021, we had $498.1 million in available cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash, and short-term investments. Our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments primarily consist of bank account balances, short-term time deposits and highly liquid money market funds. As of December 31, 2021, we did not hold any marketable securities. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash flows generated by operations and the Revolving Facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, we may be required to raise or desire additional funds for selective purposes, such as acquisitions or other investments in complementary businesses, products, or technologies, and may raise such additional funds through equity or debt financing or from other sources.
On October 29, 2021, we completed our IPO, with a subsequent full exercise of underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, which resulted in aggregate net proceeds of $915.7 million, after underwriting discounts and commissions of $51.5 million. The Company also incurred offering costs of approximately $11.9 million. We also (i) repaid in full the $2.8 billion of outstanding indebtedness under the First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement from $1.9 billion of borrowings under the Credit Agreement and $915.7 million of the net proceeds from the IPO and $30.2 million from cash and cash equivalents on hand; (ii) paid a 2.0% prepayment premium under our Second Lien Credit Agreement.
The borrowings under the Term Facility bear interest at either, at the Company's election, LIBOR plus 2.75% or the base rate plus 1.75%. The Revolving Facility accrues interest at a per annum rate based on either, at the borrower’s election, (i) LIBOR plus the applicable margin for LIBOR loans ranging between 2.00% and 2.50% based on the borrower’s total net first lien leverage ratio or (ii) the base rate plus an applicable margin ranging between 1.00% and 1.50% based on the borrower’s total net first lien leverage ratio. See Note 9. Borrowings in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details.
Our primary sources of cash are from cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, the Revolving Facility and the collection of accounts receivable from our customers. Our uses of cash include payroll and payroll-related expenses and operating expenses such as marketing programs, travel, professional services, facilities and related costs, servicing our borrowings, and debt principal payments. We have also used cash to purchase property and equipment and to acquire businesses and technologies to expand our product offerings. We expect to use most of our available cash to service our borrowings, to the extent not used for working capital needs.
Approximately a fourth of our cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments are held by our foreign subsidiaries.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating Activities: Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $228.7 million. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $99.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges, primarily consisting of $276.3 million of depreciation and amortization, $45.0 million of stock-based compensation expense, $30.9 million loss on debt refinancing and $15.3 million of non-cash operating lease cost which was partially offset by $29.7 million of gain on remeasurement of our euro debt and $18.9 million of deferred income taxes. Additional providers of cash resulted from changes in operating assets and liabilities. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities were a $83.3 million increase in contract liabilities and a $36.8 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payments and payment of our lease obligations. This was partially offset mainly by a $64.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and assets associated with the growth in our operations, a $26.4 million increase in accounts receivable due higher balance and the timing of collections and a $19.8 million decrease in income tax payable due to the timing of tax payments. Our “days sales outstanding” in accounts receivable decreased to 97 days as of December 31, 2021 from 99 days as of December 31, 2020.
- 92 -
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $167.8 million. Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $167.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges, primarily consisting of $321.6 million of depreciation and amortization, $50.6 million of unrealized loss on remeasurement of our euro debt, $37.4 million in loss on our debt refinancing, $19.2 million of non-cash operating lease cost and $12.0 million of stock-based compensation expense which was partially offset by $77.9 million of deferred income taxes. Additional uses of cash resulted from changes in operating assets and liabilities. The main drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities were a $42.5 million increase in prepaid expenses and assets associated with the growth in our operations, a $8.5 million increase in accounts receivable due to the timing of collections and a $11.2 million decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to timing of payment and payment of our lease obligations. This was partially offset mainly by a $22.7 million increase in income tax payable due to the timing of tax payments and a $12.5 million increase in contract liabilities. Our “days sales outstanding” in accounts receivable increased to 99 days as of December 31, 2020 from 96 days as of December 31, 2019.
Investing Activities: Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $32.4 million primarily due to a $101.2 million cash outflow consisting primarily of $90.4 million in purchases of investments and $10.8 million for purchases of property and equipment. These cash outflows were partially offset by $68.7 million in maturities of investments and $0.1 million from the sale of an investment in an equity interest.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $52.5 million primarily due to a $72.3 million cash outflow consisting primarily of $36.7 million in purchases of investments, $21.4 million for business acquisitions, net of cash acquired, $13.8 million for purchases of property and equipment, and $0.3 million for payment for equity method investment. These cash outflows were partially offset by $19.6 million in maturities of investments and $0.1 million from the sale of an investment in an equity interest.
We acquire property and equipment in our normal course of business. The amount and timing of these purchases and the related cash outflows in future periods depend on a number of factors, including the hiring of employees, the rate of upgrade of computer hardware and software used in our business, as well as our business outlook.
We have used cash to acquire businesses and technologies that enhance and expand our product offerings, and we anticipate that we will continue to do so in the future. Due to the nature of these transactions, it is difficult to predict the amount and timing of such cash requirements to complete such transactions. We may be required to raise additional funds to complete future acquisitions.
Financing Activities: Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $86.4 million primarily due to $1,373.6 million payment in debt, $25.6 million payment of debt issuance costs, $19.0 million of net activity from derivatives with an other-than-insignificant financing element, $10.7 million paid for contingent consideration in connection with an acquisition, $9.3 million for payments for share repurchases, and $2.8 million for payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards. These cash outflows were partially offset by $905.9 million proceeds from issuance of common stock upon initial public offering, net of underwriting discounts and offering costs, $441.3 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt and $7.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of shares.
Net cash generated from financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $70.3 million driven by $950.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of debt and $3.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of our shares. These cash inflows were partially offset by $826.0 million payment of debt, $32.2 million payment of debt issuance costs, $7.5 million payment for settlement of stock options, $6.2 million paid for contingent consideration in connection with an acquisition, $5.6 million of net activity from derivatives with an other-than-insignificant financing element, $3.3 million for payments for share repurchases and $2.4 million payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Debt
Credit Facilities
On February 25, 2020, we amended our existing credit facilities (as amended, the “First Lien Credit Agreement”) and entered into a new Second Lien Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “Second Lien Credit Agreement” and, together with the First Lien Credit Agreement, the “2020 Credit Agreements”) with Nomura Corporate Funding Americas, LLC, as agent, for a syndicate of lenders. We borrowed $1.8 billion of dollar term
- 93 -
loans and €480.0 million of euro term loans under the First Lien Credit Agreement and $425.0 million of term loans under the Second Lien Credit Agreement
On July 14, 2020, we borrowed an additional $50.0 million of second lien term loans under the Second Lien Credit Agreement.
On October 29, 2021, the Company refinanced the 2020 Credit Agreements with a new Credit and Guaranty Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”), with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as agent, for a syndicate of lenders. Under the Credit Agreement, the Company incurred $1.9 billion of dollar term loans (the “Term Facility”) and obtained $250.0 million of commitments under a revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”).
The entry into the Credit Agreement and related transactions resulted in a one-time loss on debt refinancing of $30.8 million, which was comprised of $10.5 million related to expensing of existing unamortized debt issuance and discount costs due to extinguishment of debt, $9.5 million related to a breakage fee on a term loan repaid under the Second Lien Agreement, and the remaining $10.8 million related to new debt issuance costs on loans from existing lenders which were considered modified. On the date of the Credit Agreement, the Company had previously unamortized debt issuance costs and an original issue discount associated with the modified lenders of $18.1 million and incurred an additional $3.7 million of new debt issuance costs and $2.3 million of new debt discount from new lenders, the aggregate amount of which will be amortized to interest expense using the effective interest method over the remaining life of the term loan.
The Term Facility matures on October 29, 2028 and is repayable in quarterly installments of 0.25% of the initial principal amount thereof, with the remaining amount due at maturity. The Revolving Facility matures on October 29, 2026. See Note 9. Borrowings in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details.
As of December 31, 2021, a total of approximately $1.9 billion was outstanding under the Term Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we have also utilized $0.7 million of letters of credit under the Revolving Facility. See Note 9. Borrowings in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details.
The Credit Agreement requires that, as of the last day of any fiscal quarter if on such date the aggregate principal amount of all revolving loans, swingline loans and letter of credit obligations (in excess of $15 million) exceed 35% of the revolving loan commitments, the total net first lien leverage ratio cannot exceed 6.25 to 1.00. Accrued interest on the Term Facilities is payable quarterly in arrears with respect to base rate loans, at the end of each interest rate period (or at each 3- month interval in the case of loans with interest periods greater than 3 months) with respect to LIBOR loans, the date of any repayment or prepayment, and at maturity (whether by acceleration or otherwise).
The Credit Agreements contain certain customary affirmative and negative covenants. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all such covenants.
On October 29, 2021, we completed our IPO, with a subsequent full exercise of underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, which resulted in aggregate net proceeds of $915.7 million, after underwriting discounts and commissions of $51.5 million. The Company also incurred offering costs of approximately $11.9 million. We also (i) repaid in full the $2.8 billion of outstanding indebtedness under the First Lien Credit Agreement and Second Lien Credit Agreement from $1.9 billion of borrowings under the Credit Agreement and $915.7 million of the net proceeds from the IPO and $30.2 million from cash and cash equivalents on hand; and (ii) paid a 2.0% prepayment premium under our Second Lien Credit Agreement.
The borrowings under the Term Facility bear interest at either, at the borrower’s election, LIBOR plus 2.75% or the base rate plus 1.75%. The Revolving Facility accrues interest at a per annum rate based on either, at the borrower’s election, (i) LIBOR plus the applicable margin for LIBOR loans ranging between 2.00% and 2.50% based on the borrower’s total net first lien leverage ratio or (ii) the base rate plus an applicable margin ranging between 1.00% and 1.50% based on the borrower’s total net first lien leverage ratio. See Note 9. Borrowings in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for details
- 94 -
Contractual and Lease Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations at December 31, 2021, which include our future principal and estimated interest payments under our debt facilities and our future minimum lease payments under operating leases with original terms in excess of one year, and the effect of such obligations on our liquidity and cash flows in the future periods (in thousands):
The above commitment table does not include approximately $23.8 million of long-term income tax liabilities recorded in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of these potential future payments in individual years beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes. As a result, this amount is not included in the table above. For further information, see Note 17. Income Taxes of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contractual Obligations
Purchase orders or contracts for the purchase of certain goods and services are not included in the above table. We cannot determine the aggregate amount of such purchase orders that represent contractual obligations because purchase orders may represent authorizations to purchase rather than binding agreements. For the purposes of the contractual obligation table above, contractual obligations for purchase of goods or services are defined as agreements that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms, including fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased; fixed, minimum, or variable price provisions; and the approximate timing of the transaction. Our purchase orders are based on our current needs and are fulfilled by our vendors within short time horizons. We also enter into contracts for outsourced services; however, the obligations under these contracts were not significant and the contracts generally contain clauses allowing for cancellation without significant penalty. Contractual obligations that are contingent upon the achievement of certain milestones are not included in the table above.
We estimate the expected timing of payment of the obligations discussed above based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different depending on the time of receipt of goods or services or changes to agreed-upon amounts for some obligations.
Operating Leases
We also lease certain office facilities and equipment under operating leases, which expire at various dates through 2035.
The expected timing of payment of the obligations discussed above is estimated based on current information. Timing of payments and actual amounts paid may be different.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, which require us to make estimates, judgments, and assumptions. We believe that the estimates, judgments, and assumptions upon which we rely are reasonable based upon information available to us at the time that these assumptions, judgments, and estimates are made. These estimates, judgments, and assumptions can affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Any material differences between these estimates and actual results will impact our consolidated financial statements. On a regular basis, we evaluate our estimates, judgments, and assumptions and make changes accordingly.
- 95 -
We believe that the following critical accounting estimates reflect the more significant estimates, judgments, and assumptions and have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. See the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report for additional information.
Revenue Recognition
We account for our revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The core principle of ASC 606 is to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. This principle is achieved by applying the following five-step approach:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer. A contract with a customer exists when (i) we enter into an enforceable contract with a customer that defines each party’s rights regarding the goods or services to be transferred and identifies the payment terms related to these goods or services, (ii) the contract has commercial substance, and (iii) we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for goods or services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration. We apply judgment in determining the customer’s ability and intention to pay, which is based on a variety of factors, including the customer’s historical payment experience or, in the case of a new customer, published credit and financial information pertaining to the customer.
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract. Performance obligations contained in a contract are identified based on the goods or services that will be transferred to the customer that are both (i) capable of being distinct, and the customer can benefit from the goods or services either on their own or together with other resources that are readily available from third parties or from us, and (ii) distinct in the context of the contract, and the transfer of the goods or services is separate from other promises in the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods or services, we apply our judgment to determine whether the promised goods or services are capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised goods or services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation. We consider a performance obligation satisfied once we have transferred control of a good or product to a customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the product.
•Determination of the transaction price. The transaction price is determined based on the consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring goods or services to the customer.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract. If the contract contains a single performance obligation, the entire transaction price is allocated to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on a relative standalone selling price (SSP). We generally determine SSP based on the price at which the performance obligation is routinely sold separately, such as support and maintenance on our core offerings. In connection with our on-premises perpetual and subscription licenses and cloud services, we are unable to establish an SSP based on observable prices given the same selling price for the same products are highly variable, and a representative SSP is not discernible from past transactions or other observable evidence. As a result, the SSP for on-premises perpetual and subscription licenses and cloud services included in a contract with multiple performance obligations is determined by applying a residual approach whereby all other performance obligations within a contract are first allocated a portion of the transaction price based upon their respective SSPs, with any residual amount of transaction price allocated to on-premises perpetual and subscription licenses and cloud services revenues.
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, performance obligations are satisfied. We satisfy performance obligations either over time or at a point in time, as discussed in further detail below. Revenue is recognized at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied with the transfer of control of a promised good or service to a customer.
We derive our revenues from sales of perpetual and subscription-based on-premises software licenses, a variety of cloud and data-as-a-service offerings, maintenance and support services (which entitle the customer to receive product support and unspecified software updates), and professional services, consisting of consulting and education services. We recognize revenue net of applicable sales taxes, financing charges that we have absorbed, and amounts retained by our resellers and distributors, if any.
- 96 -
Software revenue
Software revenue consists of subscription and perpetual license revenues. Subscription revenues primarily consist of revenues from subscription-based on-premises licenses and related support, and subscription cloud services. Revenues from subscription-based on-premises licenses are recognized at a point in time upon transfer of control of the software license to the customer, similar to perpetual licenses. Revenue on the remaining subscription support offering is generally recognized over time on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer. Subscription contracts are generally three years or shorter in length and billed annually in advance.
Perpetual license revenues are derived from sales of our software under perpetual licenses. Revenue from our perpetual license products is generally recognized at a point in time upon transfer of control of the software license to the customer, which is typically upon making the software available to our customers.
Maintenance and Professional Services revenue
Maintenance revenue, which consists of fees for ongoing support and product updates are recognized ratably over the term of the contract, typically one year. Maintenance contracts are generally billed annually in advance and are non-cancelable.
Professional services revenues are primarily related to configuration, installation, and implementation of our products. These services are generally performed on a time-and-materials basis. Revenues for fixed fee contracts are generally recognized as services are performed, applying input methods to estimate progress to completion. Consulting services are generally either billed in advance or monthly as services are rendered. Consulting services, if included as part of the software arrangement, generally do not entail significant modification or customization of the software and hence, such services are not considered essential to the functionality of the software.
Professional services revenues also include education services revenues, which are generated from classes offered at our headquarters, sales and training offices, customer locations, and on-line. Revenues are recognized as the classes are delivered.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Stock Compensation. We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including stock options, restricted stock units (RSUs) granted to employees and directors, and stock purchase rights granted under the ESPP to employees, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We use the Black-Scholes Merton and Monte Carlo models for valuation of our option awards. For purchase rights granted under the ESPP, the fair value is estimated using the Black-Scholes Merton model. Both models require the input of certain assumptions on the grant date, including fair value of the underlying stock and exercise price, expected term, volatility, risk-free interest rate, and dividend yield. Prior to the Company's Initial Public Offering (IPO), the fair value of the underlying share and the exercise price were based on the estimated per share fair value from our recurring valuation process. We had discounted the fair value of the underlying share for lack of marketability of the shares before applying each model. After the completion of the IPO, the fair value of our common stock is determined by the closing price of the common stock, on the date of grant. The expected term is estimated based on an analysis of the facts and circumstances underlying the option agreement. The expected volatility data is calculated using publicly traded peer companies’ historical volatility. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on the implied yield on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issued with maturities that were consistent with the option’s expected term. The expected dividend yield is zero based on our continued assumption that there will not be any dividend payouts. After the completion of the IPO, the Company determines the fair value of each RSU granted based on the fair value of each share of underlying common stock using the closing price as reported on the date of grant on the primary stock exchange on which our common stock is traded.
We granted stock options with only service conditions as well as with both service and performance/market conditions. The term of the options granted under our equity plan is ten years with a vesting requirement of continued employment through the applicable vesting date, and in certain cases attainment of performance criteria. The performance-based options are subject to a multiple on invested capital (MOIC) performance criteria and/or market conditions in connection with achieving a certain per share price in any one or more exit events, which includes the IPO.
- 97 -
Compensation expense is recognized for time-based options and RSUs on a straight-line basis over the vesting period. Compensation expense for options containing performance conditions is based on the estimated number of the performance-based stock options expected to vest and is recognized using the graded vesting attribution method. Compensation expense for options containing a market condition is based on the estimated number of the stock options expected to vest on attainment of the condition. Compensation expense is recognized for shares issued pursuant to the ESPP on a straight-line basis over the offering period.
See Note 14. Stockholders’ Equity and Deferred Compensation in the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our stock-based compensation plan and more information on the assumptions used to calculate the fair value of stock-based options, RSUs and stock purchase rights. We recognize forfeitures as they occur, and cash flows related to excess tax benefits are presented as an operating activity in the statement of cash flows.
Common Stock Valuation
After the IPO, the fair value of the common stock was determined based on the Company's closing stock price as quoted on the NYSE on the grant date.
Prior to our IPO in October 2021, in the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, the fair value of our common stock underlying our option awards had been determined on each grant date by our board of directors with input from management and contemporaneous third-party valuations. We believe that our board of directors had the relevant experience and expertise, and exercised reasonable judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including:
•contemporaneous valuations of our common stock performed by independent third-party appraisers;
•actual operating results and financial performance;
•conditions in the industry and economy in general;
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of common stock, such as an initial public offering or a sale of the company, given prevailing market conditions;
•equity market conditions affecting comparable public companies and the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies;
•the U.S. and global common market conditions; and,
•the lack of marketability of our common stock and the results of independent third-party valuations, which valued our common stock.
Valuations of our common stock were prepared by a third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
Prior to our IPO, in valuing our common stock, our board of directors determined the fair value of our common stock by using a weighting of both the income and market approach valuation methods. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows were discounted to their present values using a discount rate based on our weighted-average cost of capital, and were adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. The market approach estimated value based on a comparison of our company to comparable public companies in a similar line of business. From the comparable companies, a representative market value multiple was determined and then applied to our company’s financial forecasts to estimate the value of the subject company.
In addition, we also considered any secondary transactions, if any, involving our common stock. In our evaluation of those transactions, we considered the facts and circumstances of each transaction to determine the extent to which they represented a fair value exchange and assigned the transactions an appropriate weighting in the valuation of our common stock. Factors considered include the number of different buyers and sellers, transaction volume, timing relative to the valuation date, whether the transactions occurred between willing and unrelated parties, and whether the transactions involved investors with access to our financial information.
- 98 -
Application of these approaches and methodologies involved the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding our expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies, and the probability of and timing associated with possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions can effect the common stock fair value estimates used to measure stock-based compensation expense to be recognized.
Business Combinations
We estimate the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. Goodwill, as of the acquisition date, is measured as the excess of consideration transferred over the net of the acquisition date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, and as a result, our actual results may differ from estimates.
Contingent consideration arrangements are recognized at their acquisition date fair value using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model and included as part of purchase price at the acquisition date. Contingent consideration arrangements are classified as liabilities and are remeasured to fair value at each reporting period, with any change in fair value being recognized in the consolidated statement of operations. The estimated fair value of the contingent consideration is based primarily on estimates of meeting the applicable contingency conditions as per the terms of the applicable agreements.
Goodwill
We test goodwill for impairment during the fourth quarter of each year and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We have one reporting unit, and therefore we test goodwill for impairment at the entity level. Goodwill impairment is recognized when the quantitative assessment results in the carrying value of the goodwill exceeds its estimated fair value, in which case an impairment charge is recorded to goodwill to the extent the carrying value exceeds the estimated fair value, limited to the amount of goodwill. We have not recognized any impairment of goodwill for all periods presented.
Derivative Instruments
We use derivative instruments as part of our overall strategy to manage our exposure to market risks primarily associated with fluctuations in foreign currency and interest rates. We do not use derivatives for trading or speculative purposes. We determine the fair value of our derivative instruments using pricing models that use inputs from actively quoted markets for similar instruments and other inputs which require judgment. These amounts include fair value adjustments related to our own credit risk and counterparty credit risk. Subsequent to initial recognition, we may adjust the initial fair value position of the derivative instruments for the creditworthiness of the banking counterparty (if the derivative is an asset) or of our own (if the derivative is a liability). The counterparties associated with our foreign currency forward contracts and interest rate swaps are large credit-worthy financial institutions. The foreign currency derivatives transacted with these entities are relatively short in duration and the interest rate derivatives are spread between three counterparties; therefore, we do not consider counterparty concentration and non-performance to be material risks at this time.
Income Taxes
We use the liability method of accounting for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, income tax expense or benefit is recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current year. In addition, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred tax assets and liabilities is based on provisions of currently enacted tax laws. The effects of future changes in tax laws or rates are not contemplated.
A two-step approach is applied pursuant to ASC 740 in the recognition and measurement of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. The first step is to determine if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained in an audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the
- 99 -
largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in its income tax provision line of its consolidated statements of operations.
We evaluate the realization of deferred tax assets based on all available evidence, including projected results of operations and the scheduled reversal of temporary differences. We establish a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more likely than not that they will not be realized.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We make estimates as to the overall collectability of accounts receivable and provide an allowance for credit losses considered uncollectible. We specifically analyze our accounts receivable based on historical bad debt experience, customer creditworthiness, the age of the receivable, current economic trends, and changes in customer payment terms when evaluating the adequacy of the allowance for credit losses. We record any adjustment in general and administrative expense.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.