Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto included in this Form 10-K. The forward-looking statements included in this discussion and elsewhere in this Form 10-K involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under “Cautionary Statement About Forward-Looking Statements.” Actual results and experience could differ materially from the anticipated results and other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including but not limited to those discussed in this Item and in Item 1A - “Risk Factors.” For discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 22, 2021.
Overview
We are a leading national health care service provider, facilitating outpatient care for Durable Medical Equipment manufacturers and health care providers. We provide our products and services to hospitals, oncology practices, ambulatory surgery centers, and other alternate site health care providers. Our headquarters is in Rochester Hills, Michigan, and we operate our business from a total of seven locations in the United States and Canada. We deliver local, field-based customer support as well as operate pump service and repair Centers of Excellence in Michigan, Kansas, California, Massachusetts, Texas and Ontario, Canada. ISI is accredited by the Community Health Accreditation Partner (CHAP) while First Biomedical is ISO 9001 certified at our Kansas, Michigan, Massachusetts, Canada and Santa Fe Springs, California locations and also ISO 13485 certified at our Bakersfield, California location.
InfuSystem competes for and retains its business primarily on the basis of its long participation and strong reputation in the Durable Medical Equipment space, its long-standing relationships with Durable Medical Equipment manufacturers and its health care provider customers, and the high levels of service it provides. Current barriers to entry for potential competitors are created by our: (i) growing number of third-party payer networks under contract, which included nearly 770 third-party payer networks for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of 6% over the prior year period; (ii) economies of scale, which allow for predictable reimbursement and less costly purchase and management of the pumps, respectively; (iii) established, long-standing relationships as a provider of pumps to outpatient oncology practices in the U.S. and Canada; (iv) pump fleet of ambulatory and large volume infusion pumps for rent and for sale, which may allow us to be more responsive to the needs of physicians, outpatient oncology practices, hospitals, outpatient surgery centers, homecare practices, patient rehabilitation centers and patients than a new market entrant; (v) seven geographic locations in the U.S. and Canada that allow for same day or next day delivery of pumps; and (vi) pump repair and service capabilities at all of these facilities and at our customer's locations. We do not perform any research and development on pumps, but we have made, and continue to make investments in our information technology.
ITS Segment
Our ITS segment’s core purpose is to seek opportunities to leverage our unique know-how in clinic-to-home health care involving Durable Medical Equipment, our logistics and billing capabilities, our growing network of third-party payers under contract, and our clinical and biomedical capabilities. This leverage may take the form of new products and/or services, strategic alliances, joint ventures and/or acquisitions. The leading service within our ITS segment is to supply electronic ambulatory infusion pumps and associated disposable supply kits to private oncology clinics, infusion clinics and hospital outpatient oncology clinics to be utilized in the treatment of a variety of cancers, including colorectal cancer and other disease states (“Oncology Business”). Colorectal cancer is the third most prevalent form of cancer in the United States, according to the American Cancer Society, and the standard of care for the treatment of colorectal cancer relies upon continuous chemotherapy infusions delivered via ambulatory infusion pumps. One of the primary goals for the ITS segment is to expand into treatment of other types of cancers. In 2021, our Oncology Business approximated 92% of our total ITS segment revenues. In 2021, we generated approximately 49% of our total ITS segment revenues from treatments for colorectal cancer and 44% of our ITS segment revenues from treatments for non-colorectal disease states. There are a number of approved treatment protocols for pancreatic, head and neck, esophageal and other types of cancers, as well as other disease states which present opportunities for growth. There are also a number of other drugs currently approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”), as well as agents in the pharmaceutical development pipeline, which we believe could potentially be used with continuous infusion protocols for the treatment of diseases other than colorectal cancer. Additional drugs or protocols currently in clinical trials may also obtain regulatory approval over the next several years. If these new drugs or protocols obtain regulatory approval for use with continuous infusion protocols, we expect the pharmaceutical companies to focus their sales and marketing efforts on promoting the new drugs and protocols to physicians.
Furthermore, our Oncology Business focuses mainly on the continuous infusion of chemotherapy. Continuous infusion of chemotherapy can be described as the gradual administration of a drug via a small, lightweight, portable infusion pump over a prolonged period of time. A cancer patient can receive his or her medicine anywhere from one to 30 days per month depending on the chemotherapy regimen that is most appropriate to that individual’s health status and disease state. This may be followed by periods of rest and then repeated cycles with treatment goals of progression-free disease survival. This drug administration method has replaced intravenous push or bolus administration in specific circumstances. The advantages of slow continuous low doses of certain drugs are well documented. Clinical studies support the use of continuous infusion chemotherapy for decreased toxicity without loss of anti-tumor efficacy. The 2015 National Comprehensive Cancer Network (“NCCN”) Guidelines recommend the use of continuous infusion for treatment of numerous cancer diagnoses. We believe that the growth of continuous infusion therapy is driven by three factors: evidence of improved clinical outcomes; lower toxicity and side effects; and a favorable reimbursement environment.
The use of continuous infusion has been demonstrated to decrease or alter the toxicity of a number of cytotoxic, or cell killing agents. Higher doses of drugs can be infused over longer periods of time, leading to improved tolerance and decreased toxicity. For example, the cardiotoxicity (heart muscle damage) of the chemotherapy drug Doxorubicin is decreased by schedules of administration according to The Chemotherapy Source Book by Michael C. Perry. Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and decreased white blood cell and platelet counts are all affected by duration of delivery. Continuous infusion can lead to improved tolerance and patient comfort while enhancing the patient’s ability to remain on the chemotherapy regimen. Additionally, the lower toxicity profile and resulting reduction in side effects enables patients undergoing continuous infusion therapy to continue a relatively normal lifestyle, which may include continuing to work, going shopping, and caring for family members. We believe that the partnering of physician management and patient autonomy provide for the highest quality of care with the greatest patient satisfaction.
We believe that oncology practitioners have a heightened sensitivity to providing quality service and to their ability to obtain reimbursement for services they provide. Simultaneously, CMS and private insurers are increasingly focused on evidence-based medicine to inform their reimbursement decisions - that is, aligning reimbursement with clinical outcomes and adherence to standards of care. Continuous infusion therapy is a main component of the standard of care for certain types of cancers because clinical evidence demonstrates superior outcomes. Payers’ recognition of this benefit is reflected in their relative reimbursement policies for clinical services related to the delivery of this care.
Additional areas of focus for our ITS segment are as follows:
•Pain Management - providing our ambulatory pumps, products, and services for pain management in the area of post-surgical continuous peripheral nerve block.
•Negative Pressure Wound Therapy (“NPWT”) - as announced in February 2020, NPWT includes providing the Durable Medical Equipment and related consumables, overseeing logistics, providing biomedical services, and managing third-party billing of the U.S. home healthcare market, which as a subset of the broader NPWT market, has an estimated addressable home healthcare market of $600 million per year.
•Lymphedema Therapy - as announced in June 2021, Lymphedema therapy includes providing patient care and customer service, pneumatic compression devices and associated garments through our partnership with Bio Compression Systems, Inc. to outpatients, initially targeting our existing acute care and oncology customers, estimated to be 20% of the multi-billion-dollar Lymphedema market.
•Acquisitions - we believe there are opportunities to acquire smaller, regional health care service providers, in whole or in part that perform similar services to us but do not have the national market access, network of third-party payer contracts or operating economies of scale that we currently enjoy. We may also pursue acquisition opportunities of companies that perform similar services, but offer different therapies or utilize different devices.
•Information technology-based services - we also plan to continue to capitalize on key new information technology-based services such as EXPRESS, InfuSystem Mobile, InfuBus or InfuConnect, Pump Portal and BlockPain Dashboard®.
The payer environment within our ITS segment is in a constant state of change. We continue to extend our considerable breadth of payer networks under contract as patients move into different insurance coverage plans, including Medicaid and Insurance Marketplace products. In some cases, this may slightly reduce our aggregate billed revenues payment rate but result in an overall increase in collected revenues, due to a reduction in concessions. Consequently, we are increasingly focused on net revenues less concessions.
DME Services Segment
Our DME Services segment’s core service is to: (i) sell or rent new and pre-owned pole-mounted and ambulatory infusion pumps and other Durable Medical Equipment; (ii) sell treatment-related consumables; and (iii) provide biomedical recertification, maintenance and repair services for oncology practices as well as other alternate site settings, including, home care and home infusion providers, skilled nursing facilities, pain centers and others. We also provide these products and services to customers in the hospital market. We purchase new and pre-owned pole-mounted and ambulatory infusion pumps from a variety of sources on a non-exclusive basis. We repair, refurbish and provide biomedical certification for the devices as needed. The pumps are then available for sale, rental or to be used within our ambulatory infusion pump management service. Our recent acquisition of FilAMed, a privately-held biomedical services company, on January 31, 2021 will supplement the Company’s existing biomedical recertification, maintenance and repair services for acute care facilities and other alternate site settings, including, home care and home infusion providers, skilled nursing facilities, pain centers and others. Our recent acquisition of OB Healthcare Corporation (“OB Healthcare”), a privately-held biomedical services company, on April 18, 2021 further develops and expands InfuSystem’s DME Services segment by extending our existing biomedical service capability into our customer's locations. OB Healthcare complements the Company’s purchase of FilAMed.
Key Business Metrics
Our management monitors a number of financial and non-financial measures and ratios on a regular basis in order to track the progress of our business and make adjustments as necessary. We believe that the most important of these measures and ratios include net revenues and our order-to-cash process, fleet utilization, operating margin, operating expenses, profitability, and debt levels including available credit and leverage ratios. These measures and ratios are compared to standards or objectives set by management, so that actions can be taken, as necessary, in order to achieve the standards and objectives.
COVID-19 Update
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of COVID-19 as a pandemic, which spread globally and throughout the United States. In response, we took a number of precautionary and preemptive steps to protect the safety and well-being of our employees while ensuring continuity of service to our clients, including, transitioning our employees to a remote work environment, suspending employee travel, canceling participation in industry events and in-person group meetings, promoting social distancing and enhanced cleaning and sanitization efforts across office locations, and implementing protocols to quarantine employees who may have been exposed to COVID-19, or show relevant symptoms. We also continued to undertake preparedness plans at our facilities to maintain continuity of operations, which provide for flexible work arrangements without any significant disruptions to our business or control processes. Our management team is continuing to actively monitor the situation and is in constant communication with our workforce as well as with our customers and vendors.
The COVID-19 global pandemic has caused significant disruption to the United States and global economies and has severely impacted the overall healthcare industry and the related supply chain. During 2020, the focus on preparing and treating large numbers of COVID-19 patients resulted in significant shifts in demand and related shortages in certain types of medical equipment, including infusion pumps, while at the same time reducing capacity for non-COVID-19 services such as elective surgeries. During 2020, these impacts created a significant net favorable dynamic for InfuSystem resulting in increased net revenues and margins in certain of our service lines only partially offset by reductions in others. Some of these benefits did not occur in 2021, such as elevated levels of sales of new and pre-owned medical equipment, whereas some diminished during 2021, including a portion of the increased volume of rental revenues. During 2021, outbreaks of COVID-19, including the Delta and Omicron variants, unfavorably impacted our revenue growth initiatives in certain product lines including Pain Management and NPWT, The impacts included scattered restrictions on elective surgeries and delayed ramp-up in treatment volumes for new custom, both of which unfavorably impacted the Pain Management business, and restricted physical access to our customers facilities, which unfavorably impacted both the Pain Management and NPWT businesses. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to heighten potential risks that did not impact the Company in 2020 or 2021, but may impact the Company on a delayed basis, such as disruptions in our supply chain and increased costs of the products we sell and for our labor force. We continue to prepare for disruptions in the current and future periods, both positive and negative.
While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had any material unfavorable effect on our operations to date, the extent and nature of the impact in the future, if any, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain, cannot be predicted and could have a material adverse impact on our financial position, operating results and cash flows. We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and may take further actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and partners. As the conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic continue to evolve, we will continue to actively manage our response in collaboration with customers, government officials and stakeholders, and assess any potential impacts to our
financial position and operating results, as well as adverse developments in our business. For further information regarding the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company, please see Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
InfuSystem Holdings, Inc. Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenues
Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $102.4 million, an increase of $5.0 million, or 5.1%, compared to $97.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to higher treatment volumes for all three ITS Segment therapies, improved collections on billings to third party payers and additional revenue from acquisitions. These amounts were partially offset by lower equipment sales. Increased net revenues were achieved in both the ITS and DME Services segments.
ITS
ITS net revenue of $65.6 million increased $4.5 million, or 7.4%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. This increase was primarily attributable to higher treatment volume and improved patient collections on
billings for Oncology and increased treatment volume in both Pain Management and NPWT. Pain Management net revenue for 2021 increased as compared to 2020 due to additional sites of care added during 2021 and a recovery in the elective surgeries market which was negatively impacted by COVID-19 during the second quarter of 2020. The new NPWT business was launched during the first quarter of 2020 but did not start to have measurable quarterly revenues until the second half of 2020. On a combined basis, Pain Management and NPWT net revenues increased by $1.9 million during 2021 as compared to 2020, which represented an increase of 57%.
DME Services
DME Services net revenue of $36.8 million increased $0.5 million, or 1.3%, during 2021 as compared to the prior year. DME Services net revenue excludes inter-segment revenues for both periods. This increase was due to revenues totaling $2.1 million from FilAMed and OB Healthcare which were acquired during the first quarter of 2021 and second quarter of 2021, respectively. This increase was offset partially by a $2.4 million decrease in sales of medical equipment related to a moderation in market demand for infusion pumps which was elevated during 2020 because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Gross Profit (inclusive of certain inter-segment allocations)
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $60.2 million increased $1.4 million, or 2.4%, from $58.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by the increase in net revenues partially offset by a lower gross profit as a percentage of net revenue (“gross margin”). Gross margin decreased to 58.8% during 2021, as compared to 60.3% during the prior year period, a decrease of 1.5%. The increase in gross profit was attributable to an increase in ITS gross profit partially offset by a decrease in gross profit for the DME Services segment. The gross margin was lower for both operating segments during 2021 as compared to 2020.
ITS
ITS gross profit was $42.0 million, during 2021, representing an increase of $2.3 million, or 5.7%, compared to the prior year. The improvement reflected an increase in net revenues offset partially by a lower gross margin which was 64.1% during 2021, a decrease of 1.0%, from the prior year. The lower gross margin was the result of an unfavorable net revenue mix favoring lower margin therapies offset partially by improved collections on billings during 2021 as compared to 2020. Pump maintenance expenses, which include preventative maintenance, cleaning and repair services mainly performed by the DME Services segment, were unusually low during the prior year due to COVID-19 when the Company deployed a significant number of newly purchased pumps.
DME Services
DME Services gross profit during 2021 was $18.2 million, representing a decrease of $0.8 million, or 4.4%, over the prior year. This decrease was due to lower gross margin partially offset by higher net revenue. The DME gross margin was 49.3% during 2021, which was 2.9% lower than the prior year. This decrease was the result of unfavorable net revenue mix favoring lower gross margin revenues from acquisitions, an increase in labor costs related to an increase in biomedical technicians and an increase in freight expense. The increase in biomedical technician labor resulted from an increase in team members who were hired in order to increase the capacity in biomedical services in anticipation of increased biomedical services demand. These newly hired team members mainly spent their time training during the 2021 period but will be deployed to support higher demand and related revenue volumes in future quarters.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.3 million representing a decrease of less than $0.1 million, or 0.5%, compared to 2020. The decrease is attributable to certain intangible assets becoming fully amortized.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $10.8 million, an increase of $1.1 million, compared to 2020. Selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of net revenues increased to 10.5% compared to 9.9% in 2020. This increase reflected $1.4 million in higher expenses for NPWT and Pain Management dedicated sales personnel hired during the 2021 second quarter, higher customer travel expenses and a shift in the proportion of net revenue favoring the ITS segment which has a higher commission to sales ratio than the DME Services segment. The additional sales team members represent a strategic investment to accelerate revenue growth for both the Pain Management and NPWT therapies and the expense included in selling and marketing is a portion of an overall expense increase of $2.0 million during 2021 associated with this initiative, the remainder of which is included in general and administrative expense. The higher travel expenses
occurred as travel restrictions related to COVID-19 were lifted during 2021. During 2020, when the COVID-19 related travel restrictions were at their peak, our sales team generally did not travel. These increases were partially offset by lower expenses associated with a management reorganization completed during the fourth quarter of 2020 and improved net revenue leverage of fixed selling and marketing expenses. Selling and marketing expenses during these periods consisted of sales personnel salaries, commissions and associated fringe benefit and payroll-related items, marketing, overall travel and entertainment and other miscellaneous expenses.
General and Administrative (“G&A”) Expenses
G&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $42.3 million, an increase of 20.1% from $35.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. G&A expenses during these periods consisted primarily of accounting, administrative, third-party payer billing and contract services, customer service, nurses on staff, new product services, service center personnel salaries, fringe benefits and other payroll-related items, professional fees, legal fees, stock-based compensation, insurance and other miscellaneous items. The increase of $7.1 million was due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $3.8 million, $0.8 million in additional expenses related to the investments in NPWT and Pain Management. There was also additional G&A and acquisition expenses for FilAMed and OB Healthcare totaling $0.6 million and other increases including higher travel, additional personnel and general business expenses totaling $2.7 million. These amounts were partially offset by lower management bonus expense of $0.8 million. The higher personnel expenses reflect higher staff levels supporting the increase in revenues and other increases. G&A expenses as a percentage of net revenues for 2021 increased to 41.3% compared to 36.1% for the prior year mainly reflecting the year-over-year increases offset partially by improved net revenue leverage over fixed costs.
Other Income and Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred interest expense of $1.4 million, an increase of $0.1 million, or 9.7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was a net result of higher weighted average interest rates on our outstanding debt in 2021 as compared to 2020 and additional commitment fees on a higher unused revolving line availability during 2021. These increases were partially offset by lower interest on our decreased average outstanding borrowings during 2021.
Benefit from Income Taxes
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a benefit from income taxes of $0.2 million, representing an effective tax rate of negative 12.9% on pre-tax income totaling $1.3 million. This effective tax rate for 2021 differed from the U.S. statutory rate mainly due to permanent differences in the amounts of equity compensation expense recognized for book versus tax purposes. As of December 31, 2020, the Company had generated significant pre-tax income on a three-year cumulative basis prompting management to assess available positive and negative evidence regarding the recovery of our net deferred tax assets. Due to this assessment, it was determined that it was more likely than not that the Company will recognize the benefits of its federal and state net deferred tax assets and, as a result, a previously recorded valuation allowance was released totaling $11.2 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a benefit from income taxes of $9.8 million, which included the valuation allowance reversal, representing a negative effective tax rate of 130% on pre-tax income of $7.5 million. Without the valuation reserve reversal, the Company would have recorded a provision for income taxes of $1.5 million which would have represented an effective tax rate of 19.4%. This adjusted effective tax rate differed from the U.S. statutory rate mainly due to permanent differences in the amounts of equity compensation expense recognized for book versus tax purposes. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Securities (CARES) Act was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which provides numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures. The Company assessed the impact of these CARES Act provisions and the subsequently released government guidance related to the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial position and results of operations and determined their impact was not material.
Subsequent Events
We have evaluated subsequent events through the date that our consolidated financial statements are issued with nothing to report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview:
We finance our operations and capital expenditures with cash generated from operations and borrowings under our existing credit agreements. On February 5, 2021, we and certain of our subsidiaries, as borrowers, entered into a Credit Agreement (the “2021 Credit Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, sole bookrunner and sole lead arranger, and the lenders party thereto, which replaced our then existing credit facility, dated March 23, 2015 (the “2015 Credit Agreement”). See Note 8 (Debt) in the notes to the accompanying unaudited condensed consolidated financial statements for additional information regarding the 2021 Credit Agreement and 2015 Credit Agreement.
The following table summarizes our available liquidity (in millions):
Our liquidity and borrowing plans are established to align with our financial and strategic planning processes and ensure we have the necessary funding to meet our operating commitments, which primarily include the purchase of pumps, inventory, payroll and general expenses. We also take into consideration our overall capital allocation strategy which includes investment for future organic growth, potential acquisitions and share repurchases. We believe we have adequate sources of liquidity and funding available for at least the next year from the filing date of this report, as well as for our currently anticipated long-term needs. However, any projections of future earnings and cash flows are subject to substantial uncertainty, including factors such as the successful execution of our business plan and general economic conditions. We may need to access debt and equity markets in the future if unforeseen costs or opportunities arise, to meet working capital requirements, fund acquisitions or investments or repay indebtedness under the 2021 Credit Agreement. If we need to obtain new debt or equity financing in the future, the terms and availability of such financing may be impacted by economic and financial market conditions as well as our financial condition and results of operations at the time we seek additional financing.
Long-Term Debt Activities:
The 2021 Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Facility”) of $75.0 million, maturing on February 5, 2026. The Revolving Facility may be increased by $25.0 million, subject to certain conditions, including the consent of the Agent and obtaining necessary commitments. The lenders under the 2021 Credit Agreement may issue up to $7.0 million in letters of credit subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions. On February 5, 2021, the Borrowers made an initial borrowing of $30.0 million under the Revolving Facility. Proceeds from the loan, along with approximately $8.2 million in cash, were used to repay all amounts due under the Company’s then existing 2015 Credit Agreement.
The 2021 Credit Agreement has customary representations and warranties. The ability to borrow under the facility is subject to ongoing compliance with a number of customary affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on indebtedness, liens, mergers, acquisitions, investments, asset sales, affiliate transactions and restricted payments, as well as financial covenants, including the following:
•a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio (defined as the ratio of consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) less 50% of depreciation expense), to consolidated fixed charges (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement)) for the prior four most recently ended calendar quarters of 1.20 to 1.00; and
•a maximum leverage ratio (defined as total indebtedness to EBITDA for the prior four most recently ended calendar quarters) of 3.50 to 1.00.
The 2021 Credit Agreement includes customary events of default. The occurrence of an event of default will permit the lenders to terminate commitments to lend under the Revolving Facility and accelerate payment of all amounts outstanding thereunder.
On February 5, 2021, in connection with the execution and closing of the 2021 Credit Agreement, the Company, along with its wholly owned subsidiaries as borrowers, terminated the 2015 Credit Agreement. All outstanding loans under the 2015
Credit Agreement have been repaid and all liens under the 2015 Credit Agreement have been released, except that a letter of credit originally issued under the 2015 Credit Agreement in the amount of approximately $0.8 million was transferred to the 2021 Credit Agreement.
The 2021 Credit Agreement was accounted for as a debt modification that resulted in a small increase to deferred debt issuance costs. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all debt-related covenants under the 2021 Credit Agreement.
At December 31, 2020, the 2015 Credit Agreement, which would have matured on November 9, 2024, included three term notes totaling $37.9 million, with varying required quarterly amortization payments, and an undrawn $11.8 million revolving line of credit. The availability under the line of credit was reduced by outstanding letters of credit and reserves totaling $1.0 million and was subject to a borrowing base limitation as defined by the agreement. The borrowing base was approximately $15.6 million at December 31, 2020. At December 31, 2020 and on the date of the refinancing, the Company was in compliance with all affirmative and negative covenants, as outlined in the agreement, which included maintenance of a maximum leverage ratio and a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio, as defined in the agreement. Interest on the facility was payable at the Company’s option as a (i) Eurodollar Loan, which bore interest at a per annum rate equal to the applicable 30-day London Inter-bank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") plus an applicable margin ranging from 2.00% to 3.00% or (ii) CB Floating Rate (“CBFR”) Loan, which bore interest at a per annum rate equal to the greater of (a) the lender’s prime rate or (b) LIBOR plus 2.50%, in each case, plus a margin ranging from -1.00% to 0.25% based on our leverage ratio. The actual Eurodollar Loan rate at December 31, 2020 was 2.19% (LIBOR of 0.19% plus 2.00%). The actual CBFR Loan rate at December 31, 2020 was 2.25% (lender’s prime rate of 3.25% minus 1.00%).
On April 15, 2019, the Company sold for $2.0 million and immediately leased back certain medical equipment in rental service to a third party specializing in such transactions. The leaseback term is 36 months. Because the arrangement contains a purchase option that the Company is reasonably certain to exercise, this transaction did not qualify for the sale-leaseback accounting under ASC 842. The medical equipment remains recorded on the accompanying condensed consolidated balance sheet and the proceeds received have been classified as an other financing liability, which is being paid off monthly over the term of the lease. The balance of other financing as of December 31, 2021 was $0.4 million.
As referenced above, the Company executed and closed the 2021 Credit Agreement during the first quarter of 2021, and in connection with entering into that agreement, terminated the 2015 Credit Agreement. For the following tables, the figures related to the December 31, 2021 revolving credit facility balances relate to the 2021 Credit Agreement, while the December 31, 2020 revolving credit facility balances relate to the now-terminated 2015 Credit Agreement. The following table illustrates the net availability under the revolving credit facilities as of the applicable balance sheet date (in thousands):
As of December 31, 2021, amounts outstanding under the Revolving Facility provided under the 2021 Credit Agreement bear interest at a variable rate equal to, at the Company’s election, a LIBO Rate for Eurodollar loans or an Alternative Base Rate for ABR loans, as defined by the 2021 Credit Agreement, plus a spread that will vary depending upon the Company’s leverage ratio. The spread ranges from 2.00% to 3.00% for Eurodollar Loans and 1.00% to 2.00% for base rate loans. The weighted-average Eurodollar loan rate at December 31, 2021 was 2.11% (LIBO of 0.11% plus 2.00%). The actual ABR loan rate at December 31, 2021 was 4.25% (lender’s prime rate of 3.25% plus 1.00%).
Share Repurchases
As noted above, on June 30, 2021, our Board of Directors approved the Share Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had repurchased approximately $0.6 million, or 33,469 shares, of the Company's outstanding common stock under the Share Repurchase Program and had approximately $19.4 million of available repurchases remaining under the program. Repurchases under the Share Repurchase Program will be subject to market conditions, the periodic capital needs of the Company's operating activities, and the continued satisfaction of all covenants under the Company's existing credit
agreement. The Share Repurchase program does not obligate the Company to repurchase shares and may be suspended, terminated, or modified at any time.
Cash Flows:
The following table summarizes our cash flows (in millions):
Operating Cash Flow. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $18.3 million compared to $20.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $2.0 million, or 9.7%, decrease was primarily attributable to the unfavorable cash flow effect of an increased amount of cash invested in working capital balances during 2021 as compared to 2020 and a decrease in net income adjusted for non-cash items of $21.0 million during 2021 as compared to $21.5 million during 2020, a decrease of $0.5 million, or 2.5%. During 2021, cash invested in working capital balances totaled $2.7 million, which included a $2.4 million decrease in accounts payable and other liabilities and a $0.9 million increase in inventories. This amount represented a $1.4 million increase as compared to 2020 when investments in working capital balances totaled $1.3 million and included a $2.6 million increase in accounts receivable and a $0.7 million increase in other current assets.
During 2021, accounts receivable decreased by $0.8 million and increased by $2.6 million during 2020 due to a lower growth in net revenues and improved customer collections during the 2021 period as compared to the prior year period. Inventory increased by $0.9 million during 2021, which was more than the prior year when inventory increased by $0.1 million. The higher increase during 2021 was attributable to the need to hold additional inventories related to new business lines including Pain Management and NPWT and to be more prepared for the potential disruption in the supply chain. Accounts payable and other liabilities, net of capital items, decreased by $2.4 million during 2021 and increased by $2.4 million during 2020 resulting in a net decrease in cash flows totaling $4.8 million during 2021 as compared to the prior year. The primary reason for this change was due to a lower management incentive bonus accrual and expense in 2021 as compared to 2020, a decrease of $2.1 million, versus a higher bonus accrual and expense in 2020 as compared to 2019, an increase of $0.7 million. The remaining cash flow impact from accounts payable and accrued liabilities was due to timing in payments.
Investing Cash Flow. Net cash used in investing activities was $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $12.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $9.2 million increase in net cash used was primarily due to the acquisitions of FilAMed and OB Healthcare totaling $8.0 million during 2021 and a $1.4 million decrease in proceeds from the sales of medical equipment. There were no acquisitions during 2020.
Financing Cash Flow. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.5 million compared to $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The use of cash during 2021 was mainly related to the refinancing of our bank debt on February 5, 2021. Prior to that date, we operated under the 2015 Credit Agreement which included three term notes and a revolving line of credit. At the beginning of 2021, we had $9.6 million in cash on hand and no outstanding borrowings under the then outstanding revolving line of credit. The 2015 Credit Agreement was completely repaid and replaced by the 2021 Credit Agreement, which has a new $75 million revolving line of credit and no term notes. This structure allowed the Company to use a portion of its available cash, totaling $7.9 million, to reduce its overall outstanding debt on the closing date of the financing. Other amounts of cash used in financing activities during 2021 included net revolving line of credit repayments under the 2021 Credit Agreement made from our operating cash flows after the date of the February 5, 2021 refinancing totaling $3.8 million, $0.6 million used to repurchase the Company's common stock and $0.6 million in principal payments on our other financing. These amounts were partially offset by revolving line of credit borrowings totaling $8.0 million used to acquire FilAMed and OB Healthcare. Net cash used in financing activities during 2020 included $1.5 million net cash used in the Company's equity compensation plan partially offset by a $0.4 million net increase in outstanding borrowings under the 2015 Credit Agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the
financial statements, including the notes thereto. We consider critical accounting policies to be those that require more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, including the following: revenue recognition; leases; accounts receivable and allowance for doubtful accounts; income taxes; and long-lived asset valuations. Management relies on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable in making its judgments and estimates. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
Management believes its application of accounting policies, and the estimates inherently required therein, are reasonable. These accounting policies and estimates are periodically reevaluated, and adjustments are made when facts and circumstances dictate a change.
Our accounting policies are more fully described under the heading “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. We believe the following critical accounting estimates are the most significant to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments:
Revenue Recognition
Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606") stipulates revenue recognition at the time and in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received for the performance obligations that have been provided. ASC 606 defines contracts as written, oral and through customary business practice. Under this definition, the Company considers contracts to be created at the time that the rental service is authorized or an order to purchase product is agreed upon regardless of whether or not there is a written contract.
The Company has three separate and distinct performance obligations offered to its customers: a rental service performance obligation, a product sale performance obligation and a service performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is defined as the unit of account for revenue recognition under ASC 606. These performance obligations are related to separate revenue streams and at no point are they combined into a single transaction. Sources of net revenues include commercial insurance payers, government insurance payers, medical facilities and patients.
The Company generates the majority of its revenue from the rental of infusion pumps to its customers and a minority of its revenue from product sales and services. For the rental service performance obligation, revenue is based on its standalone price, determined by using reimbursement rates established by third-party payer or other contracts. Revenue is recognized in the period in which the related performance obligation is satisfied, which is typically at the point in time that a patient concludes a treatment, or in certain arrangements, based on the number of pumps that a facility has onsite. The Company’s revenues related to product sales is recognized at the time that control of the product has been transferred to the customer; either at the time the product is shipped or the time the product has been received by the customer, depending on the delivery terms. The Company does not commit to long-term contracts to sell customers a certain minimum quantity of products. The Company's revenues related to services are recognized at the time that the service work has been completed.
The Company employs certain significant judgments to estimate the dollar amount of revenue, and related concessions, allocated to the rental service. These judgments include, among others, the estimation of variable consideration. Variable consideration, specifically related to the Company’s third-party payer rental revenues, is estimated as implied price concessions resulting from differences between the rates charged for services performed and the expected reimbursements for commercial payers and other implied customer concessions. The estimates for variable consideration are based on historical collections with similar payers, aged accounts receivable by payer class and payer correspondence using the portfolio approach, which provide a reasonable basis for estimating the variable portion of a transaction. The Company doesn’t believe it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will occur in future periods because (i) there is no significant uncertainty about the amount of considerations that are expected to be collected based on collection history and (ii) the large number of sufficiently similar contracts allows the Company to adequately estimate the component of variable consideration.
Net revenues are adjusted when changes in estimates of variable consideration occur. Changes in estimates typically arise as a result of new information obtained, such as actual payment receipt or denial, or pricing adjustments by payers. Subsequent changes to estimates of transaction prices are recorded as adjustments to net revenue in the period of the change. Subsequent changes that are determined to be the result of an adverse change in the payer’s ability to pay are recorded as an adjustment to the allowance for doubtful accounts.
Leases
On January 1, 2019 (the “Effective Date”), the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842); ASU 2018-10, Codification Improvements to Topic 842, Leases; and ASU 2018-11, Targeted Improvements (collectively, “Topic 842”) using a modified retrospective transition approach, which requires Topic 842 to be applied to all leases existing at the date of initial application. Under Topic 842, lessees are required to recognize a lease liability and right-of-use asset (“ROU asset”) for all leases and to disclose key information about leasing arrangements. Additionally, leases are classified as either financing or operating; the classification determines the pattern of expense recognition and classification within the statement of operations. The Company elected to apply its lease accounting policy only to leases with a term greater than twelve months.
Topic 842 provides several optional practical expedients that we adopted at transition. The Company elected the “package of practical expedients”, which does not require it to reassess its prior conclusions regarding lease identification, lease classification and initial direct costs. The Company did not elect the practical expedient of hindsight to the evaluation of lease options (e.g. renewal).
Topic 842 also provides practical expedients for an entity’s ongoing accounting. The Company elected the “combining lease and non-lease components” practical expedient and also elected to apply the short-term lease recognition exemption to certain leases; therefore, the Company did not recognize ROU assets and lease liabilities for these leases.
In adopting Topic 842, the Company determined and will continue to determine whether an arrangement is a lease at inception. The Company’s operating leases are primarily for office space, service facility centers and equipment under operating lease arrangements that expire at various dates over the next ten years. The Company’s leases do not contain any restrictive covenants. The Company’s office leases generally contain renewal options for periods ranging from one to five years. Because the Company is not reasonably certain to exercise these renewal options, the options are not considered in determining the lease term, and payments associated with the option years are excluded from lease payments. The Company’s office leases do not contain any material residual value guarantees. The Company’s equipment leases generally do not contain renewal options. The Company is not reasonably certain to exercise the renewal options for those equipment leases that do contain renewal options, thus, the options are not considered in determining the lease term and payments associated with the option years are excluded from lease payments.
For the Company’s equipment leases, the Company used and will use the implicit rate in the lease as the discount rate, when available. Otherwise, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate. For the Company’s office leases, the implicit rate is typically not available, so the Company used and will use its incremental borrowing rate as the discount rate. The incremental borrowing rate is estimated to approximate the interest rate on a collateralized basis with similar terms and payments. The Company’s lease agreements include both lease and non-lease components. The Company elected the practical expedient that allows it to combine lease and non-lease components for all of its leases.
Payments due under the Company’s operating leases include fixed payments as well as variable payments. For the Company’s office leases, variable payments include amounts for the Company’s proportionate share of operating expenses, utilities, property taxes, insurance, common area maintenance and other facility-related expenses. For the Company’s equipment leases, variable payments may consist of sales taxes, property taxes and other fees.
Long-lived Asset Valuation
Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or when events occur or circumstances change that trigger a review. Management has the option to first assess qualitative factors such as current performance and overall economic conditions to determine whether or not it is necessary to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test. If we choose that option, then we would not be required to perform a quantitative goodwill impairment test unless we determine that, based on a qualitative assessment, it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If we determine that it is more likely than not, or if we choose not to perform a qualitative assessment, we will then proceed with the quantitative assessment. Under the quantitative test, if the fair value of a reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, then goodwill of the reporting unit is considered to not be impaired. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess, up to the value of the goodwill. We performed our annual impairment analysis by using a qualitative assessment as off the first day of October 2021 and determined that there was no impairment. Any changes in management's judgments could result in impairment charges in the future.
Management tests indefinite life trade names for impairment annually or more frequently if deemed necessary. Management has the option of first performing the impairment test for intangible assets with indefinite lives on a qualitative basis, by evaluating factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that an impairment exists. If it is more likely than not
that an impairment exists, then a quantitative impairment test is performed. Impairment exists when the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value. If the carrying value of the intangible assets exceeds the fair value, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess. We performed our annual impairment analysis by using a qualitative assessment as of the first day of October 2021 and determined that the fair value of the trade names with indefinite lives was greater than their carrying value, resulting in no impairment.
We also evaluate the carrying value of other long-lived assets for impairment by analyzing the operating performance and anticipated future cash flows for those assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts of such assets may not be recoverable. We evaluate the need to adjust the carrying value of the underlying assets if the sum of the expected cash flows is less than the carrying value. Our projection of future cash flows, the level of actual cash flows, the methods of estimation used for determining fair values and salvage values can impact impairment. Any changes in management’s judgments could result in greater or lesser annual depreciation and amortization expense or impairment charges in the future. Depreciation and amortization of long-lived assets is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
The Company assesses impairment indicators related to its internally-developed, internal-use software, specifically looking at the effectiveness and useful lives of each project and sub-project to determine if impairment indicators are present. In December 2021 and 2020, respectively, the Company assessed the impairment indicators and found none to be present.
For more information, refer to the “Goodwill and Intangible Assets” discussion included in Note 7 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.