ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of our operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The purpose of Management's Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is to provide an understanding of Inogen’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows by focusing on changes in certain key measures from year to year. The MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying Notes. The MD&A is organized in the following sections:
•
COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE
•
Overview
•
Basis of presentation
•
Results of operations
•
Liquidity and capital resources
•
Sources of funds
•
Uses of funds
•
Non-GAAP financial measures
•
Critical accounting policies and estimates
COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE
The novel coronavirus outbreak of COVID-19 has had and likely will continue to have significant adverse effects on businesses and healthcare institutions around the world. While it is not possible at this time to estimate the overall impact that the COVID-19 pandemic and related public health emergency (PHE) could have on our business, the continued spread of COVID-19, both across the United States and throughout the world, and the measures taken by the governments of countries and local authorities affected has adversely impacted and could likely continue to adversely impact patient mobility, care accessibility, diagnosis rates, demand for our products, our business operations, including manufacturing, due to supply chain constraints, hiring and continued employment of our employees and contractors, shipment, cost of our products, and our financial condition and operating results.
Our priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE include protecting the health and safety of our employees and supporting our patients and customers. Given the COVID-19 impact to the respiratory system, we anticipate that it is possible that the demand for long-term oxygen therapy will increase due to new cases of chronic respiratory failure or exacerbation or progression of preexisting respiratory conditions will sustain or increase, although this is not based on clinical data. We also believe stationary oxygen concentrators, and, secondarily, portable oxygen concentrators (POCs) could help meet the needs of global healthcare systems by allowing appropriate patients to use oxygen therapy at home to treat respiratory symptoms.
However, the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE adversely impacted our consolidated operating results starting in the second quarter of 2020. We experienced lower direct-to-consumer sales starting toward the end of the first quarter of 2020, which we believe was primarily associated with shelter-in-place orders, self-quarantine, reduced mobility and travel, and reduced access to clinicians for diagnosis and follow-up for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) patients related to the mandates and behaviors emanating from the COVID-19 pandemic and PHE. In periods with lower COVID-19 spread, we saw improved consumer demand for our products, which we believe was due to increasing vaccination rates and other effective containment measures, higher consumer confidence, mobility and interest in travel, versus lower demand in periods with higher COVID-19 spread. Those impacts were in addition to our traditional seasonality in consumer buying patterns. We continue to believe that potential future shelter-in-place orders, reduced travel, lower consumer confidence, or the impacts of new variants could reduce consumer demand in future periods.
Despite the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE adverse impacts to direct-to-consumer sales, we experienced increased rental setups in the second quarter of 2020 through 2021, which we believe was due to Medicare and commercial payors reducing some of the administrative burden for oxygen therapy and our focus on the rental channel of the business. We believe this change will continue to contribute to increased rental setups during the remainder of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. We have also seen increased reimbursement rates in some areas for Medicare beneficiaries, which have increased rental revenue during the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE and are expected to continue to do so for the remainder of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE.
In the business-to-business channel, there have been certain surges in demand for oxygen concentrators by our home medical equipment (HME) providers worldwide during the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE in specific markets with significant COVID-19 case rates due to the tendency of hospitals to discharge COVID-19 impacted patients for treatment at home during rehabilitation due to space and labor shortages in hospitals. However, overall business-to-business demand has been lower because of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE due to lower patient travel, physician offices limiting patient interactions for COPD patient referrals, HME providers minimizing patient interactions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, which includes replacing existing oxygen patient setups with POCs, and HME providers turning their purchasing focus to stationary oxygen concentrators to treat COVID-19 patients. Also, sales in Europe declined due to the temporary closure and reduced operating capacity of certain respiratory assessment centers and continued tender delays in certain markets due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Similar to our direct-to-consumer sales channel, business-to-business sales improved in periods with lower COVID-19 spread, higher consumer confidence, interest in travel, and availability of effective vaccines. In addition, this channel is impacted by COPD patient referral volumes in our core markets of the United States and Europe, which tends to improve in periods with lower COVID-19 spread due to a patient’s willingness to see their physician. However, supply constraints, primarily due to limited semiconductor chip availability, negatively impacted sales in 2021 mainly in the domestic business-to-business channel, as discussed in more detail below.
During 2020 and 2021, we were able to broadly maintain our operations, but in the first quarter of 2022 we were forced to temporarily suspend production due to the semiconductor chip shortages discussed below. As seen in this temporary production halt, the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE have caused and could continue to cause disruption to our supply chain that could impact our operations, limit our growth, and increase our cost of goods sold.
For example, we have seen higher semiconductor chip demand and reduced semiconductor chip availability in 2021 and the first quarter of 2022, which has impacted our ability to produce and sell systems and batteries. We expect availability issues to continue through 2022, which has impacted and will continue to impact our ability to produce and sell systems and batteries until supply stabilizes. The semiconductor chip shortage is being experienced across many industries, placing additional pressure on existing supplies. We have attempted to mitigate the impact of this increased supply shortage, but it has and will likely continue to negatively impact our ability to manufacture product, including with respect to the temporary production halt discussed below, as these chips are used across all of our portable oxygen concentrators, in both our batteries and printed circuit boards on our systems and, if we are not able to obtain sufficient components going forward, we could be forced to slowdown or temporarily halt production again. We are continuing to focus our mitigation efforts on product redesign, seeking increased commitments on supply and shipment dates from our regular suppliers, sourcing from the open semiconductor channel, and using appropriate pricing actions such as the price increase we implemented on September 1, 2021 to help offset some of the increased cost, but we expect increasing challenges in terms of supply constraint and inflationary pressure moving forward.
We saw inflated costs related to the acquisition of semiconductor chips begin to negatively impact our cost of goods sold in the second half of 2021, and we expect this to have an increased impact on our cost of goods sold throughout 2022. Even though we paid significant costs in the second half of 2021 associated with acquiring chips on the open market, most of these costs increased our prepaid expense and inventory given that these components were not yet in finished products that were sold during the period. We believe based on our assessment and industry feedback that these supply shortages and increased costs are likely to continue through 2022. In addition to the semiconductor chip limitations, we are continuing to see supply chain constraints and cost inflation for other components used in our products albeit to a lower degree. Due to semiconductor chip shortages as of late December 2021, we temporarily suspended manufacturing operations beginning January 3, 2022, at our Texas and California locations as well as at Foxconn, our contract manufacturer in the Czech Republic. We have since secured the required semiconductor supplies to resume production and restarted our manufacturing operations at all three locations in early February. While we have been able to restart manufacturing operations at all locations, we are still seeing challenges in terms of available supply and we believe the supply shortages continue to represent an increased risk to the business for 2022.
Additionally, we have experienced, along with most other companies across many industries, the macro-economic impact of a challenging employment environment related to hiring and retaining employees and wage inflation. We expect that these hiring, retention, and wage inflation challenges, as well as challenges related to maintaining our current workforce, will continue into 2022. These hiring, retention, and cost challenges may negatively affect our ability to grow our business and keep our best employees or increase our cost of operations. In response to these challenges, we have implemented more flexible workplace requirements depending on the role, such as increasing ability for remote work, but we still expect to be challenged by the macro-economic employment environment.
The COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE has also and could continue to lead to volatility in consumer access to our products due to government actions impacting our ability to produce and ship products or impacting consumers’ movements and access to our products. The COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE has caused demand to fluctuate for our products across all channels due to the global economic environment and changes to physician visits, interactions, testing requirements and diagnosis. Additionally, while we planned for sales and marketing expansion in 2021, we saw lower hiring and increased attrition in our direct-to-consumer sales force primarily due to increased competition for sales professionals in 2021. The labor shortage trend for qualified sales professionals may continue in 2022, limiting our ability to grow in future periods.
The health and safety of our people and their families continues to be our primary focus. Our ability to continue to operate without any significant negative operational impacts will in part depend on our ability to protect our employees. As the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE has developed, we have taken numerous steps to help ensure the health and safety of our employees and their families. We follow recommended actions of government and health authorities to protect our employees, with particular measures in place for those working in our manufacturing facilities, and those with patient, prescriber, or customer face-to-face interactions. Employees whose tasks can be done offsite have been allowed to work from home and most of our personnel continue to work from home. We have also worked closely with local and national officials to keep our manufacturing facilities open due to the essential nature of our products.
For additional information on risk factors that could impact our results, please refer to “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a medical technology company that primarily develops, manufactures and markets innovative POCs used to deliver supplemental long-term oxygen therapy to patients suffering from chronic respiratory conditions. Long-term oxygen therapy is defined as the provision of oxygen therapy for use at home in patients who have chronic low blood oxygen levels (hypoxemia). Traditionally, these patients have relied on stationary oxygen concentrator for use in the home and oxygen tanks or cylinders for mobile use, which we call the delivery model. The tanks and cylinders must be delivered regularly and have a finite amount of oxygen, which requires patients to plan activities outside of their homes around delivery schedules and a finite oxygen supply. Additionally, patients must attach long, cumbersome tubing to their stationary concentrators simply to enable mobility within their homes. Our proprietary Inogen One® systems concentrate the air around the patient to offer a single source of supplemental oxygen anytime, anywhere with a portable device weighing as little as approximately 2.8 pounds with a single battery. Our Inogen One systems range from 2.6 to 6.5 hours of battery life with a single battery and can be plugged into an outlet as needed. We believe our Inogen One systems reduce the patient’s reliance on stationary concentrators and scheduled deliveries of tanks with a finite supply of oxygen, thereby improving patient quality of life and fostering mobility.
We employ a direct-to-consumer market and rental strategy that we believe contributes to our leadership position in the POC market. Our direct-to-consumer market and rental strategy means that we (i) advertise directly to consumers, process their physician paperwork, and provide clinical support as needed and (ii) bill Medicare or insurance on the patient’s behalf in the United States. We believe that we are the only POC manufacturer offering patients both a purchase and a rental option to acquire an oxygen therapy device.
We derive the majority of our revenue from the sale and rental of our Inogen One systems and related accessories to patients, insurance carriers, home healthcare providers, resellers, charitable organizations, and distributors, including our private label partner. We sell multiple configurations of our Inogen One and Inogen At Home systems with various batteries, accessories, warranties, power cords and language settings. Our goal is to design, build and market oxygen solutions that redefine how long-term oxygen therapy is delivered.
To accomplish this goal and to grow our revenue, we intend to:
•
Expand our domestic direct-to-consumer sales and prescriber sales teams and increase productivity. We expect minimal net new inside direct-to-consumer sales hires in the near term due to the size and quality of the candidate pool and expected attrition, but as part of our growth plans, we are increasing our focus on improving performance and productivity of our existing sales force. Going forward, except as otherwise limited by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, our plan is to continue to expand sales capacity while focusing on increased productivity driven by improved sales management discipline, insights-informed tools, and optimized patient lead generation.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of inside direct-to-consumer sales representatives decreased to 292 from 300 as of December 31, 2020. In 2021, hiring was challenging due to the continued impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. We hope to offset attrition with replacement hiring in 2022 while we opportunistically increase the total inside direct-to-consumer sales representatives if and when required while maintaining our hiring standards and being mindful of the supply constraints.
We also plan to expand our prescriber sales team to drive increased physician referrals for patient rentals. This specialized sales team consisted of 35 sales representatives and 6 support personnel as of December 31, 2021. In addition, we are using a third-party contract sales organization, Ashfield, that will only represent Inogen in the field, to enhance our go-to-market capabilities in the U.S. As of January 2022, we had approximately 47 dedicated sales representatives, 10 sales representations with accepted offers that will be in the field early March 2022, and 12 concierge service representatives to our prescriber sales team. Additionally, Ashfield will provide access to its best-in-class data-driven sales management disciplines, proprietary prescriber insights, and analytics to support our growth strategy and drive performance in the clinician sales channel. The combined sales organization, Inogen and Ashfield, will benefit from access to Ashfield’s comprehensive offering of analytics tools, sales operations support, and personalized concierge services that will help drive productivity and efficiency.
•
Expand our domestic direct-to-consumer marketing efficiently and, optimize pricing. We slightly increased marketing efforts in 2021 to continue to drive patient awareness of our products and patient inquiries about their ability to switch from their current oxygen products to our technology as patient interest increased, so media and advertising costs increased to $35.2 million in 2021 compared to $34.2 million in 2020. We plan to increase and optimize marketing spend to drive consumer and physician awareness of our products in 2022 and beyond. We raised prices as of September 1, 2021 to partially offset rising product costs. We plan to continue to monitor the progression of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE in the United States and may adjust our marketing plan accordingly.
•
Expand our rental revenues. We are evolving our operating model to focus the enhanced prescriber sales team on rental opportunities with our direct-to-consumer sales team focusing mainly on cash sales. We believe the new specialized operating model will drive higher rental setups as we expand prescriber and payor awareness of our products and services.
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, Medicare and commercial payors have reduced some of the administrative burden for oxygen therapy, which also contributed to increased rental setups in the second quarter of 2020 through 2021. We believe this change will continue to contribute to increased rental setups during the remainder of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. We have also seen increased reimbursement rates in some areas for Medicare beneficiaries, which have increased rental revenue during the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE and are expected to continue to do so for the remainder of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. CMS has finalized additional changes to the administrative requirements to dispense and bill for oxygen therapy, which is discussed in more detail in the Third-party reimbursement section of Item 1 above. These changes may reduce the administrative burden and increase patient access to our products; however, we still need additional clarity on how it will be implemented.
•
Expand our domestic HME provider and reseller sales. We are also focused on building our domestic business-to-business partnerships, including relationships with distributors, key accounts, resellers, our private label partner, traditional HME providers, and charitable organizations. We offer patient-preferred, low service cost products and services to help providers convert their businesses to a non-delivery POC business model.
Supplemental oxygen is a treatment prescribed by healthcare professionals for patients with hypoxemia, which in some cases may be caused or exacerbated by COVID-19. While there have been surges in demand for oxygen concentrators by our HME providers during the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE in specific markets with significant COVID-19 case rates, domestic business-to-business demand in 2020 was lower because of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE due to lower retail sales, lower patient travel, physician offices limiting patient interactions for COPD patient referrals, HME providers minimizing patient interactions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE which includes replacing existing oxygen patient setups with POCs, and HME providers turning their purchasing focus to stationary oxygen concentrators to treat COVID-19 patients. Domestic HME provider demand increased in the fourth quarter of 2020 and in the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to increased demand for POCs as hospital systems and stationary oxygen concentrator supply were strained to keep up with the increase in COVID-19 cases and increased patient ambulation and consumer confidence.
However, in spite of the increased demand, in the third and fourth quarters of 2021 we saw supply constraints associated with the semiconductor chip shortage that limited growth in this channel, and we expect this to continue in the near-term in 2022, specifically in the first quarter as we were forced to temporarily halt production from early January 2022 to early February 2022 due to these supply constraints.
•
Increase international business-to-business adoption. Although our main growth opportunity remains POC adoption in the United States given what we still believe is a relatively low penetration rate, we believe there is a sizable international market opportunity, particularly in Europe where there is existing oxygen reimbursement for respiratory conditions. In order to take advantage of these international markets, we have partnered with distributors who serve those markets and key customers in them. We additionally have an Inogen base of operations for sales and customer service in the Netherlands and use Foxconn to support the majority of our European sales volumes. We have sold our products in a total of 59 international countries and overseas regions.
Current Inogen products are commercialized in the European Union under Medical Device Directive (MDD) certificates, expiring on May 18, 2022. The extension of the existing certificates under the MDD or obtaining a new certificate under the European Medical Devices Regulation (MDR) is required for continued marketing in the European Union after May 18, 2022. We are preparing the filing of the MDR submissions in the earlier part of 2022 and have verified our ability to meet most of the demand in terms of existing orders up to the MDD certificate expiration. Additionally, we are in the process of applying for select European country level exemptions if supply is constrained and prevents us placing adequate supply into the EU supply chain before May 18, 2022. We are also securing the necessary certification from the United Kingdom and Switzerland which we believe would be completed in Q1 2022.
As in the United States, there have been surges in demand for oxygen concentrators by our international HME customers during the COVID-19 pandemic in specific markets with significant COVID-19 case rates. However, international demand declined in the second quarter of 2020 continuing through the first quarter of 2021, primarily due to the temporary closures and reduced operating capacity of certain European respiratory assessment centers due to the COVID-19 pandemic, continued tender delays in certain European markets, and decreased sales in other markets, primarily Canada. In addition, as in the United States, providers turned their focus to supplying stationary oxygen concentrators with higher flow characteristics in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We experienced increased demand during 2021, which we believe was due to improving COVID-19 vaccination rates and increased ambulation of patients in Europe, increased operational capacity of certain European respiratory assessment centers, and increased sales in certain markets associated with spikes in COVID-19 cases in such instances. To grow our international sales markets, we are also in the process of developing regulatory and sales pathways to capture opportunities in new and emerging markets.
Over time, as the U.S. and European markets mature, our growth will depend on our ability to drive POC adoption in developing or emerging markets, where limited oxygen therapy treatment and reimbursement exists today. However, growth may also be limited by regulatory and reimbursement clearances, currency fluctuations, capital expenditure constraints, ongoing restructuring challenges, and tender uncertainty.
•
Invest in our oxygen product offerings to develop innovative products and expand clinical evidence. We incurred $16.6 million, $14.1 million and $9.4 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, in research and development costs, and we intend to continue to make such investments in the foreseeable future.
We launched our fifth-generation POC, the Inogen One G5 in 2019. The Inogen One G5 weighs 4.7 pounds and produces 1,260 ml per minute of oxygen output, with very quiet operation at 38 dBA and our longest battery life at 6.5 hours for a single battery and up to 13 hours for a double battery. We estimate that the Inogen One G5 is suitable for over 90% of ambulatory long-term oxygen therapy patients based on our analysis of the patients who have contacted us and their clinical needs. We expect the Inogen One G5 to obsolete the Inogen One G3® over the short-term. The Inogen One G5 represented more than 80% of total domestic POC units sold in 2021, showing the strong demand for this product from both patients and providers.
Inogen Connect, our connectivity platform on our Inogen One G4® and Inogen One G5 products in the United States and Canada is compatible with Apple and Android platforms and includes patient features such as purity status, battery life, product support functions, notification alerts, and remote software updates. We believe home oxygen providers will also find features such as remote troubleshooting, equipment health checks, and location tracking to help drive operational efficiencies when transitioning away from the oxygen tank delivery model.
We plan to also invest in clinical studies to evaluate expected improvements in clinical, economic and patient reported outcomes associated with the use of our products as part of our efforts to drive payor and prescriber advocacy for our products.
•
Expand our product offerings. We are primarily focused on creating innovative, evidence-based chronic respiratory care solutions to strengthen and build preference and advocacy for our respiratory therapies and brand across patients, prescribers, and payors. We plan to do this with an expanded, high quality, connected, and innovative product portfolio that strengthens our differentiation. We are also committed to pursuing complementary acquisition opportunities to strengthen our technology, product offerings, and channel access.
In August 2019, we acquired New Aera. New Aera’s patented and Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-cleared Tidal Assist® Ventilator (TAV®) system is designed to deliver increased air flow and pressure from an approximately 4-ounce pocket-size unit, features a state-of-the-art nasal pillow interface, and is compatible with certain oxygen concentrators, oxygen cylinders, wall gas, and certain medical air sources. TAV therapy with oxygen has been clinically demonstrated during periods of exercise to reduce breathlessness, increase exercise endurance, and improve oxygen saturation for patients suffering from certain chronic lung disease compared to oxygen therapy alone. We plan to only sell this product across our domestic direct-to-consumer channel and in our domestic business-to-business channel in 2022, and we expect limited contributions to revenue in its existing configuration.
We have been developing and refining the manufacturing of our Inogen One systems since 2004. While nearly all of our manufacturing and assembly processes were originally outsourced, assembly of the compressors, sieve beds, concentrators and certain manifolds were brought in-house in order to improve quality control and reduce cost. In support of our European sales, we use a contract manufacturer located in the Czech Republic to manufacture high volume products and perform product repairs to improve delivery to our European accounts. We expect to maintain our assembly operations for our products at our facilities in Texas and California. In 2022, we are focused on securing supply for components to make our products in spite of the higher costs of semiconductor chips, reducing the cost of our Inogen One G5 product (excluding semiconductor chips), and increasing the robustness of our supply chain to reduce potential component constraints as we grow our business.
We also use lean manufacturing practices to maximize manufacturing efficiency. We rely on third-party manufacturers to supply several components of our products. We typically enter into master service agreements for these components that specify quantity and quality requirements and delivery terms. In certain cases, these agreements can be terminated by either party upon relatively short notice. We have elected to source certain key components from single sources of supply, including our batteries, motors, valves, TAV-compatible stationary concentrators, columns, and some molded plastic components. In some cases, maintaining a single source of supply can allow us to control production costs and inventory levels and to manage component quality, but also may lead to supply availability risks, and means our ability to maintain production is dependent on these single source suppliers, which may put us at an increased risk of supply disruption, as we have seen from the production halt we implemented in early January 2022 through early February 2022. In order to help mitigate against the risks related to a single source of supply, for certain components we qualify alternative suppliers and develop contingency plans for responding to disruptions. However, a continued reduction or halt in supply from one of these single-source suppliers, any dual-sourced suppliers or any other limited source suppliers with similar sub-component suppliers could limit or prevent our ability to manufacture our products or devices until one or more sufficient replacement suppliers is found and qualified. For additional discussion of potential risks related to our manufacturing and raw materials, please see the risk factor entitled “We obtain some of the components, subassemblies and completed products included in our products from a single source or a limited group of manufacturers or suppliers, and in some cases those components are available in only limited supplies from limited manufacturers or suppliers, and the partial or complete loss of one or more of these manufacturers or suppliers could cause significant production delays or stoppages, an inability to meet customer demand, substantial loss in revenue, and an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.”
Historically, we have generated a majority of our revenue from sales and rentals to customers in the United States. In the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, approximately 22.2%, 20.1% and 21.5%, respectively, of our total revenue was from sales to customers outside the United States, primarily in Europe. Approximately 74.1%, 73.6% and 70.2% of the non-U.S. revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, was invoiced in Euros with the remainder invoiced in United States dollars. We have sold our products in a total of 59 international countries and overseas regions outside the United States through our wholly-owned subsidiary, distributors or directly to large “house” accounts, which include gas companies, HME oxygen providers, and resellers. In those instances, we sell to and bill the distributor or “house” accounts directly, leaving responsibility for the patient billing, support and clinical setup to the local provider.
Our total revenue was $358.0 million, $308.5 million and $361.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in total revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year was primarily due to an increase in direct-to-consumer sales and international business-to-business sales, primarily associated with reduced impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, and an increase in rental revenue. We generated net income (loss) of $(6.3) million, $(5.8) million and $21.0 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We generated Adjusted EBITDA of $29.5 million, $21.6 million and $43.3 million in the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively (see “Non-GAAP financial measures” for reconciliations between U.S. GAAP and non-GAAP results). As of December 31, 2021, our retained earnings were $69.3 million.
Sales revenue
Our future financial performance will be driven in part by the growth in sales of our Inogen One POCs, and, to a lesser extent, sales of batteries, other accessories, our Inogen At Home stationary oxygen concentrators and our TAV products. We plan to grow our system sales in the coming years through multiple strategies including: hiring additional sales representatives directly or through our contract sales organization, improving productivity, investing in consumer and physician awareness and advocacy through increased sales and marketing efforts, expanding our clinical evidence, expanding our sales infrastructure and efforts outside of the United States, expanding our business-to-business sales through key strategic partnerships, and enhancing our product offerings through additional product launches, although, as mentioned above, these plans have been and may continue to be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. While we believe most HME providers are still in the process of converting their business model to a non-delivery model and purchase POCs, growth has been challenged and we expect it could continue to be challenged due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, their ongoing restructuring efforts, lack of access to available credit, provider capital expenditure constraints, and potential changes in reimbursement rates.
Our direct-to-consumer and prescriber sales processes involve numerous interactions with the individual patient, their physician and the physician’s staff, and includes an in-depth analysis and review of our product, the patient’s diagnosis and prescribed oxygen therapy, including procuring an oxygen prescription, although, as discussed above, this process has been disrupted due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE and we expect that such disruption will continue for the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. The patient may consider whether to finance the product through an Inogen-approved third party or purchase the equipment. Product is not deployed until both the prescription and payment are received. Once a full system is deployed, the patient has 30 calendar days to return the product, subject to the payment of a minimal processing and handling fee. Approximately 6-10% of consumers who purchase a system return the system during this 30-day return period.
Our business-to-business efforts are focused on selling to distributors, HME oxygen providers, our private label partner, resellers, and charitable organizations who are based inside and outside of the United States. This process involves interactions with various key customer stakeholders including sales, purchasing, product testing, and clinical personnel. Businesses that have patient demand that can be met with our products place purchase orders to secure product deployment. This may be influenced based on outside factors, including the result of tender offerings, changes in insurance plan coverage or reimbursement rates, business restructuring activities toward a non-delivery model, capital constraints, and overall changes in the net oxygen therapy patient populations, and is presently being impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE. Products are shipped freight on board (FOB) Inogen dock domestically, and based on financial history and profile, businesses may either prepay or receive extended payment terms. Products are shipped both FOB Inogen dock and Delivery Duty Paid (DDP) for certain international shipments depending on the shipper used. DDP shipments are Inogen’s property until title has transferred which is upon duty being paid and delivered to the customer. As a result of these factors, product purchases can be subject to changes in demand by customers.
We sold approximately 175,800 systems in 2021, 178,900 systems in 2020 and 201,100 systems in 2019. Management focuses on system sales as an indicator of current business success.
Rental revenue
Our rental process involves numerous interactions with the individual patient, their physician and the physician’s staff. The process includes an in-depth analysis and review of our product, the patient’s diagnosis and prescribed oxygen therapy, and their medical history to confirm the appropriateness of our product for the patient’s oxygen therapy and compliance with Medicare and private payor billing requirements, which often necessitates additional physician evaluation and/or testing for oxygen. Once the product is deployed, the patient receives instruction on product use and may receive a clinical titration from our licensed staff to confirm the product meets the patient’s medical oxygen needs prior to billing. As a result, the period of time from initial contact with a patient to billing can vary significantly and be up to one month or longer. However, during the COVID-19 PHE, CMS has reduced the paperwork requirements for Medicare oxygen therapy patients, as discussed in more detail in the Reimbursement section below. CMS has also adopted additional changes to the administrative requirements to dispense and bill for oxygen therapy, which is discussed in more detail in the Reimbursement section below, which may reduce the administrative burden and increase patient access to our products.
Rental revenue increased in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to a greater number of patients on service, higher Medicare reimbursement rates, and higher billable patients as a percent of total patients on service. Medicare reimbursement rates for oxygen therapy have increased, as detailed in the Reimbursement section below. In addition, as part of the various stimulus bills in 2020 (also discussed in more detail in the Reimbursement section below), the 2% Medicare sequestration reduction was temporarily paused, and Medicare reimbursement rates for non-rural, non-competitive bid areas through the duration of the COVID-19 PHE were increased to a 75/25 blended rate retroactive to March 6, 2020, which increased the rates in 2021 while the COVID-19 PHE continued. The 50/50 blended rate for HME providers in rural and non-contiguous, non-competitive bid areas was extended permanently as part of the final rule published in December 2021. We plan to add new rental patients on service in future periods through multiple strategies, including expanding our prescriber sales team, expanding our direct-to-consumer marketing efforts, investing in patient and physician awareness and advocacy, expanding clinical evidence, and securing additional insurance contracts.
A portion of rentals include a capped rental period during which no additional reimbursement is allowed unless additional criteria are met. In this scenario, the ratio of billable patients to total patients on service is critical to maintaining rental revenue growth as patients on service increases. Medicare has noted a certain percentage of beneficiaries, approximately 25%, based on their review of Medicare claims, reach the 36th month of eligible reimbursement and enter the capped rental period. The percentage of capped patients may fluctuate over time as new patients come on service, patients come off of service before and during the capped rental period, and existing patients enter the capped rental period.
We had approximately 42,900, 32,200 and 25,300 oxygen rental patients as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Management focuses on patients on service as a leading indicator of likely future rental revenue; however, actual rental revenue recognized is subject to a variety of other factors, including reimbursement levels by payor, patient location, the number of capped patients, write-offs for uncollectable balances, and rental revenue adjustments.
Reimbursement
We rely significantly on reimbursement from Medicare and private payors, including Medicare Advantage plans, Medicaid and patients for our rental revenue. A discussion of third-party reimbursement is contained in Item 1, Third-party reimbursement in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, approximately 81.9%, 81.5% and 81.1%, respectively, of our rental revenue was derived from Medicare’s traditional fee-for-service reimbursement programs.
Basis of presentation
The following describes the line items set forth in our consolidated statements of comprehensive income (loss).
Revenue
We classify our revenue in two main categories: sales revenue and rental revenue. There will be fluctuations in mix between business-to-business sales, direct-to-consumer sales and rental revenue from period-to-period. Product selling prices and gross margins may fluctuate as we introduce new products, our product costs change, we have changes in purchase volumes, and as currency variations occur. For example, the higher costs for semiconductor chips has had a negative impact on our gross margin, and we expect that will continue in 2022. Thus, to the extent that these higher costs continue, our overall gross margin should decline. In addition, the gross margin of the sales to direct-to-consumer sales and rental customers are generally higher than business-to-business accounts, so to the extend our sales of direct-to-consumers sales and rental customers are higher than sales to our business-to-business customers, our overall gross margins should improve, and, conversely, to the extent our sales are higher to our business-to-business customers than our sales to direct-to-consumer sales and rental customers, our overall gross margins should decline. Quarter-over-quarter results may vary due to seasonality in both the international and domestic markets, as discussed in Item 1. Seasonality and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Sales revenue
Our sales revenue is primarily derived from the sale of our Inogen One systems, Inogen At Home systems, TAV systems, and related accessories to individual consumers, our private label partner, HME providers, distributors, resellers, and charitable organizations worldwide. Sales revenue is classified into two areas: business-to-business sales and direct-to-consumer sales. Generally, our direct-to-consumer sales have higher gross margins than our business-to-business sales.
Rental revenue
Our rental revenue is primarily derived from the rental of our Inogen One and Inogen At Home systems to patients through reimbursement from Medicare, private payors and Medicaid, which typically also includes a patient responsibility component for patient co-insurance and deductibles. Rental revenue increased in 2021, primarily due to higher patients on service, higher billable patients as a percent of total patients on service, and higher Medicare reimbursement rates. We expect our rental revenue to increase in future periods as we scale the rental intake and sales teams and increase new rental setups. In addition, for the duration of the COVID-19 PHE, we expect to benefit from higher Medicare reimbursement rates and reduced administrative requirements for oxygen therapy enacted due to the COVID-19 PHE. We also expect that our rental revenue will be impacted by the number of our sales and rental intake representatives, reimbursement rate changes, including the impact of COVID-19 PHE changes, the level of and response from potential customers to direct-to-consumer marketing spend, product launches, the number of billable patients and denial rates, and other uncontrollable factors such as changes in the market and competition.
Cost of revenue
Cost of sales revenue
Cost of sales revenue consists primarily of costs incurred in the production process, including component materials, assembly labor and overhead, warranty expense, provisions for slow-moving and obsolete inventory, rework and delivery costs for items sold. Labor and overhead expenses consist primarily of personnel-related expenses, including wages, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for manufacturing, logistics, repair, manufacturing engineering, and quality assurance employees and temporary labor. Cost of sales revenue also includes manufacturing freight in, depreciation expense, facilities costs and materials. Provisions for warranty obligations are included in cost of sales revenue and are provided for at the time of revenue recognition.
We continue to make progress towards reducing the average unit costs of our products (excluding the impact of the semiconductor chip cost increases) as a result of our ongoing efforts to develop lower-cost systems, negotiate with our suppliers, improve our manufacturing processes, and increase production volume and yields. However, we have experienced and expect to continue experiencing supply chain disruptions through 2022, primarily associated with semiconductor chips used in our batteries and printed circuit boards which are components of our portable oxygen concentrators, which drove up the cost of our products in 2021 and which we expect will continue to drive up the cost of our products in 2022.
As a result, we saw these inflated costs negatively impact our cost of goods sold in the third and fourth quarters of 2021, and we expect this to have an increased impact on our material costs in 2022 until supply and demand get closer to equilibrium. Even though we paid significant costs in the third and fourth quarters of 2021 associated with these chips, most of these costs increased our prepaid expense and inventory given that these components were not yet sold in finished products during the period. We believe based on our assessment and industry feedback that these supply shortages and are likely to continue through first half of 2022. In addition to the semiconductor chip limitations, we are continuing to see supply chain constraints for other components used in our products. As a result of the semiconductor chip shortages, we temporarily suspended manufacturing operations at our Texas and California locations from January 3, 2022 to February 7, 2022 and Foxconn, our Czech Republic-based OEM, suspended manufacturing due to the same supply constraints from January 3, 2022 to February 9, 2022. While we were able to resume manufacturing operations, we are still seeing challenges in terms of available supply, and we believe this is an increased risk to the business in 2022. As a result, in the interim we expect to be supply constrained and unable to meet all customer demand for our products.
Recent United States policies related to global trade and tariffs may also increase our average unit cost. The current economic environment has introduced greater uncertainty with respect to potential trade regulations, including changes to United States policies related to global trade and tariffs. We continue to monitor the Section 301 tariffs being imposed by the United States on certain imported Chinese materials and products in addition to potential retaliatory responses from other nations. In 2021 and 2020, the impact of the China tariffs on our financial results was minimal as we have received some exemptions, negotiated cost sharing and price reductions with suppliers, and re-allocated purchases. Assuming the Chinese tariffs stay at the current levels, we currently expect the overall financial impact to our business to be minimal to the average unit cost for 2022.
For these reasons, we expect sales gross margin percentage to fluctuate over time based on the sales channel mix, product mix, and changes in average selling prices and cost per unit.
Cost of rental revenue
Cost of rental revenue consists primarily of depreciation expense; service costs for rental patients, including rework costs, material, labor, freight, and consumable disposables; and logistics costs.
We expect rental gross margin percentage to increase over time, primarily associated with higher rental revenue per patient on service and lower costs per patient on service. We expect the average cost of rental revenue per patient on service to decline in future periods as a result of our ongoing efforts to reduce average unit cost of our systems as well as reductions in depreciation, service costs, and logistics costs.
Operating expense
Research and development
Our research and development expense consists primarily of personnel-related expenses, including wages, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation for research and development and engineering employees, facility costs, laboratory supplies, product development materials, consulting fees and related costs, clinical study costs, and testing costs for new product launches as well as enhancements to existing products. We have made substantial investments in research and development since our inception. Our research and development efforts have focused primarily on the tasks required to enhance our technologies and to support development and commercialization of new and existing products.
We plan to continue to invest in research and development activities to stay at the forefront of patient preference in oxygen therapy. We expect research and development expense to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we continue to invest in our engineering and technology teams to support our new and enhanced product research and development efforts and manufacturing improvements. We expect increased research and development costs associated with broadening our product portfolio including incorporating the TAV technology into our oxygen concentrator.
Sales and marketing
Our sales and marketing expense primarily supports our direct-to-consumer sales and rental strategy and consists mainly of personnel-related expenses, including wages, bonuses, commissions, benefits, and stock-based compensation for sales, marketing, customer service, rental intake, and clinical service employees. It also includes expenses for media and advertising, printing, informational kits, dues and fees, credit card fees, recruiting, training, sales promotional activities, travel and entertainment expenses as well as allocated facilities costs.
Sales and marketing expense increased in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily associated with higher personnel-related expense, consulting costs, credit card/financing fees, and advertising expense. Our average direct-to-consumer sales representative headcount was down approximately 12% in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 from the comparative period in the prior year as attrition outpaced hiring, primarily due to increased competition for sales professionals in 2021. We continue to look to add new sales representatives, while maintaining our hiring standards and being mindful of the supply constraints. Headcount was down slightly as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. We expect minimal net new hires in the near term due to the size and quality of the candidate pool and expected attrition, but as part of our growth plans, we are increasing our focus on improving productivity of our existing sales force. Going forward, except as otherwise limited by the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, our plan is to continue to expand sales capacity while focusing on increased productivity, improved sales personnel and lead distribution systems, and improved training. We expect an increase in sales and marketing expense in future periods as we continue to invest in our business, including expanding our sales and sales support team which includes our prescriber sales team, increasing our rental infrastructure, increasing media spend to drive consumer awareness, and rising patient support costs as our patient and customer base increases.
General and administrative
Our general and administrative expense consists primarily of personnel-related expenses, including wages, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for employees in our compliance, finance, medical billing, order intake, regulatory and clinical affairs, legal, human resources, and information technology (IT) departments as well as facilities costs, sales bad debt expense, and board of directors’ expenses, including stock-based compensation. In addition, general and administrative expense includes professional services, such as legal, patent registration and defense costs, insurance, consulting and accounting services, including audit and tax services, and travel and entertainment expenses. In addition, general and administrative expense includes changes in the fair value of the New Aera earnout liability, as discussed below.
We expect general and administrative expense to increase in future periods as the number of administrative personnel grows and we continue to introduce new products, broaden our customer base and grow our business. We expect general and administrative expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in corporate infrastructure to support our growth including personnel-related expenses, professional services fees and compliance costs associated with operating as a public company. Those costs include increases in our regulatory and clinical affairs, legal, accounting, medical billing, human resources, and IT personnel, as well as increases in additional consulting, legal and accounting fees, facilities costs, insurance costs, and board of directors’ compensation.
Other income (expense), net
Our other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income earned on cash equivalents and marketable securities as well as foreign currency gains and (losses).
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 740-Income Taxes. Under ASC 740, income taxes are recognized for the amount of taxes payable or refundable for the current period and deferred tax liabilities and assets are recognized for the future tax consequences of transactions that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. A valuation allowance is provided when it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
We account for uncertainties in income tax in accordance with ASC 740-10-Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. ASC 740-10 prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. This accounting standard also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition.
The accounting for stock-based compensation will increase or decrease our effective tax rate based upon the difference between our stock-based compensation expense and the deductions taken on our U.S. tax return, which depends upon the stock price at the time of employee option exercise or award vesting. We recognize excess tax benefits or deficiencies on a discrete basis, and we anticipate our effective tax rate will vary from year-to-year depending on our stock price in each period.
Results of operations
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Sales revenue increased $31.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 11.3% from the comparable year. The increase was primarily attributable to increased direct-to-consumer sales and international business-to-business sales, primarily due to increased average selling prices and increased consumer demand, and the reduced impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, partially offset by supply chain constraints limiting product availability. We sold approximately 175,800 oxygen systems during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately 178,900 oxygen systems sold during the year ended December 31, 2020, or a decrease of 1.7%. The decrease in the number of systems sold resulted mainly from a decrease in sales in the domestic business-to-business channels, primarily due to supply chain constraints.
Rental revenue increased $18.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 63.5% from the comparable year. The increase in rental revenue was primarily related to higher rental patients on service, higher Medicare reimbursement rates, and higher billable patients as a percent of total patients on service.
Domestic business-to-business sales decreased 5.2% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to supply chain constraints that limited sales primarily in the second half of 2021.
International business-to-business sales increased 27.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, mostly driven by the reduced impact of the COVID-19 pandemic with increased vaccination rates and increased operating capacity of certain European respiratory assessment centers, and in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE due to greater demand for POCs for COVID-19 patients at hospital discharge in certain markets with high case rates of COVID-19. In the year ended December 31, 2021, sales in Europe as a percentage of total international sales revenue increased slightly to 86.8% versus 85.8% in the comparative period in 2020.
Domestic direct-to-consumer sales increased 15.9% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increased average selling prices and increased demand for POCs which we believe was primarily due to higher vaccination rates within our patient population and increased ambulation, additional stimulus payments, and improved consumer confidence. This led to improved sales representative productivity and increased average revenue per order in the comparative periods. This was partially offset by lower average inside sales representative headcount, which was down approximately 12% from the comparative period in 2020.
Domestic direct-to-consumer rentals increased 63.5% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in patients on service, increased Medicare reimbursement rates, and higher billable patients as a percent of total patients on service.
Cost of revenue and gross profit
Cost of sales revenue increased $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 3.2% from the comparable year. The increase in cost of sales revenue was primarily attributable to higher bill of material costs as well as higher material cost per unit and labor and overhead per unit. The year ended December 31, 2021 included $3.2 million of higher material costs associated with open-market purchases of semiconductor chips used in its batteries and POCs.
Cost of rental revenue increased $6.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 45.4% from the comparable year. The increase in cost of rental revenue was primarily due to an increase in total patients on service, which led to increased rental asset depreciation expense and servicing costs. Cost of rental revenue included $8.9 million of rental asset depreciation for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Sales revenue gross margin percentage increased to 48.1% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 44.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily related to higher average selling prices and decreased mix of domestic business-to-business sales, which have a lower gross margin than direct-to-consumer and international sales, partially offset by higher labor and overhead per unit and material cost per unit due to higher component cost versus the comparative year. Total worldwide business-to-business sales revenue accounted for 54.8% of total sales revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 versus 56.6% in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Rental revenue gross margin percentage increased to 57.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 52.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to higher billable patients as a percent of total patients on service and higher Medicare reimbursement rates, partially offset by higher servicing costs and depreciation expense per patient on service.
Research and development expense
Research and development expense increased $2.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 17.7% over the comparable period, primarily due to a $1.7 million increase in personnel-related expenses and $0.6 million in product development expenses.
Sales and marketing expense
Sales and marketing expense increased $15.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 15.7% from the comparable period, primarily attributable to an increase of $9.0 million of personnel-related expenses, $2.4 million of consulting fees, $2.1 million in credit card and financing fees, $1.0 million in media and advertising costs, and $0.4 million in travel and entertainment expenses. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we spent $35.2 million in media and advertising costs versus $34.2 million in the comparative period in 2020.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense decreased $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or a decrease of 2.0% from the comparable period. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $12.6 million decrease in the change in fair value of the New Aera earnout liability and $1.1 million in lower consulting fees, partially offset by increases of $6.5 million in personnel-related expenses, $2.1 million in CEO transition costs, $1.2 million in legal and accounting fees, $1.1 million in officer transition costs, $0.9 million reimbursement from the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund due to the COVID-19 PHE received in the comparable period, $0.5 million in insurance expense, and $0.3 million in facilities costs.
Other income (expense)
Total other income (expense), net decreased $7.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or a decrease of 108.6% from the comparable period. The decrease was primarily attributable to $5.3 million in other income from the CARES Act Provider Relief Fund due to lost revenues from the COVID-19 PHE received in the comparable period and not received the current year, a $1.3 million increase in net foreign currency losses, and a decrease of $0.8 million in interest income on marketable securities due to the lower interest rate environment and lower invested balances in marketable securities in the 2021 compared to 2020.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense increased $14.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily resulting from the recording of a valuation allowance on the use of deferred tax assets, the reduction in the fair value of the New Aera earnout liability, partially offset by an increase in excess tax benefits recognized from stock-based compensation.
Our effective tax rate in the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the recording of a valuation allowance on the use of deferred tax assets, the reduction in the fair value of the New Aera earnout liability, partially offset by an increase in excess tax benefits recognized from stock-based compensation.
Net loss
Net loss increased $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the year ended December 31, 2020, or an increase of 8.6% from the comparable period. The increase in net loss was primarily related to the recording of a valuation allowance on the use of deferred tax assets and higher operating expense, partially offset by an increase in gross profit and the reduction in the fair value of the New Aera earnout liability.
Seasonality
We believe our sales may be impacted by seasonal factors. For example, we typically experience higher total sales in the second and third quarters, as a result of consumers traveling and vacationing during warmer weather in the spring and summer months, but this may vary year-over-year. In particular, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, we have seen and expect to continue to see a disruption in our normal seasonal trends due to the mandates and behaviors emanating from the COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE, including shelter-in-place orders, reduced travel, and lower consumer confidence, and we did not see the typical seasonal increases in direct-to-consumer sales in 2020 that we have seen in prior years, but have seen seasonality in our direct-to-consumer sales in 2021 to be similar to historical periods excluding 2020, although this may not continue in future periods. We also expect the semiconductor chip shortage to negatively impact our total revenue for 2022. Additionally, as more home medical equipment (HME) providers adopt portable oxygen concentrators in their businesses, we expect our historical seasonality in the domestic business-to-business channel could change as well, which was previously influenced mainly by consumer buying patterns.
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
A discussion of changes in our results of operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 has been omitted from this Annual Report on Form 10-K but may be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021, which discussion is incorporated herein by reference and which is available free of charge on the SECs website at www.sec.gov.
Liquidity and capital resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $235.5 million, which consisted of highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less. In addition, we held marketable securities of $10.0 million in available-for-sale corporate bonds which had maturities greater than three months. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we received $15.6 million, $2.4 million and $5.9 million, respectively, in proceeds related to stock option exercises and our employee stock purchase plan.
Our principal uses of cash for liquidity and capital resources in the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of capital expenditures of $24.1 million including additional rental equipment, other property, plant and equipment, and intangible assets.
The COVID-19 pandemic and related PHE has not materially impacted our liquidity position to date, and we believe our current cash and cash equivalents provide us with a certain degree of stability and liquidity during this time of uncertainty. We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents and the cash to be generated from expected product sales and rentals will be sufficient to meet our projected operating and investing requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, our liquidity assumptions may prove to be incorrect, and we could utilize our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including market acceptance of our products; the cost of our research and development activities; payments from customers; the cost, timing, and outcome of litigation or disputes involving intellectual property rights, our products, employee relations, cyber security incidents, or otherwise; the cost and timing of acquisitions; the cost and timing of regulatory clearances or approvals; the cost and timing of establishing additional sales, marketing, and distribution capabilities; and the effect of competing technological and market developments. In the future, we may acquire businesses or technologies from third parties, and we may decide to raise additional capital through debt or equity financing to the extent we believe this is necessary to successfully complete these acquisitions. Our future capital requirements will also depend on many additional factors, including those set forth in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors.”
If we require additional funds in the future, we may not be able to obtain such funds on acceptable terms, or at all. In the future, we may also attempt to raise additional capital through the sale of equity securities or through equity-linked or debt financing arrangements. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, the ownership of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we raise additional financing by the incurrence of indebtedness, we will be subject to increased fixed payment obligations and could also be subject to restrictive covenants, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any future indebtedness we incur may result in terms that could be unfavorable to equity investors. There can be no assurances that we will be able to raise additional capital, which
would adversely affect our ability to achieve our business objectives. In addition, if our operating performance during the next twelve months is below our expectations, our liquidity and ability to operate our business could be adversely affected.
The following tables show a summary of our cash flows and working capital for the periods and as of the dates indicated:
Operating activities
We derive operating cash flows from cash collected from the sales and rental of our products and services. These cash flows received are partially offset by our use of cash for operating expenses to support the growth of our business.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our non-cash expense items such as depreciation of equipment and leasehold improvements and amortization of our intangibles of $21.6 million, a decrease in deferred tax assets of $14.4 million, provision for sales returns and doubtful accounts of $11.1 million, stock-based compensation expense of $10.9 million, provision for inventory obsolescence and other inventory losses of $2.1 million, and net loss on disposal of rental equipment and other fixed assets of $1.5 million; partially offset by the change in fair value of earnout liability of $11.6 million and our net loss of $6.3 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net use of cash of $20.1 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of our non-cash expense items such as depreciation of equipment and leasehold improvements and amortization of our intangibles of $18.6 million, provision for sales returns and doubtful accounts of $10.5 million, stock-based compensation expense of $8.2 million, provision for rental revenue adjustments of $2.6 million, provision for inventory obsolescence and other inventory losses of $1.3 million, change in fair value of earnout liability of $1.1 million, net loss on disposal of rental equipment and other fixed assets of $0.9 million and our net loss of $5.8 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in no effect on cash flows from operating activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 consisted primarily of our net income of $21.0 million as well as non-cash expense items such as provision for sales returns and doubtful accounts of $17.2 million, depreciation of equipment and leasehold improvements and amortization of our intangibles of $13.8 million, stock-based compensation expense of $9.1 million, deferred tax assets of $2.9 million, provision for rental revenue adjustments of $2.2 million, provision for inventory obsolescence and other inventory losses of $1.0 million, change in fair value of earnout liability of $0.8 million and net loss on disposal of rental equipment and other fixed assets of $0.6 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities resulted in a net use of cash of $27.9 million.
Investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities for each of the periods presented included cash used for acquisitions and in the production and purchase of rental assets, manufacturing equipment and tooling, computer equipment and software, leasehold improvements and other property, plant and equipment to support our expanding business, partially offset by net maturities of marketable securities.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we invested $23.9 million in the production and purchase of rental assets and other property, equipment, and intangible assets as well as $10.0 million in corporate bonds with maturities greater than three months that were classified as marketable securities, partially offset by $19.3 million in maturities of marketable securities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we invested $22.8 million in corporate bonds, U.S. Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities with maturities greater than three months that were classified as marketable securities, partially offset by $14.5 million in maturities of available-for-sale investments. In addition, we invested $17.6 million in the production and purchase of rental assets and other property, equipment, and intangible assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, we acquired New Aera for a net cash payment of $70.4 million and invested $58.7 million in corporate bonds and U.S. Treasury securities with maturities greater than three months that were classified as marketable securities, partially offset by $91.4 million in maturities of marketable securities. In addition, we invested $6.5 million in the production and purchase of rental assets and other property, equipment, leasehold improvements and intangible assets.
We expect to continue investing in property, equipment and leasehold improvements as we expand our operations. Our business is inherently capital intensive. For example, we expend significant manufacturing and production expense in connection with the development and production of our oxygen concentrator products and, in connection with our rental business, we incur expense in the deployment of rental equipment to our patients. Investments will continue to be required in order to grow our sales and rental revenue and continue to supply and replace rental equipment to our rental patients on service.
Financing activities
Historically, we have funded our operations through our sales and rental revenue, the issuance of preferred and common stock, and the incurrence of indebtedness.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $15.6 million from the proceeds received from stock options that were exercised and purchases under our employee stock purchase program, partially offset by the payment of employment taxes related to the vesting of restricted stock awards and restricted stock units of $0.6 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $2.4 million from purchases under our employee stock purchase program and the proceeds received from stock options that were exercised, partially offset by the payment of employment taxes related to the vesting of restricted stock awards and restricted stock units of $0.4 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $5.9 million from the proceeds received from stock options that were exercised and purchases under our employee stock purchase program, partially offset by the payment of employment taxes related to the vesting of restricted stock awards and restricted stock units of $0.9 million.
Sources of funds
Our cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $23.6 million compared to $37.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $235.5 million.
Use of funds
Our principal uses of cash are funding our new rental asset deployments and other capital purchases, operations, and other working capital requirements and, from time-to-time, the acquisition of businesses. Over the past several years our cash flows from customer collections have remained consistent and our annual cash provided by operating activities has generally been a significant source of capital to the business, which we expect to continue in the future.
We may need to raise additional funds to support our investing operations, and such funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, our operations and ability to execute our business strategy could be adversely affected. We may seek to raise additional funds through equity, equity-linked or debt financings. If we raise additional funds through the incurrence of indebtedness, such indebtedness would have rights that are senior to holders of our equity securities and could contain covenants that restrict our operations. Any additional equity financing may be dilutive to our stockholders.
Non-GAAP financial measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are financial measures that are not calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We define EBITDA as net income (loss) excluding interest income, interest expense, taxes and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA also excludes stock-based compensation and change in fair value of earnout liability. Below, we have provided a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to our net income (loss), the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to net income (loss) or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other organizations because other organizations may not calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner as we calculate these measures.
We include EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report on Form 10-K because they are important measures upon which our management assesses our operating performance. We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA as key performance measures because we believe they facilitate operating performance comparisons from period-to-period by excluding potential differences primarily caused by variations in capital structures, tax positions, the impact of depreciation and amortization expense on our fixed assets and intangible assets, the impact of stock-based compensation expense and the impact of the change in fair value of the earnout liability. Because EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA facilitate internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis, we also use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for business planning purposes, to incentivize and compensate our management personnel, and in evaluating acquisition opportunities. In addition, we believe EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA and similar measures are widely used by investors, securities analysts, ratings agencies, and other parties in evaluating companies in our industry as a measure of financial performance and debt-service capabilities.
Our uses of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations are:
•
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect our cash expenditures for capital equipment or other contractual commitments;
•
although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect capital expenditure requirements for such replacements;
•
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
Adjusted EBITDA does not include changes in fair value of earnout liability related to our acquisitions; and
•
other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA measures differently, which reduces their usefulness as a comparative measure.
In evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, we anticipate that in the future we will incur expenses within these categories similar to this presentation. Our presentation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by certain expenses. When evaluating our performance, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should be considered alongside other financial performance measures, including U.S. GAAP results.
The following tables present a reconciliation of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to our net income (loss), the most comparable U.S. GAAP measure, for each of the periods indicated:
Contractual obligations
The following table reflects a summary of our contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021.
(1)
We lease manufacturing and office space in Richardson, TX, Plano, TX, Goleta, CA, Smyrna, TN, Huntsville, AL, Aurora, CO, Cleveland, OH and Breukelen, Netherlands with terms that expire between 2022 and 2031 and miscellaneous office and processing equipment in Texas, California and Ohio with terms expiring between 2022 and 2031.
(2)
We obtain individual components for our products from a wide variety of individual suppliers. Consistent with industry practice, we acquire components through a combination of purchase orders, supplier contracts, and open orders based on projected demand information. Where appropriate, the purchases are applied to inventory component prepayments that are outstanding with the respective supplier.
For additional description of contractual obligations and commitments, see the section titled “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contingent consideration
In connection with our acquisition of New Aera, we have contingent obligations to pay up to $31.4 million in earnout payments in cash if certain future financial results are met. See the section titled “Fair Value of Earnout Liability” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with U.S. GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates and such differences could be material to the financial position and results of operations.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our critical accounting policies and estimates include those related to:
●
revenue recognition; and
●
acquisitions and related acquired intangible assets and goodwill.
Revenue recognition
We generate revenue primarily from sales and rentals of our products. Our products consist of our proprietary line of oxygen concentrators and related accessories. Other revenue primarily comes from service contracts, replacement parts and freight revenue for product shipments.
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Revenue from product sales is generally recognized upon shipment of the product but is deferred for certain transactions when control has not yet transferred to the customer.
Our product is generally sold with a right of return and we may provide other incentives, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. Returns and incentives are estimated at the time sales revenue is recognized. The provisions for estimated returns are made based on known claims and estimates of additional returns based on historical data and future expectations. Sales revenue incentives within our contracts are estimated based on the most likely amounts expected on the related sales transaction and recorded as a reduction to revenue at the time of sale in accordance with the terms of the contract. Accordingly, revenue is recognized net of allowances for estimated returns and incentives.
For a fixed price, we also offer a lifetime warranty for direct-to-consumer sales for our oxygen concentrators. The revenue is allocated to the distinct lifetime warranty performance obligation based on a relative stand-alone selling price (SSP) method. We have vendor-specific objective evidence of the selling price for our equipment. To determine the selling price of the lifetime warranty, we use the best estimate of the SSP for the distinct performance obligation as the lifetime warranty is neither separately priced nor is the selling price available through third-party evidence. To estimate the selling price associated with the lifetime warranties, management considers the profit margins of service revenue, the average estimated cost of lifetime warranties and the price of extended warranties. Revenue from the distinct lifetime warranty is deferred after the delivery of the equipment and recognized based on an estimated mortality rate over five years, which is the estimated performance period of the contract based on the average patient life expectancy.
Revenue from the sale of our repair services is recognized when the performance obligations are satisfied, and collection of the receivables is probable. Other revenue from the sale of replacement parts is generally recognized when product is shipped to customers.
Freight revenue consists of fees associated with the deployment of products internationally and domestically when expedited freight options are requested or when minimum order quantities are not met. Freight revenue is generally recognized upon shipment of the product but is deferred if control has not yet transferred to the customer. Shipping and handling costs for sold products and rental assets shipped to our customers are included on the consolidated statement of comprehensive income as part of cost of sales revenue and cost of rental revenue, respectively.
The payment terms and conditions of customer contracts vary by customer type and the products and services offered. For certain products or services and customer types, we require payment before the products or services are delivered to the customer. The timing of sales revenue recognition, billing and cash collection results in billed accounts receivable and deferred revenue in the consolidated balance sheet.
Contract liabilities primarily consist of deferred revenue related to lifetime warranties on direct-to-consumer sales revenue when cash payments are received in advance of services performed under the contract. The contract with the customer states the final terms of the sale, including the description, quantity, and price of each product or service purchase.
We elected to apply the practical expedient in accordance with ASC 606-Revenue Recognition and did not evaluate contracts of one year or less for the existence of a significant financing component. We do not expect any revenue to be recognized over a multi-year period with the exception of revenue related to lifetime warranties.
We recognize equipment rental revenue over the non-cancelable lease term, which is one month, less estimated adjustments, per ASC 842-Leases. We have separate contracts with each patient that are not subject to a master lease agreement with any payor. We evaluate the individual lease contracts at lease inception and the start of each monthly renewal period to determine if there is reasonable assurance that the bargain renewal option associated with the potential capped free rental period would be exercised. Historically, the exercise of such bargain renewal option is not reasonably assured at lease inception and most subsequent monthly lease renewal periods. If we determine that the reasonable assurance threshold for an individual patient is met at lease inception or at a monthly lease renewal period, such determination would impact the bargain renewal period for an individual lease. We would first consider the lease classification (sales-type lease or operating lease) and then appropriately recognize or defer rental revenue over the lease term, which may include a portion of the capped rental period. To date, we have not deferred any amounts associated with the capped rental period. Amounts related to the capped rental period have not been material in the periods presented.
The lease term begins on the date products are shipped to patients and are recorded at amounts estimated to be received under reimbursement arrangements with third-party payors, including Medicare, private payors, and Medicaid. Due to the nature of the industry and the reimbursement environment in which we operate, certain estimates are required to record net revenue and accounts receivable at their net realizable values. Inherent in these estimates is the risk that they will have to be revised or updated as additional information becomes available. Specifically, the complexity of many third-party billing arrangements and the uncertainty of reimbursement amounts for certain services from certain payors may result in adjustments to amounts originally recorded. Such adjustments are typically identified and recorded at the point of cash application, claim denial or account review. Accounts receivable are reduced by an allowance for doubtful accounts which provides for those accounts from which payment is not expected to be received, although product was delivered and revenue was earned. Upon determination that an account is uncollectable, it is written-off and charged to the allowance. Amounts billed but not earned due to the timing of the billing cycle are deferred and recognized in revenue on a straight-line basis over the monthly billing period. For example, if the first day of the billing period does not fall on the first of the month, then a portion of the monthly billing period will fall in the subsequent month and the related revenue and cost would be deferred based on the service days in the following month.
Rental revenue is recognized as earned, less estimated adjustments. Revenue not billed at the end of the period is reviewed for the likelihood of collections and accrued. The rental revenue stream is not guaranteed, and payment will cease if the patient no longer needs oxygen or returns the equipment. Revenue recognized is at full estimated allowable reimbursement rates. Rental revenue is earned for that month if the patient is on service on the first day of the 30-day period commencing on the recurring date of service for a particular claim regardless of whether there is a change in condition or death after that date. In the event that a third-party payor does not accept the claim for payment, the consumer is ultimately responsible for payment for the products and services. We have determined that the balances are collectable at the time of revenue recognition because the patient signs a notice of financial responsibility outlining their obligations.
Included in rental revenue are unbilled amounts that were earned but not able to be billed for various reasons. The criteria for recognizing revenue had been met as of period-end, but there were specific reasons why we were unable to bill Medicare and private insurance for these amounts. As a result, we create an unbilled rental revenue accrual based on these earned revenues not billed based on a percentage of unbilled amounts and historical trends and estimates of future collectability.
Acquisitions and related acquired intangible assets and goodwill
The purchase price of an acquisition is allocated to the underlying assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their estimated fair values at the date of acquisition. To the extent the purchase price exceeds the fair value of the net identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed, such excess is allocated to goodwill. We may adjust the preliminary purchase price allocation, as necessary, for up to one year after the acquisition closing date if we obtain more information regarding asset valuations and liabilities assumed.
We acquired New Aera on August 9, 2019 for $101.9 million. The excess purchase price over the fair value of net tangible assets and identifiable intangible assets acquired has been allocated to goodwill. Goodwill represents the expected synergies with the existing business, the acquired assembled workforce, and future cash flows after the acquisition. The fair value assigned to the identifiable intangible asset was determined primarily by using the excess earnings method. The key assumptions included in the excess earnings method included revenue recognized, cost of revenue and the discount rate.
Goodwill is tested for impairment on an annual basis as of October 1. Interim testing of goodwill for impairment is also required whenever an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit or asset below its carrying amount. No impairments were recorded as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their useful lives and are tested for recoverability whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Technology and customer relationship intangibles are amortized using the straight-line method.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 - Summary of significant accounting policies of the audited consolidated notes included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.