ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
We are a major supplier of high-quality food and industrial ingredient solutions to customers around the world. We have 45 manufacturing facilities located in North America, South America, Asia-Pacific and Europe, the Middle East and Africa (“EMEA”) and we manage and operate our businesses at a regional level. We believe this approach provides us with a unique understanding of the cultures and product requirements in each of the geographic markets in which we operate, bringing added value to our customers. Our ingredients are used by customers in the food, beverage, brewing and animal feed industries, among others.
Effectively managing our manufacturing costs, including costs for corn, other raw materials and utilities, is critical to the success of our business. In addition, our global operations expose us to fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates. We use derivative financial instruments, when appropriate, for the purpose of minimizing the risks and costs associated with fluctuations in certain raw material and energy costs, foreign exchange rates and interest rates. The capital-intensive nature of our business requires that we generate significant cash flow over time in order to selectively reinvest in our operations and grow organically, as well as to expand through strategic acquisitions and alliances.
In 2021, net sales increased over 15 percent to $6.9 billion from $6.0 billion in 2020. The increase in net sales was driven by higher sales volumes and a strong price mix, including the pass-through of higher input costs to customers. Operating income, net income and diluted earnings per common share in 2021 declined from 2020 levels. Operating income of $310 million in 2021 decreased from $582 million in 2020, primarily due to the $340 million net asset impairment charge related to the contribution of Ingredion’s Argentina assets to the Arcor joint venture. Excluding the net asset impairment charge, operating income increased to reflect our higher sales volumes.
COVID-19: Our operations in recent periods have been adversely affected by impacts of COVID-19. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared COVID-19 a pandemic, and on March 13, 2020, the United States declared a national emergency with respect to COVID-19. Our global operations expose us to risks associated with public health crises, including pandemics such as COVID-19. Foreign governmental organizations and governmental organizations at the national, state and local levels in the United States have taken various actions to combat the spread of COVID-19, including, from time to time, imposing stay-at-home orders and closing “non-essential” businesses and their operations. As a manufacturer of food ingredients, our operations are considered “essential” under most current COVID-19 government regulations and our facilities are operating globally. We did not experience any material supply chain interruptions in 2021 and were able to continue to operate and ship products from our global network of manufacturing facilities without material interruptions. We place top priority on our employees’ health and safety and continue to follow the advice and the guidelines of public health authorities for physical distancing and to make available personal protective equipment and sanitization supplies. We are monitoring COVID-19 infection rates as well as the pace and effectiveness of vaccination rollouts, as the net sales volume is generally correlated with increased consumer activity and availability of food and beverages consumed away from home.
Cost Smart Program: In July 2018, we announced a Cost Smart program, which we designed to improve profitability, further streamline our global business and deliver increased value to stockholders. We set a $125 million savings target to include an anticipated $75 million in cost of sales savings, including freight, and $50 million in anticipated SG&A savings through 2021. Since the program’s inception, we have periodically updated our savings targets and expect to deliver $170 million in total savings through the end of the program, far exceeding our original target.
Results of Operations
We have significant operations in four reporting segments: North America, South America, Asia-Pacific and EMEA. Fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates affect the U.S. dollar amounts of our foreign subsidiaries’ revenues and expenses. For most of our foreign subsidiaries, the local foreign currency is the functional currency.
Accordingly, revenues and expenses denominated in the functional currencies of these subsidiaries are translated into U.S. dollars at the applicable average exchange rates for the period.
We acquired KaTech on April 1, 2021, the remaining interest in Verdient on November 3, 2020, and a controlling interest in PureCircle on July 1, 2020. The results of the acquired businesses are included in our consolidated financial results beginning on the respective acquisition dates, which inclusion affects the comparability of results between years. In addition, our share of results in joint ventures is classified as other operating (income) and comparability between years and between financial statement line items is affected by the timing of and consideration provided to the investments. While we identify fluctuations due to the acquisitions, our discussion below also addresses results of operations excluding the impact of the acquisitions and investments, where appropriate, to provide a more comparable and meaningful analysis.
2021 Compared to 2020 - Consolidated
Net sales. Net sales increased 15 percent to $6,894 million in 2021 compared to $5,987 million for 2020. The increase in net sales was driven by strong price mix including the pass through of higher corn costs and higher volumes, which also reflected inclusion of the results of KaTech, Verdient and PureCircle.
Cost of sales. Cost of sales increased by 18 percent to $5,563 million in 2021 compared to cost of sales of $4,715 million in 2020. The increase in cost of sales primarily reflected the increase in net sales. Our gross profit margin of 19 percent for 2021 decreased from 21 percent in 2020. The decrease in gross margin was driven by higher corn and input costs.
Operating expenses. Operating expenses increased 6 percent to $668 million in 2021 compared to $628 million in 2020. The increase in operating expenses during 2021 was primarily attributable to the inclusion of PureCircle and KaTech. Operating expenses as a percentage of net sales were approximately 10 percent in 2021 and 2020.
Other operating (income). Other operating (income) increased 10 percent to $(34) million in 2021 compared to $(31) million in 2020. The increase was due primarily to a net gain related to the Amyris joint venture, an increase in equity method earnings related to the Arcor joint venture, gains on the sale of assets and other items in 2021. These items were partially offset by a reduction in Brazil indirect tax credits recorded in 2021.
Restructuring and impairment charges. Restructuring and impairment charges increased to $387 million in 2021 compared to $93 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an impairment charge of $340 million for net assets from our Argentina business we contributed to the Arcor joint venture, of which $311 million was related to the write-off of the cumulative translation losses associated with the contributed net assets and $29 million was related to the final write-down of the contributed net assets to fair value. This was partially offset by $45 million in impairment charges taken on our TIC tradename intangible asset and our equity method investment in Verdient in 2020.
Financing costs. Financing costs decreased 9 percent to $74 million in 2021 compared to $81 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to Argentina hyperinflation costs. As part of the Arcor joint venture, a majority of Argentina’s hyperinflation costs are no longer recorded in financing costs, but instead are reflected in other operating (income) through our share of equity earnings.
Provision for income taxes. Our effective income tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were 49.6 percent and 30.0 percent, respectively. The increase in the effective income tax rate resulted primarily from an impairment charge related to the Arcor joint venture in Argentina and a change in the mix of earnings. These items were partially offset by the reversal of an accrual from unremitted earnings, favorable judgments related to the treatment of interest and credits on indirect taxes in Brazil and inflation adjustments in Mexico.
Net income attributable to non-controlling interests. Net income attributable to non-controlling interests increased 33 percent to $8 million in 2021 compared to $6 million in 2020.
Net Income attributable to Ingredion. Net income attributable to Ingredion for 2021 decreased to $117 million from $348 million in 2020. The decrease in net income was largely attributable to the $340 million impairment charge for the Argentina assets contributed to the Arcor joint venture, partially offset by strong price mix and volume improvement.
North America
Net sales. North America’s net sales increased 13 percent to $4,137 million in 2021 compared to $3,662 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 9 percent improvement in price and product mix, a 3 percent increase in volume and a 1 percent favorable foreign exchange.
Operating income. North America’s operating income was flat at $487 million for 2021 and 2020. Favorable price mix and higher volumes in 2021 were fully offset by higher corn and input costs and ramp-up costs related to our plant-based protein operations in our South Sioux City and Vanscoy facilities.
South America
Net sales. South America’s net sales increased 15 percent to $1,057 million in 2021 from $919 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 26 percent improvement in price and product mix, which was partially offset by an 8 percent decrease in volume and a 3 percent unfavorable foreign exchange impact. The decrease in volume was driven by the contribution of our Argentina, Chile and Uruguay operations to the Arcor joint venture.
Operating income. South America’s operating income increased 23 percent to $138 million in 2021 compared to $112 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to a strong price mix that more than offset higher corn and input costs.
Asia-Pacific
Net sales. Asia-Pacific’s net sales increased 23 percent to $997 million in 2021 compared to $813 million in 2020. The increase was driven by favorable volumes of 18 percent, a favorable price and product mix of 3 percent and favorable foreign exchange impacts of 2 percent.
Operating income. Asia-Pacific’s operating income increased 9 percent to $87 million in 2021 compared to $80 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a favorable price and product mix and year-over-year improvement in PureCircle results that more than offset higher raw materials and input costs.
EMEA
Net sales. EMEA’s net sales increased by 19 percent to $703 million in 2021, compared to $593 million in 2020. The increase was driven by favorable volumes of 11 percent, partially due to the purchase of KaTech on April 1, 2021, a favorable price and product mix of 5 percent and favorable foreign exchange impacts of 3 percent.
Operating income. EMEA’s operating income increased 4 percent to $106 million in 2021 compared to $102 million in 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a favorable price mix in Pakistan and higher volumes in Europe.
2020 Compared to 2019 - Consolidated
A discussion of the year-over-year comparison of results for 2020 and 2019 is not included in this report and can be found in Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Ingredion’s annual report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, Ingredion had total available liquidity of approximately $1,719 million. Domestic liquidity of $770 million consisted of $20 million in cash and cash equivalents and $750 million available through a $1 billion commercial paper program that had $250 million of outstanding borrowings. The commercial paper program, which we entered on July 27, 2021, is backed by $1 billion of borrowing availability under a five-year revolving credit agreement that we entered on June 30, 2021 (“Revolving Credit Agreement”).
As of December 31, 2021, we had international liquidity of approximately $953 million, consisting of $308 million of cash and cash equivalents and $4 million of short-term investments held by our operations outside the U.S., as well as $641 million of unused operating lines of credit in the various foreign countries in which we operate. As the parent company, we guarantee certain obligations of our consolidated subsidiaries. As of December 31, 2021, such guarantees aggregated $61 million. We believe that such consolidated subsidiaries will be able to meet their financial obligations as they become due.
As of December 31, 2021, we had repaid in full the $380 million of borrowings outstanding under a term loan credit agreement that we previously amended on March 16, 2021 (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”). The Term Loan Credit Agreement restated the previous agreement by extending the maturity date of the borrowings under the previous agreement until March 15, 2022. No new borrowings under the Term Loan Credit Agreement were incurred in connection with the amendment and restatement. Borrowings under the Term Loan Credit Agreement bore interest at a variable annual rate based on a London Interbank Offering Rate (“LIBOR”) or a base rate, at our election, subject to the terms and conditions thereof, plus, in each case, an applicable margin. The Term Loan Credit Agreement reduced the applicable interest rate margin for loans accruing interest based on LIBOR from 0.80 percent to 0.75 percent. We were required to pay a fee on the unused availability under the Term Loan Credit Agreement, which contained customary representations, warranties, covenants and events of default, including covenants restricting the incurrence of liens, the incurrence of indebtedness by our subsidiaries and certain fundamental changes involving us and our subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions in each case. We were also required to maintain a specified maximum consolidated leverage ratio and a specified minimum consolidated interest coverage ratio.
On June 30, 2021, we entered into the Revolving Credit Agreement to replace our previous revolving credit agreement, which we terminated. The Revolving Credit Agreement provides for a five-year unsecured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $1 billion outstanding at any time. The facility will mature on June 30, 2026. Loans under the facility accrue interest at a per annum rate equal, at our option, to either a specified LIBOR plus an applicable margin, or a base rate (generally determined according to the highest of the prime rate, the federal funds rate or the specified LIBOR plus 1.00 percent) plus an applicable margin. The Revolving Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants that, among other matters, specify customary reporting obligations, and that, subject to exceptions, restrict the incurrence of additional indebtedness by our subsidiaries, the incurrence of liens and the consummation of certain mergers, consolidations and sales of assets. We are subject to compliance, as of the end of each quarter, with a maximum leverage ratio of 3.5 to 1.0 and a minimum ratio of consolidated EBITDA to consolidated net interest expense of 3.5 to 1.0, as each such financial covenant is calculated for the most recently completed four-quarter period. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with these financial covenants.
On July 27, 2021, we established a commercial paper program under which we may issue senior unsecured notes of short maturities up to a maximum aggregate principal amount of $1 billion outstanding at any time. The notes may be sold from time to time on customary terms in the U.S. commercial paper market. We intend to use the note proceeds for general corporate purposes. During the period from July 27, 2021 through December 31, 2021, the average amount of commercial paper outstanding was $670 million. As of December 31, 2021, the $250 million of commercial paper then outstanding had a weighted average interest rate of 0.35 percent over a weighted average maturity of 40 days. The amount of commercial paper outstanding under this program in 2022 is expected to fluctuate.
As of December 31, 2021, we had total debt outstanding of $2.0 billion, or $1.7 billion excluding the outstanding commercial paper and other short-term borrowings. Of our outstanding debt, $1.7 billion consists of senior notes that do not require principal repayment until 2026 through 2050. The weighted average interest rate on our total indebtedness was approximately 3.0 percent for 2021 and 3.4 percent for 2020.
The principal source of our liquidity is our internally generated cash flow, which we supplement as necessary with our ability to borrow under our credit facilities and to raise funds in the capital markets. We currently expect that our available cash balances, future cash flow from operations, access to debt markets and borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility and commercial paper program, will provide us with sufficient liquidity to fund our anticipated capital expenditures, dividends and other investing and financing activities for at least the next twelve months and for the foreseeable future thereafter. Our future cash flow needs will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth, the timing and extent of our expansion into new markets, the timing of introductions of new products, potential acquisitions of complementary businesses and technologies, continuing market acceptance of our new products and general economic and market conditions. We may need to raise additional capital or incur indebtedness to fund our needs for less predictable strategic initiatives, such as acquisitions.
Net Cash Flows
Our cash provided by operating activities decreased to $392 million in 2021 from $829 million in 2020, primarily due to changes in working capital. Our cash used by investing activities decreased to $335 million in 2021 from $571 million in 2020, primarily due to our acquisition of a controlling interest in PureCircle in 2020. In 2021, we used $373 million of cash for financing activities compared to cash provided by financing activities of $143 million in 2020. Cash used for financing activities in 2021 was primarily used for our repayment of the $380 million outstanding under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
To manage price risk related to corn purchases, we use derivative instruments, consisting of corn futures and options contracts, to lock in our corn costs associated with firm-priced customer sales contracts. As the market price of these commodities fluctuates, our derivative instruments change in value and we fund any unrealized losses or receive cash for any unrealized gains related to outstanding commodity futures and option contracts.
We used $300 million of cash for capital expenditures and mechanical stores purchases to update, expand and improve our facilities in 2021, as compared to $340 million that we paid in 2020 for capital expenditures and mechanical stores. Capital investment commitments for 2022 are anticipated to be between $300 million and $335 million.
In April 2021, we acquired a controlling interest in KaTech for $40 million, net of cash acquired.
We declare and pay cash dividends to our common stockholders of record on a quarterly basis. Dividends paid, including those to noncontrolling interests, increased 3 percent to $184 million during 2021 compared to $178 million during 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in the dividend paid per share during 2021. Additionally, during 2021, we repurchased 765 thousand outstanding shares of common stock in open market transactions at a net cost of $68 million.
We have not provided foreign withholding taxes, state income taxes and federal and state taxes on foreign currency gains/losses on accumulated undistributed earnings of certain foreign subsidiaries because these earnings are considered to be permanently reinvested. It is not practicable to determine the amount of the unrecognized deferred tax liability related to the undistributed earnings. We do not anticipate the need to repatriate funds to the U.S. to satisfy domestic liquidity needs arising in the ordinary course of business, including liquidity needs associated with our domestic debt service requirements.
Key Financial Performance Metrics
We use certain key financial performance metrics to monitor our progress towards achieving our long-term strategic business objectives. These metrics relate to our ability to drive profitability, create value for stockholders and monitor our financial leverage. We assess whether we are achieving our profitability and value creation objectives by measuring our Adjusted Return on Invested Capital (“Adjusted ROIC”). We monitor our financial leverage by regularly reviewing our ratio of net debt to adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Net Debt to Adjusted EBITDA”). We believe these metrics provide valuable managerial information to help us run our business and are useful to investors.
The metrics Adjusted ROIC and Net Debt to Adjusted EBITDA include certain financial measures (Adjusted operating income, net of tax and Adjusted EBITDA, respectively) that are not calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We also have presented below the most comparable metrics calculated using components determined in accordance with GAAP. Management uses these non-GAAP financial measures internally for strategic decision-making, forecasting future results and evaluating current performance. Management believes that the non-GAAP financial measures provide a more consistent comparison of our operating results and trends for the periods presented. These non-GAAP financial measures are used in addition to and in conjunction with results presented in accordance with GAAP and reflect an additional way of viewing aspects of our operations that, when viewed with our GAAP results, provides a more complete understanding of factors and trends affecting our business. The non-GAAP financial measures should be considered as a supplement to, and not as a substitute for, or superior to, the corresponding measures calculated in accordance with GAAP.
In accordance with our long-term objectives, we set certain objectives relating to these key financial performance metrics that we strive to meet. However, no assurance can be given that we will continue to meet our financial performance metric targets. See Item 1A. Risk Factors and