ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial conditions and results of operations for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In this Annual Report, we sometimes refer to the twelve month period ended December 31, 2021 as 2021, and to the twelve month period ended December 31, 2020 as 2020.
We caution you that any forward-looking statements included in this section are not guarantees of future performance or events and are subject to a number of uncertainties, risks and other influences, many of which are beyond our control, which may influence the accuracy of the statements and the projections upon which the statements are based. Factors that may affect our results include, but are not limited to, the risk factors that are included in Part I, Item 1A of this report.
Company Overview
We are a document services and software solutions company serving both the small-to-medium business and governmental sectors with their digital transformation and process automation initiatives. During 2020, we made two significant business acquisitions that have significantly impacted our financial operations and grown our business operations:
● Graphic Sciences, on March 2, 2020, and
● CEO Image, on April 21, 2020.
For further information about these acquisitions, please see Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report.
Our products and services are provided through two reporting segments: Document Management and Document Conversion. Our Document Management segment, which includes our CEO Image acquisition, consists primarily of solutions involving our software platform, allowing customers to capture and manage their documents across operations such as scanned hard-copy documents and digital documents including those from Microsoft Office 365, digital images, audio, video and emails. Our Document Conversion segment, which includes and primarily consists of our Graphic Sciences acquisition, provides assistance to customers as a part of their overall document strategy to convert documents from one medium to another, predominantly paper to digital, including migration to our software solutions, as well as long-term storage and retrieval services. Our solutions create value for customers by making it easy to connect business-critical documents to the people and processes who need them by making those documents easy to find and act upon, while also being secure, compliant, and audit-ready. Solutions are sold both directly to end-users and through resellers.
Our customers use our software by one of two methods: purchasing our software and installing it onto their own equipment, which we refer to as a “premise” model, or licensing and accessing our platform via the Internet, which we refer to as a “software as a service” or “SaaS” model and also as a “cloud-based” model. Licensing of our software through our SaaS model has become increasingly popular among our customers, especially in light of the increased deployment of remote workforce policies, and is a key ingredient in our revenue growth strategy. Our SaaS products are hosted with Amazon Web Services and Expedient, providing our customers with reliable hosting services that we believe are consistent with industry best practices in data security and performance.
We operate a U.S.-based business with concentrated sales to the State of Michigan for our Document Conversion segment, complemented by our diverse set of document management software solutions and services. We hold or compete for leading positions regionally in select markets and attribute this leadership to several factors including the strength of our brand name and reputation, our comprehensive offering of innovative solutions, and the quality of our service support. Net growth in sales of software as a service in recent years reflects market demand for these solutions over traditional sales of on-premise software. We expect to continue to benefit from our select niche leadership market positions, innovative product offering, growing customer base, and the impact of our sales and marketing programs. Examples of these programs include identifying and investing in growth and expanded market penetration opportunities, more effective products and services pricing strategies, demonstrating superior value to customers, increasing our sales force effectiveness through improved guidance and measurement, and continuing to optimize our lead generation and lead nurturing processes.
How We Evaluate our Business Performance and Opportunities
The major qualitative and quantitative factors we consider in the evaluation of our operating results include the following:
● With respect to our Document Management segment, including the solutions recently acquired from CEO Image, our current strategy is to focus on cloud-based delivery of our software products. Historically, our revenues have mostly resulted from premise-based software licensing revenue and professional services revenue. Our observation of industry trends leads us to anticipate that cloud-based delivery will become our principal software business and a primary source of revenues for us, and we are seeing our customers migrate to cloud-based services. When we evaluate our results, we assess whether our cloud-based software revenues are increasing, relative to prior periods and relative to other sources of revenue.
● With respect to our Document Conversion segment, our strategy is to maintain and grow our core document conversion, storage, and retrieval business, while simultaneously leveraging our software products and services to provide more attractive total digital transformation solutions for the customers of our Document Conversion segment. Accordingly, when we evaluate our results for Document Conversion, we will assess whether our revenues increase with respect to the segment’s services, relative to prior periods, but we will also be assessing whether Document Conversion customers begin to make purchases of other products or services.
● We are focused upon sales of our document services and software solutions through resellers and directly to our customers, with a further focus on select vertical markets. We assess whether our sales resulting from relationships with resellers are increasing, relative to prior periods and relative to direct sales to customers, and whether reseller or direct efforts offer the best opportunities for growth in our targeted vertical markets.
● Our customer engagements often involve the development and licensing of customer-specific document solutions and related consulting and software maintenance services or tailoring a document conversion program to meet customer requirements. When analyzing whether to undertake a particular customer engagement, we often consider the following factors as part of our overall strategy to grow the business: (i) the profit margins the project may yield, and (ii) whether the project would help to develop new product and service features that we could integrate into our suite of products, resulting in an overall product portfolio that better aligns with the needs of our target customers.
● Our software sales cycle averages 1-2 months; however, large projects can be longer, lasting 3-6 months. When a software project begins, we generally perform pre-installation assessment, project scoping, and implementation consulting. On the other hand, our document conversion services typically contain a very short sales cycle, but we can have a backlog of work orders not yet processed. Therefore, when we plan our business and evaluate our results, we consider the revenue we expect to recognize from projects in our late-stage software pipeline and in our document conversion services backlog queue.
● We monitor our costs and capital needs to ensure efficiency as well as an adequate level of support for our business plan.
● While we are constantly focused on organic growth, we also continually monitor potential acquisitions of complementary solutions and expertise that are consistent with our core business. We look for acquisitions that can add value for our customers and are expected to be accretive to our financial performance.
Executive Overview of Results
The biggest factors in the changes in our results of operations during 2021 compared to 2020 were our acquisitions of Graphic Sciences on March 2, 2020 and, to a much lesser extent, CEO Image on April 21, 2020, and the impact of the COVID-19 stay-at-home orders in Michigan and Ohio during most of the second quarter 2020 which did not fully resume in the third quarter 2020. Our results for 2021 include the results of Graphic Sciences and CEO Image operations for the full period, while our twelve month period 2020 include only approximately ten month’s results of Graphic Sciences operations, and eight month’s results of CEO Image. We faced challenges in the fourth quarter 2021 due to the Omicron variant of COVID-19 and general inflationary pressures, but this did not outweigh our strong performance for 2021 year-over-year.
Below are our key financial results for 2021 (consolidated unless otherwise noted):
● Revenues were $11,460,265, representing revenue growth of 39% year over year.
● Cost of revenues was $4,517,283.
● Operating expenses (excluding cost of revenues) were $5,977,994.
● Income from operations was $964,988.
● Net income was $1,357,951 with basic and diluted net income per share of $0.48 and $0.44, respectively, including $845,083 gain on PPP loan forgiveness.
● Operating cash flow was $1,389,966.
● Capital expenditures were $590,485.
● As of December 31, 2021, we had 114 employees, including 13 part-time employees.
Financial Impact of COVID-19
The spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and developments surrounding this global pandemic have had, and we expect will continue to have, a significant impact on our business, operations, financial condition and results of operations.
For approximately three months beginning in late March 2020, our Graphic Sciences business operations, which constitute a majority of our professional services revenues, were substantially reduced while the State of Michigan’s stay-at-home order was in effect, during which period we were only able to process work orders deemed “essential” by the State of Michigan. Since the initial shutdowns, our level of customer engagement in Document Conversion has varied with the ebb and flow of the initial virus and the subsequent variants and outbreaks. In particular, we experienced slow-downs in workflow and corresponding revenues during the fourth quarter of 2021 due to the Omicron variant outbreak. The State of Michigan, our largest customer, has yet to return a majority of its agencies and departments to on site work, resulting in a decrease in the volume of work orders for our Document Conversion segment. We are seeing inconsistent demand in certain other areas of our operations, even though those operations are still currently open for business with mostly remote staff.
Looking ahead, the ongoing impact of COVID-19 on our business continues to evolve and be unpredictable. The majority of our Ohio employees continue to work remotely. Many of our clients operate in a variety of other states, which had differing time periods in which their operations have been, currently or may in the future be restricted due to COVID-19. Our business, financial condition and results of operations could be affected by future outbreaks of COVID-19 generally or in our facilities. We are also likely to be impacted further by decreased customer demand and/or subscription terminations as a result of a reduction in customer spending (especially customers that are state and local governmental entities) or as a result of government-imposed restrictions on businesses. In particular, governmental budget reductions in the State of Michigan, our largest customer, may have a material adverse effect on our business. The extent of the impact will depend on a number of factors, including the duration and severity of the outbreak(s); the uneven impact to certain industries; vaccination rates; the effect that any governmental vaccine mandates might have on our ability to attract and retain talent; the macroeconomic impact of government measures to contain the spread of the virus and related government stimulus measures. To address the potential impact to our business, we have engaged, and continue to assess and engage, in aggressive efforts to reduce expenses and preserve cash flow in order to address the effects of COVID-19 on our business, operations and results. Additionally, we have instituted safe distancing practices and additional cleaning procedures for all our company offices, as well as established work-from-home policies wherever feasible, in order to prevent or mitigate future outbreaks and disruptions to our business. At the same time, we believe the current environment is accelerating digital transformation and we remain focused on innovating and investing in the services we offer to our customers. Accordingly, the ongoing impact of COVID-19 and the extent of these measures we may implement have and are likely to continue to have a material impact on our financial results.
Reportable Segments
We have two reportable segments: Document Management and Document Conversion. These reportable segments are discussed above under “Company Overview.”
Results of Operations
Revenues
The following table sets forth our revenues by reportable segment for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our revenues by revenue source for the periods indicated:
The increase in total revenues for 2021 is driven primarily by two factors: 2020 COVID-19 impact and acquisitions. The COVID-19 stay-at-home orders in Michigan and Ohio, which were in place for the majority of the second quarter 2020, significantly affected our professional services revenues for that quarter. We estimate the impact of COVID-19 on our Document Conversion segment to be approximately $655,000 reduced revenue for the second quarter 2020. The remaining increase in total revenues for 2021 is driven primarily by the acquisition of our Graphic Sciences subsidiary and the associated expansion of our revenues from professional services and the addition of storage and retrieval services. Graphic Sciences, which was acquired towards the end of the first quarter 2020, accounted for $1,843,221 of our revenues in the first quarter 2021 compared to $556,254 in the first quarter 2020, constituting 91% of the increase in revenues. In addition, the CEO Image business line that we acquired after the first quarter 2020 accounted for $132,605 of our first quarter revenues, or 9% of the total increase.
Sale of Software Revenues
Revenues from the sale of software principally consist of sales of additional or upgraded software licenses and applications to existing customers and resellers. Revenues from the sale of software, which are reported as part of our Document Management segment decreased by $116,337, or 60% during 2021 compared to 2020.
This decrease was due to timing of large direct sales projects, with unfavorable comparisons to the high project volume the same periods in 2020. We expect the volatility of this revenue line item to continue as project timing is unpredictable and we expect the frequency of on-premise software solution sales to decrease over time.
Software as a Service Revenues
We provide access to our software solutions as a service, accessible through the internet. Our customers typically enter into our software as a service agreement for periods of one year or more. Under these agreements, we generally provide access to the applicable software, data storage and related customer assistance and support. Revenues from the sale of software as a service, which are reported as part of our Document Management segment increased by $386,667, or 37% in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily the result of most new customers choosing a cloud-based solution, as well as expanded data storage, user seats, and hosting fees for existing customers.
Software Maintenance Services Revenues
Software maintenance services revenues consist of fees for post-contract customer support services provided to license (premise-based) holders through support and maintenance agreements. These agreements allow our customers to receive technical support, enhancements and upgrades to new versions of our software products when and if available. A substantial portion of these revenues were generated from renewals of maintenance agreements, which typically run on a year-to-year basis. Revenues from the sale of software maintenance services, which are reported as part of our Document Management segment, increased by $93,024, or 7%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily the result of maintenance and support agreements acquired with CEO Image, augmented by expansion of services with existing customers and price increases more than offsetting normal attrition.
Professional Services Revenues
Professional services revenues consist of revenues from document scanning and conversion services, consulting, discovery, training, and advisory services to assist customers with document management needs, as well as repair and maintenance services for customer equipment. These revenues include arrangements that do not involve the sale of software. Revenues from our professional services offerings were significantly enhanced with our acquisition of Graphic Sciences. Of our professional services revenues during 2021, $7,249,650 was derived from our Document Conversion operations and $219,066 was derived from our Document Management operations. Our overall professional services revenues increased by $2,461,099, or 49%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase is largely the net result of two key factors limiting professional service sales during 2020: the acquisition of Graphic Sciences late in the first quarter 2021 and the COVID-19 stay-at-home orders. The increase is also due to a solid pipeline and favorable mix of project work during 2021.
Storage and Retrieval Services Revenues
Graphic Sciences provides document storage and retrieval services to customers, primarily in Michigan. Revenues from storage and retrieval services, which are reported as part of our Document Conversion segment, increased by $382,421, or 52%, during 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was the result of a contract extension, including improved pricing, with our largest storage and retrieval customer, as well as unusually high project work including shredding of documents approved for destruction, and also the timing of the acquisition of Graphic Sciences in March 2020.
Costs of Revenues and Gross Profits
The following table sets forth our cost of revenues, by revenue source, for the periods indicated:
The following table sets forth our cost of revenues by reportable segment for the periods indicated:
Our total cost of revenues increased by $1,254,630, or 38%, during 2021 over 2020 primarily due to the corresponding increase in revenues for professional services and storage and retrieval services. The increase was also due to the acquisition of Graphic Sciences at the end of the first quarter 2020 and the 2020 COVID-19 stay-at-home orders, plus to a lesser degree, the acquisition of CEO Image in April 2020. Our cost of revenues for our Document Management segment decreased $108,507, or 17%, in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to more efficient execution of the software maintenance services in that segment as well as generally more standardized solutions sales. Our cost of revenues for our Document Conversion segment increased by $1,363,137, or 52%, during 2021 compared to 2020 due to the acquisition of Graphic Sciences at the end of the first quarter 2020 and corresponding sales growth in that segment.
Our overall gross profit increased to 61% for 2021 from 60% for 2020. Strong margin professional services projects as well as margin improvements software-related revenue sources were partially offset by an increase in the mix of professional services revenue driving a decrease in gross margin.
Cost of Software Revenues
Cost of software revenues consists primarily of labor costs of our software engineers and implementation consultants and third-party software licenses that are sold in connection with our core software applications. During 2021, cost of software revenues decreased by $41,836, or 74%, from 2020, due to the decrease in revenues and implementations. Our gross margin for software revenues increased to 81% from 71% in 2020. The improved 2021 margins were driven by license expansions and similar favorable solutions with lesser costs to deliver the solution.
Cost of Software as a Service
Cost of software as a service, or SaaS, consists primarily of technical support personnel, hosting services, and related costs. Cost of software as a service increased by $59,633, or 22%, during 2021 over 2020. This increase in the cost of SaaS was less than the increase in associated SaaS revenues, so our gross margin increased to 77% in 2021 compared to 74% during 2020, as a result of more standard projects and scaling of hosting infrastructure.
Cost of Software Maintenance Services
Cost of software maintenance services consists primarily of technical support personnel and related costs. Cost of software maintenance services decreased by $77,481, or 49%, in 2021 over 2020, due primarily to reduced support activity, especially compared to the unusually high support volumes in first and third quarter 2020. As a result, our gross margin for software maintenance services increased to 94% in 2021 compared to 87% in 2020.
Cost of Professional Services
Cost of professional services consists primarily of compensation for employees performing the document conversion services, compensation of our software engineers and implementation consultants, and related third-party costs. Cost of professional services increased in 2021 by $1,156,295, or 45%, over 2020, following the increased revenue volume primarily due to the acquisition of Graphic Sciences late in the first quarter 2020 and the 2020 COVID-19 stay-at-home orders. As a result, our gross margin for professional services increased to 50% during 2021 compared to 49% in 2020. Gross margins related to professional services may vary widely, depending upon the nature of the projects completed in a period, driven by the amount of labor it takes to complete a project.
Cost of Storage and Retrieval Services
Cost of storage and retrieval services consists primarily of compensation for employees performing the document storage and retrieval services, including logistics, provided by Graphic Sciences. Cost of storage and retrieval services increased by $158,019, or 72%, during 2021 compared to 2020, due to additional labor costs associated with our 2021 warehouse consolidation, which began in the third quarter, as well as costs for additional project work including shredding and the inclusion of storage and retrieval services during the entire period of the first quarter 2021 compared to approximately one full month during the first quarter 2020. Gross margins for our storage and retrieval services, which exclude the cost of facilities rental, maintenance, and related overheads, decreased to 66% during twelve month period 2021 compared to 70% in 2020 primarily as a result of increased use of subcontractors for certain projects, including shredding, labor associated with consolidating warehouses in 2021, and expanded services offered to customers.
Operating Expenses
The following table sets forth our operating expenses for the periods indicated:
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased in 2021 by $544,856, or 16%, over 2020, principally related to the full year addition of Graphic Sciences expenses combined with the impact of certain furloughed hourly workers and management salary reductions in 2020. This was primarily reflected in our Document Conversion segment, in which our general and administrative expenses increased to $2,434,279 in 2021 from $1,990,342 in 2020. In our Document Management segment, our general and administrative expenses decreased to $1,610,017 in 2021 compared to $1,818,184 in 2020. Overall increases were due to the impacts of full year of Graphic Sciences and CEO plus reinstated full management salaries in 2021, partially offset by decreased legal and accounting professional fees. Increased sharing of public company costs with the increased Document Conversion segment decreased those expenses in our Document Management segment.
Change in Fair Value of Earnout Liabilities
Improved gross margin performance at Graphic Science during the first quarter 2021 resulted in an adjustment to fair value of earnout liabilities of $69,950. Improved revenue performance at CEO during the second quarter resulted in an adjustment to fair value of earnout liabilities of $7,261. Further improvements in actual and forecast gross margin and revenue performance drove an adjustment in fair value of during the fourth quarter of $53,426 and $10,777 for Graphic Sciences and CEO, respectively, totaling $141,414 for 2021. Adjustments to fair value of earnout liabilities were $1,554,800 during 2020, comprised of $1,423,800 for Graphic Sciences and $131,000 for CEO Image. The fair value adjustments were driven by updated assumptions to reflect the improved performance of both acquisitions against their threshold targets and a reduction of pandemic-related uncertainty.
Significant Transaction Expenses
There were no significant transaction expenses during 2021. The significant transactions expenses during 2020 were comprised of investment banker and placement agent success fees, as well as legal and consulting fees, in connection with our acquisition of Graphic Sciences and our financing and debt conversion.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $336,985, or 32%, during 2021 over 2020. This increase was primarily driven by the inclusion of the sales and marketing expenses Graphic Sciences during all of those periods in 2021 as well as the reinstatement of full sales and marketing salaries as a part of reducing expenses and preserving cash during the initial COVID-19 uncertainty in 2020, as well as adding two sales representatives during the year and a partial resumption of travel in 2021, plus adding a director of marketing in the third quarter 2021. For 2021, the sales and marketing expenses related to Document Management and Document Conversion segments were $591,106 and $787,246. For 2020, the sales and marketing expenses related to Document Management and Document Conversion segments were $584,470 and 456,897. The relative increase in Document Conversion is driven by the two additional sales reps and shared general marketing expenses.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased by $116,997, or 39%, during 2021 over 2020 as a result of depreciation on additional assets placed in service, primarily racking associated with the warehouse consolidation, and the addition of Graphic Sciences depreciation for a full year.
Other Items of Income and Expense
Gain on Extinguishment of Debt
The $845,083 gain on extinguishment of debt during 2021 reflects the full forgiveness of the principal and interest on our PPP Note by the SBA in January 2021. The $287,426 gain on extinguishment of debt in the during 2020 was due to the extinguishment of certain debt as part of conversion of notes payable accounted for using troubled debt restructuring.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit was $0 during 2021 compared to $188,300 during 2020. The benefit was driven by the releases of a portion of the valuation allowance in March 2020 for deferred tax liabilities of Graphic Sciences that were no longer due.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $452,120 during 2021 as compared with $637,683 during 2020, representing a decrease of $185,563 or 29%. The decrease resulted primarily from lower interest expense on lower net debt following the March 2020 private placement of securities and note conversion, as well as one-time interest expense associated with accelerating the beneficial conversion option on the notes converted in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through a combination of cash on hand, cash generated from operations, borrowings from third parties and related parties, and proceeds from private sales of equity. Since 2012, we have raised a total of approximately $18.6 million in cash through issuances of debt and equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,752,630 in cash and cash equivalents, net working capital of $126,944, and an accumulated deficit of approximately $21.6 million. In June 2021, we paid $954,733 in annual earnout liabilities.
In 2020, we engaged in several actions that significantly improved our liquidity and cash flows, including:
● acquiring the positive cash flow generated by Graphic Sciences and CEO Image,
● receiving aggregate gross proceeds of $3.5 million from the private placement of our common stock,
● converting all of the outstanding principal and accrued interest payable on our then-existing convertible debt in the approximate amount of $6 million into shares of common stock at a conversion price of $4.00 per share, and
● receiving $2.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of 12% subordinated promissory notes due February 29, 2023, which we refer to as the 2020 notes, and
● obtaining the PPP loan in the principal amount of $838,700, the principal and interest on which was forgiven in its entirety by the SBA in January 2021.
Overall, we reduced our outstanding debt by approximately $3 million during 2020 and have not incurred any new debt in 2021.
Our existing $2 million of debt is due February 29, 2023. We also may have earnout payments of up to a maximum of $1,018,333 in the second quarter of 2022 and $833,333 in the second quarter of 2023. Our operating cash flow alone may be insufficient to meet these obligations in full in the first and second quarters of 2023. We have positive operating cash flow, and we believe we could seek additional debt or equity financing on acceptable terms. We believe that our balance sheet and financial statements would support a full or partial refinancing or other appropriate modification of the current promissory notes, such as an extension or conversion to equity. We are confident in our ability to prudently manage our current debt on terms acceptable to us.
Our ability to meet our capital needs in the short term will depend on many factors, including maintaining and enhancing our operating cash flow, successfully managing the transition of our recent acquisitions of Graphic Sciences and CEO Image, successfully retaining and growing our client base in the midst of general economic uncertainty, and managing the continuing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Based on our current plans and assumptions, we believe our capital resources, including our cash and cash equivalents, along with funds expected to be generated from our operations and potential financing options, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs arising in the ordinary course of business for at least the next 12 months, including to satisfy our expected working capital needs, earnout obligations and capital and debt service commitments.
Our ability to meet our capital needs further into the future will depend primarily on strategically managing the business and successfully retaining our client base.
Indebtedness
As of December 31, 2021, our only outstanding long-term indebtedness consisted of the 2020 notes issued to accredited investors on March 2, 2020, with an aggregate outstanding principal balance of $2,000,000 and accrued interest of $0.
Capital Expenditures
There were no material commitments for capital expenditures at December 31, 2021.
Cash Provided by Operating Activities.
From our inception, we have generated revenues from the sales, implementation, subscriptions, and maintenance of our internally generated software applications, as well as significantly increased revenues from document conversion services beginning in 2020. Our uses of cash from operating activities include compensation and related costs, hardware costs, rent for our corporate offices, hosting fees for our cloud-based software services, other general corporate expenditures, and travel costs to client sites.
Our plan is to increase our sales and market share by implementing a targeted marketing approach to select vertical markets, an expanded network of resellers through which we expect to sell our expanded software product portfolio, as well as continue to enhance our direct selling results. We expect our operations to continue to require additional capital in order to implement direct marketing campaigns and leads management, reseller training and on-boarding, and to develop additional software integration and customization capabilities. Although management believes that we may have access to additional capital resources, there are currently no commitments in place for new financing, and there is no assurance that we will be able to obtain funds on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Net cash provided by operating activities during 2021 was $1,389,966, primarily attributable to net income adjusted for non-cash expenses of $703,883, an increase in operating assets of $393,404 and an decrease in operating liabilities of $278,464. Net cash provided by operating activities during 2020 was $124,988, primarily attributable to the net loss adjusted for non-cash expenses of $2,945,569, a decrease in operating assets of $388,507 and a decrease in operating liabilities of $1,008,887.
Cash Used in Investing Activities.
Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 was $590,485, primarily related to purchases of racking property and equipment for the new Sterling Heights, MI warehouse. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 was $4,095,952, primarily related to cash paid to acquire Graphic Sciences and CEO Image.
Cash Provided and Used in Financing Activities.
Cash provided and used by financing activities primarily consist of net proceeds from issuance or repayments of debt, new issuance of equity, or payment of contingent consideration in the form of earnout liabilities.
Net cash used by financing activities during 2021 amounted to $954,733, due to payment of earnout liabilities. Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 amounted to $5,474,681. The net cash provided by financing activities resulted from new borrowings of $3,008,700, partially offset by $175,924 in financing costs, and the sale of common stock resulting in $2,859,633 in net cash. Notes payable payments amounted to $170,000, which comprised of seller notes which are installment payments for net assets acquired. Notes payable payments to related parties amounted to $47,728.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
These critical accounting policies and estimates by our management should be read in conjunction with Note 4 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses in the reporting period. We regularly make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the accrual of costs and expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources.
The actual results experienced by us may differ materially and adversely from our estimates. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations will be affected.
We consider the following accounting policies and estimates to be both those most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and those that require the most subjective judgment:
● Revenue Recognition
● Business Acquisition, Goodwill and Intangibles, including Contingent Liability-Earnout
● Accounts Receivable, Unbilled
● Deferred Revenues
● Accounting for Costs of Computer Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed and Accounting for Internal Use Software
● Accounting Stock-Based Compensation
Revenue Recognition
In accordance with ASC 606, “Revenue From Contracts With Customers,” we follow a five-step model to assess each contract of a sale or service to a customer: identify the legally binding contract, identify the performance obligations, determine the transaction price, allocate the transaction price, and determine whether revenue will be recognized at a point in time or over time. Revenue is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied and the customer obtains control of promised goods and services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services. In addition, ASC 606 requires disclosures of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
Our contracts with customers often contain multiple performance obligations. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations separately if they are distinct. The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. We determine the SSP based on an observable standalone selling price when it is available, as well as other factors, including, the price charged to customers, our discounting practices, and our overall pricing objectives, while maximizing observable inputs. In situations where pricing is highly variable or uncertain, we estimate the SSP using a residual approach.
Revenue from on-premises licenses is recognized upfront upon transfer of control of the software, which occurs at delivery, or when the license term commences, if later. We recognize revenue from maintenance contracts ratably over the service period. Cloud services revenue is recognized ratably over the cloud service term. Training, professional services, and storage and retrieval services are provided either on a time and material basis, in which revenues are recognized as services are delivered, or over a contractual term, in which revenues are recognized ratably. With respect to contracts that include customer acceptance provisions, we recognize revenue upon customer acceptance. Our policy is to record revenues net of any applicable sales, use or excise taxes.
Payment terms and conditions vary by contract type, although our terms generally include a requirement of payment within 30 to 60 days. We assess whether payment terms are customary or extended in accordance with normal practice relative to the market in which the sale is occurring. In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of payment, we have determined our contracts do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide customers with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, not to receive financing from our customers or to provide customers with financing.
We generally do not offer rights of return or any other incentives such as concessions, product rotation, or price protection and, therefore, do not provide for or make estimates of rights of return and similar incentives.
We establish allowances for doubtful accounts when available information causes us to believe that credit loss is probable.
Business Acquisition, Goodwill and Intangibles Assets, including Contingent Liability-Earnout
We have allocated the purchase price to assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on the estimated fair value of such assets and liabilities at the date of acquisition. We estimate a fair value of any earnout which would be owed to the seller based on the terms of the earnout and record this liability at the acquisition date. Fair value was based on future projections of metrics such as revenue or profit over the earnout period and valuation techniques that utilize expected volatility, threshold probability, and discounting of future payments. Evaluating the fair value involves a high degree of assumptions used within the valuation models, in particular, forecasts of projected revenues or margins. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of the earnout liabilities.
The carrying value of goodwill is not amortized, but it tested for impairment annually as of December 31, as well as on an interim basis whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a reporting unit may not be recoverable. An impairment charge is recognized for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the recorded fair value. All intangible assets have finite lives and are stated at cost, net of amortization. Amortization is computed over the useful life of the related assets on a straight-line method.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded a change in fair value of earnout liabilities for both Graphic Sciences and CEO Image. The assumptions were updated to reflect the improved performance of both acquisitions against their threshold targets, the passage of time, and, for December 2020, a reduction of uncertainty driven by the pandemic.
Accounts Receivable, Unbilled
We recognize professional services revenue over time as the services are delivered using an input or output method (e.g., labor hours incurred as a percentage of total labor hours budgeted, images scanned, or similar milestones), as appropriate for the contract, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met. When our revenue recognition policies recognize revenue that has not yet been billed, we record those contract asset amounts in accounts receivable, unbilled.
Deferred Revenues
Amounts that have been invoiced are recognized in accounts receivable, deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Deferred revenue represents amounts billed for which revenue has not yet been recognized. Deferred revenues typically relate to maintenance and software-as-a-service agreements which have been paid for by customers prior to the performance of those services, and payments received for professional services and license arrangements and software-as-a-service performance obligations that have been deferred until fulfilled under our revenue recognition policy.
Accounting for Costs of Computer Software to be Sold, Leased or Marketed and Accounting for Internal Use Software
We design, develop, test, market, license, and support new software products and enhancements of current products. We continuously monitor our software products and enhancements to remain compatible with standard platforms and file formats. In accordance with ASC 985-20 “Costs of Software to be Sold, Leased or Otherwise Marketed,” we expense software development costs, including costs to develop software products or the software component of products to be sold, leased, or marketed to external users, before technological feasibility is reached. Once technological feasibility has been established, certain software development costs incurred during the application development stage are eligible for capitalization. Based on our software development process, technical feasibility is established upon completion of a working model. Technological feasibility is typically reached shortly before the release of such products. No such costs were capitalized during the periods presented in this report.
In accordance with ASC 350-40, “Internal-Use Software,” we capitalize purchase and implementation costs of internal use software. Once an application has reached development stage, internal and external costs, if direct and incremental, are capitalized until the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Capitalization ceases upon completion of all substantial testing. We also capitalize costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable that the expenditure will result in additional functionality. Such capitalized costs are stated at cost less accumulated amortization. Amortization is computed over the estimated useful lives of the related assets on a straight-line basis, which is three years.
Stock-Based Compensation
We maintain one stock-based compensation plan. We account for stock-based payments to employees in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” Stock-based payments to employees include grants of stock that are recognized in the consolidated statement of operations based on their fair values at the date of grant. We account for stock-based payments to non-employees in accordance with ASC 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation,” which requires that such equity instruments are recorded at their fair value on the grant date.
The grant date fair value of stock option awards is recognized in earnings as stock-based compensation cost over the requisite service period of the award using the straight-line attribution method. We estimate the fair value of the stock option awards using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. The exercise price of options is specified in the stock option agreements. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock for the previous period equal to the expected term of the options. The expected term of options granted is based on the midpoint between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. The risk-free interest rate is based upon a U.S. Treasury instrument with a life that is similar to the expected term of the options. The expected dividend yield is based upon the yield expected on date of grant to occur over the term of the option.