ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage immunotherapy company focused on developing drugs that may reprogram the patient’s innate immune system to treat disease. We believe this may be done by targeting cells of the innate immune system that cause acute and chronic inflammation and are involved in the immune dysfunction associated with chronic diseases such as cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. The Company has two therapeutic platforms - dominant-negative TNF platform (“DN-TNF”) and the Natural Killer (“NK”) platform. The DN-TNF platform neutralizes soluble TNF (“sTNF”) without affecting trans-membrane TNF (“tmTNF”) or TNF receptors -TNFR1 and TNFR2. This unique biologic mechanism differentiates the DN-TNF drugs from currently approved non-selective TNF inhibitors that inhibit both sTNF and tmTNF. Protecting the function of tmTNF while neutralizing the function of sTNF is a potent anti-inflammatory strategy that does not cause immunosuppression or demyelination which occur in the currently approved non-selective TNF inhibitors. Currently approved non-selective TNF inhibitors are approved to treat autoimmune disease, but are contraindicated in patients with infection, cancer and neurologic diseases because they increase the risk of infection, cancer and demyelinating neurologic diseases, respectively; all the safety problems are due to off-target effects on inhibiting tmTNF. The NK platform targets the dysfunctional natural killer cells (“NK cells”) in patients with cancer. NK cells are part of the normal immunologic response to cancer with important roles in immunosurveillance to prevent cancer and in preventing relapse by eliminating residual disease. Residual disease is the cancer left behind after therapy is finished. Residual disease, can grow to cause relapse. The NK cells of cancer patients loses the ability to bind and kill cancer cells. The strength of the bond of binding to cancer cells, called avidity, is a necessary step NK killing of cancer cells. INKmune improves avidity of the patients NK cells to overcome the immune evasion of the patient’s cancer cells. We believe INKmune is best used to eliminate residual disease after the patient has completed other cancer therapies. Both the DN-TNF platform and the INKmune platform can be used to treat multiple diseases. The DN-TNF platform will be used as an immunotherapy for the treatment of cancer and neurodegenerative disease. INKmune is being developed to treat NK sensitive hematologic malignancies and solid tumors.
We believe our DN-TNF platform can be used as a cancer therapy to reverse resistance in immunotherapy and as a CNS therapy to target glial activation to prevent progression of Alzheimer’s disease (“AD”), and to target neuroinflammation in treatment resistant depression (“TRD”). The drug is named differently for the oncology and CNS indications; INB03 or XPro, respectively, but it is the same drug product. In each case, we believe neutralizing sTNF is a cornerstone to the treatment of these diseases. As an immunotherapy for cancer, we are using INB03 to neutralize sTNF produced by HER2+ trastuzumab resistant breast cancers to reverse resistance to therapy. sTNF causes an up-regulation of MUC4 expression that causes steric hindrance of trastuzumab binding to the HER2/Neu receptor on HER2+ breast cancer cells. Without binding, trastuzumab is not effective. In addition, INB03 changes the immunobiology of the tumor microenvironment by decreasing the number of immunosuppressive myeloid cells, both myeloid derived suppressor cells and tumor active macrophages, and increasing the number of cytotoxic lymphocytes in the TME. The Company has completed an open label dose escalation trial in cancer patients with metastatic solid tumors that have failed multiple lines of therapy. The trial informs the design of the Phase II trial by demonstrating that INB03 was safe and well tolerated, defined the dose of INB03 to carry into Phase II trials, and demonstrated a pharmacodynamic end-point. A Phase II trial is planned in women with advanced MUC4+ breast cancer with advanced disease.
Likewise, we believe the DN-TNF platform can be used to treat selected neurodegenerative diseases by modifying the brain microenvironment (BME). The Company believes the core pathology of cognitive decline is a combination of neurodegeneration and synaptic dysfunction. XPro completed a Phase I trial treating patients with Alzheimer’s disease that was partially funded by a Part-the-Clouds Award from the Alzheimer’s Association. We believe XPro targets activated microglia and astrocytes of the brain that produce sTNF that promotes nerve cell loss and synaptic dysfunction, key elements in the development of dementia. In animal models, elimination of sTNF prevents nerve cell dysfunction and reverses synaptic pruning. The Phase I trial in patients with biomarkers of inflammation with AD has been completed. The open label, dose escalation trial is designed to demonstrate that XPro can safely decrease neuroinflammation in patients with AD. The endpoints of the trial are measures of neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in blood and cerebral spinal fluid, measures of neuroinflammation by measuring cytokines in the CSF and MRI by measuring white matter free water. XPro, at the 1mg/kg/week dose decreased inflammatory cytokines in the CSF and white matter free water in the brain demonstrating that XPro can decrease neuroinflammation in patients with AD. We also studied downstream benefits of decreasing neuroinflammation by measuring changes in the CSF proteome and quantifying changes in novel white matter MRI biomarkers. XPro significantly decreases biomarkers of neurodegeneration as measured by changes in the CSF proteome including neurofilament light chain, phospho Tau 217 and VILIP-1; decreases of 84%, 46% and 91% respectively after 3 months of therapy. Three months of XPro therapy improved measures of synaptic function, as measured in the CSF proteome including a 222% increase in Contactin 2 and a 56% decrease neurogranin, proteins that contribute to improved synaptic function.
The successful completion of the Phase I trial in AD has informed the design of two Phase II trials in patients with AD; one in mild AD and the other in MCI. The mild AD trial will be a blinded randomized trial to test if treatment of mild AD patients with neuroinflammation will affect cognitive decline. The Phase II trial has six important elements. Two hundred patients will be enrolled in a 2:1 ratio (XPro vs placebo). The patients will receive 1mg/kg/week as a subcutaneous injection for six months. An enrichment strategy identical to the successful strategy used in the Phase I trial will be used to ensure patients have neuroinflammation. Patients will need to have some combination of elevated C-reactive protein, hemoglobin A1c, erythrocyte sedimentation rated in the blood and at least one allele of ApoE4. The primary end-point will be Early/mild Alzheimer’s Cognitive Composite (“EMACC”), a validated cognitive measure that is more sensitive than traditional end-points used in many studies of patients with early AD. The trial will be performed in North America and Australia, is expected to start enrolling patients in early 2022. We expect top-line clinical data to be available late-2023. All patients will be offered to stay on therapy for at least 12 months in an extension trial. Clinical and biomarker data will be collected during the extension trial.
The second Phase II trial will be a blinded randomized trial in patients with MCI in which the Company plans to enroll 60 patients in two arms in a 2:1 ratio (1mg/kg/week XPro, placebo). Patients will be treated for 3 months. Patients must have at least one ApoE4 allele to qualify for the trial. The primary end-point is EMACC, a sensitive cognitive end-point validated for use in patients with early AD. Secondary clinical endpoints include the CDR-SB, Cogstate Battery, E-Cog, NPI, and ADCS-ADL. Imaging endpoints of neuroinflammation (White matter free water), white matter integrity (apparent fiber density, radial diffusivity), and gray matter quality (cortical disarray measurement) will be assessed via MRI. Changes in brain metabolism will be assessed via FDG-PET. Additional secondary measures of function include EEG, and speech and language. All patients will be eligible to continue on XPro for at least 9 additional months. Clinical and MRI metrics will be followed during the extension trial. The Company may amend the clinical trial design from time-to-time to improve the quality of the data or the probability of success.
Effective therapy for TRD is a large unmet need. Twenty percent of patients with a Major Depressive Disorder have TRD. Once third of TRD patients have peripheral biomarkers to inflammation (elevated CRP). This is a large patient population. The role of TNF and anti-TNF therapeutics was explored in a small open label clinical trial by Prof. Andrew Miller, MD of Emory University demonstrated the patients have elevated TNF levels and treatment with infliximab treated their depression (Miller, 2011). The Company received a $2.9M USD award from the National Institute of Mental Health (“NIMH”) to treat TRD with XPro. The blinded, randomized Phase II trial will use a biomarkers of peripheral inflammation to select patients with TRD for enrollment. Patients will be treated for 6 weeks. Primary end-points include both clinical and neuroimaging measures. The final trial design has is ongoing and discussions with the FDA are not complete. The Company anticipates receiving authorization to initiate the clinical trial in the second half of 2022.
We believe that INKmune improves the ability of the patient’s own NK cells to attack their tumor. INKmune interacts with the patient’s NK cells to convert them from inert resting NK cells into memory-like NK cells that kill the patient’s cancer cells. INKmune is a replication incompetent proprietary cell line that is given to the patient after determining that i) the patient has adequate NK cells in their circulation and ii) those NK cells are functional when exposed to INKmune in vitro. INKmune is designed to be given to patients after their immune system has recovered after cytotoxic chemotherapy to target the residual disease the remains after treatment with cytotoxic therapy. We believe INKmune can be used to treat numerous hematologic malignancies and solid tumors including leukemia, multiple myeloma, lymphoma, lung, ovary, breast, renal and prostate cancer. The Company has initiated a Phase I trial using INKmune to treat patients with high risk MDS, a form of leukemia. One patient has been treated in the Phase I trial. In the single patient, INKmune therapy is safe, produces memory-like NK cells that kill cancer in vitro, promotes development of cancer killing memory-like NK cells that can be found in the patient’s circulation of 4 months. The Company will continue to enroll patients in the Phase I trial with a goal of completing patient enrollment in 2022. The Company intends to treat women with relapsed refractory ovarian in separate Phase I trial beginning during 2022.
The Company has presented pre-clinical data on the use of DN-TNF to treat non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (“NASH”). The Company has decided to defer the NASH program for the near future due to the complex and evolving clinical and regulatory environment. The Company may choose to reactivate the program or abandon the program in the future.
Since our inception in 2015, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to the discovery and development of our product candidates, including clinical trials and preclinical studies as well as general and administrative support for these operations. To date, we have generated no significant revenue. We have incurred net losses in each year since our inception and, as of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $63.7 million. Our net losses were $30,340,000 and $12,099,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations, including stock-based compensation.
The Company is subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict. Also, economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, however policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industry and economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain.
In addition, the Company’s clinical trials have been affected by and may continue to be affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. Clinical site initiation and patient enrollment have and may continue to be delayed due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic. Some patients have not and others may not be able to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services. Similarly, the ability to recruit and retain patients and principal investigators and site staff who, as healthcare providers, may have heightened exposure to COVID-19, may adversely impact the Company’s clinical trial operations.
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on the Company’s service providers, suppliers, contract research organizations (“CROs”) and the Company’s clinical trials, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the date of issuance of Company’s financial statements, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may materially impact the Company’s financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain.
As a company with less than $1.07 billion in revenue during our last fiscal year, we qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of specified reduced disclosure and other requirements that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies. These provisions include:
● only two years of audited financial statements in addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” disclosure;
● reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements;
● no non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements;
● exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal control over financial reporting; and
● delaying the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies.
We have elected to take advantage of the above-referenced exemptions and we may take advantage of these exemptions for up to five years or such earlier time that we are no longer an emerging growth company. We would cease to be an emerging growth company if we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenues, we have more than $700 million in market value of our stock held by non-affiliates, or we issue more than $1 billion of non-convertible debt over a three-year period. We may choose to take advantage of some but not all of these reduced burdens.
Components of Operating Results
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expense consists of expenses incurred while performing research and development activities to discover and develop our product candidates. This includes conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing development efforts and activities related to regulatory filings for product candidates. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Our research and development expense primarily consist of:
● clinical trial and regulatory-related costs;
● expenses incurred under agreements with investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
● manufacturing and testing costs and related supplies and materials; and
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation
We typically use our employee, consultant and infrastructure resources across our development programs. We track outsourced development costs by product candidate or development program, but we do not allocate personnel costs, other internal costs or external consultant costs to specific product candidates or development programs.
We participate, through our wholly-owned subsidiary in Australia, in the Australian research and development tax incentive program, such that a percentage of our qualifying research and development expenditures are reimbursed by the Australian government, and such incentives are reflected as a reduction of research and development expense. The Australian research and development tax incentive is recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the incentive will be received, the relevant expenditure has been incurred and the amount of the consideration can be reliably measured.
We participate, through our wholly-owned subsidiary in the United Kingdom, in the research and development program provided by the United Kingdom tax relief program, such that a percentage of our qualifying research and development expenditures are reimbursed by the United Kingdom government, and such incentives are reflected as a reduction of research and development expense. The United Kingdom research and development tax incentive is recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the incentive will be received, the relevant expenditure has been incurred and the amount of the consideration can be reliably measured. During 2022, the Company expects to receive a research and development tax rebate for eligible expenditures incurred in 2021, however the Company will be ineligible for research and development tax incentives for expenditures incurred after 2021 as a result of changes in the United Kingdom tax relief program.
Substantially all of our research and development expenses to date have been incurred in connection with our current and future product candidates. We expect our research and development expenses to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as we advance an increased number of our product candidates through clinical development, including the conduct of our planned clinical trials and manufacturing drug to be used in those clinical trials. The process of conducting clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The successful development of product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs required to complete the remaining development of any product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of product candidates.
The costs of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project owing to, but not limited to, the following:
● per patient trial costs;
● the number of sites included in the clinical trials;
● the countries in which the clinical trials are conducted;
● the length of time required to enroll eligible patients;
● the number of patients that participate in the clinical trials;
● the number of doses that patients receive;
● the cost of comparative agents used in clinical trials;
● the drop-out or discontinuation rates of patients;
● potential additional safety monitoring or other studies requested by regulatory agencies;
● the duration of patient follow-up;
● the efficacy and safety profile of the product candidate; and
● the cost of manufacturing, finishing, labeling and storage drug used in the clinical trial
We do not expect any of our product candidates to be commercially available for at least the next several years, if ever. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for the foreseeable future, which may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● continue research and development, including preclinical and clinical development of our existing product candidates;
● potentially seek regulatory approval for our product candidates;
● seek to discover and develop additional product candidates;
● establish a commercialization infrastructure and scale up our manufacturing and distribution capabilities to commercialize any of our product candidates for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
● seek to comply with regulatory standards and laws;
● maintain, leverage and expand our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire clinical, manufacturing, scientific and other personnel to support our product candidates development and future commercialization efforts;
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel; and
● incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of payroll and personnel expenses, including stock-based compensation; professional fees for legal, consulting, accounting and tax services; insurance, overhead, including rent and utilities; and other general operating expenses not otherwise classified as research and development expenses.
Other income (expense)
Other expense consists primarily of interest expense incurred on debt in 2021. Other income primarily consists of income from a settlement in 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, as well as the reported revenues and expenses during the reported periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
In-Process Research and Development
The Company evaluates the carrying value of indefinite-lived intangible assets, which consists of in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), on an annual basis or more frequently when indicators of impairment exist. An impairment of indefinite-lived intangible assets would occur if the fair value of the intangible asset is less than the carrying value. Intangible assets with finite lives are tested for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. If these facts and circumstances exist, the Company assesses for recovery by comparing the carrying values of the assets with their future undiscounted net cash flows. Significant management judgment is required in the forecast of future operating results that are used in the preparation of expected undiscounted cash flows.
IPR&D assets are considered to be indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development projects. During the period the assets are considered indefinite-lived, they are tested for impairment. If the related project is terminated or abandoned, the Company may have a full or partial impairment related to the IPR&D assets, calculated as the excess of their carrying value over fair value. The valuation process is very complex and requires significant input and judgment using internal and external sources with respect to the Company’s future revenue and expense growth rates, changes in working capital use, the selection of an appropriate discount rate, and other assumptions and estimates.
Research and Development (“R&D”)
R&D expenses consist primarily of costs related to clinical studies and outside services, personnel expenses, and other R&D expenses. Clinical studies and outside services costs relate primarily to services performed by clinical research organizations and related clinical or development manufacturing costs, materials and supplies, filing fees, regulatory support, and other third-party fees. Personnel expenses relate primarily to salaries, benefits and share-based compensation. R&D expenditures are charged to operations as incurred.
We recognize R&D tax credits receivable from the United Kingdom and Australian government for spending on R&D as an offset of R&D expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to service providers, employees, and directors based on the estimated fair value of the award on the grant date. We calculate the estimated fair value of stock options on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which is impacted by the fair value of our common stock, as well as changes in assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, the market value of common stock on the grant date, the expected dividend yield, the expected term of the awards, the risk-free interest rates and the expected common stock price volatility over the term of the option awards. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of a few unrelated public companies within our industry over the most recent period commensurate with the estimated expected term of our stock options as we have insufficient historical information regarding the volatility of the share price of our common stock. The risk-free interest rate for periods within the contractual life of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant. We have never declared or paid dividends and have no plans to do so in the foreseeable future.
We recognize the fair value of stock options on a straight-line basis over the period during which a service provider is required to provide services in exchange for the award (generally the vesting period). We account for forfeitures as they occur.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During the periods presented, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under SEC rules.
Licensing and Collaboration Agreements
We anticipate that in-licensing, out-licensing and strategic collaborations will become an integral part of our operations, providing the company with opportunities to leverage our partners’ expertise and capabilities to further expand the potential of our technologies, product candidates and revenue streams.
Xencor
In October 2017, we licensed INB03 (also known as XPro) from Xencor. This exclusive, global, unrestricted license came with considerable know-how, intellectual property, pre-clinical data, regulatory documentation and product stocks. Currently, we are focused on the immune-oncology uses of this unique asset. In the future, we may develop the asset in a wide variety of therapeutic areas, with a variety of delivery techniques by ourselves or in conjunction with partners.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Revenues
During 2021, the Company sold MSC’s to three customers and recognized $181,000 of revenues. We recorded $11,000 of revenues in 2020 as a result of selling MSC’s to one customer.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to higher professional fees ($1.0 million higher in 2021), higher stock-based compensation expense ($0.6 million higher in 2021), and higher salary expense ($0.5 million higher in 2021).
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased to $20.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is due to $5.4 million of higher expenses for the Alzheimer’s clinical program, $1.9 million of higher expenses on the COVID-19 clinical trial, and due to the Company incurring $5.5 million of higher manufacturing costs in connection with producing its DN-TNF product. In addition, the Company’s stock-based compensation was $1.1 million higher in 2021 compared to 2020.
Other Expense (Income)
Other expense increased during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 as a result of the incurring $1.0 million of interest expense from a loan the Company obtained in June 2021. During 2020, the Company received a refund from a third-party vendor pursuant to a release and settlement agreement of approximately $0.1 million for services provided in a previous year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is the ability of a company to generate funds to support its current and future operations, satisfy its obligations and otherwise operate on an ongoing basis.
We incurred a net loss of $30,340,000 and $12,099,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities was $28,504,000 and $8,943,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Since inception, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the sales of our common stock and from the receipts of grants. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $74.8 million. We anticipate that operating losses and net cash used in operating activities will increase over the next few years as we advance our products under development.
Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, third-party clinical and preclinical research and development services, costs incurred to manufacture our drugs under development, compensation and related expenses, legal, patent and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs. We believe our use of CROs provides us with flexibility in managing our spending.
The Company incurs the majority of its research and development expenses in Australia and the United Kingdom. Fluctuations in the rate of exchange between the United States dollar and the pound sterling as well as the Australian dollar could adversely affect our financial results, including our expenses as well as assets and liabilities. We currently do not hedge foreign currencies but will continue to assess whether that strategy is appropriate. As of December 31, 2021, the cash balance held by our foreign subsidiaries with currencies other than the United States dollar was approximately $0.2 million. We do not have any material financial exposure to one customer or one country that would significantly hinder our liquidity.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of $63.7 million and working capital of $78.2 million. Losses have principally occurred as a result of the substantial resources required for research and development of the Company’s products which included the general and administrative expenses associated with its organization and product development, as well as the lack of sources of material revenues until such time as the Company’s products are commercialized. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $74.8 million. We believe our cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months following the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Registered Direct Offering
During July 2021, the Company completed a registered direct offering whereby the Company sold 1,818,182 shares of its common stock to investors for net proceeds of $36.9 million.
ATM Sales Agreements
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued and sold 178,600 shares of common stock at an average price of $5.45 per share under the 2020 ATM agreement. The aggregate net proceeds were approximately $0.8 million after BTIG’s commission and other offering expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued and sold 1,439,480 shares of common stock at an average price of $20.17 per share under the 2020 ATM agreement. The aggregate net proceeds were approximately $28.4 million after BTIG’s commission and other offering expenses. As of December 31, 2021, sales of our common stock pursuant to the 2020 ATM have been completed.
During March 2021, the Company entered into the 2021 ATM agreement with BTIG, as sales agent, to establish an ATM offering of up to $45 million of common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold 713,192 shares at an average price per share of $21.73 for net proceeds of approximately $14.9 million under the 2021 ATM agreement.
Term Loan
On June 10, 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with SVB and an affiliate of SVB, providing for a $15.0 million term loan. The Term Loan also provides for us to request an additional $5.0 million term loan from the Lenders, which may be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the Lenders. The Term Loan provides for an annual interest rate equal to the greater of (i) the prime rate then in effect as reported in The Wall Street Journal plus 4.50% and (ii) 7.75% and also includes a final payment fee equal to 6.5% of the original principal amount borrowed payable on the earlier of the repayment of the loan in full and the maturity date. The Company used the proceeds of the term loan to fund the cash consideration for the Option Cancellation Agreement with Xencor.
The Lincoln Park Transaction
On May 15, 2019, the Company and Lincoln Park entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company had the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to $20.0 million in shares of the Company’s common stock, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued 196,000 shares of the Company’s common stock to Lincoln Park for gross proceeds of $1,003,000. During April 2021, the Company terminated the Purchase Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Our cash used in operating activities was primarily driven by our net loss.
Operating activities used $28.5 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily resulting from our net loss of $30.3 million, a net cash outflow of $3.1 million for changes in our net operating assets and liabilities, and non-cash stock-based compensation charges of $4.8 million. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase in research and development tax credit receivable of $3.2 million and an increase in prepaid expenses of $2.1 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $2.2 million.
Operating activities used $8.9 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily resulting from our net loss of $12.1 million, partially offset by non-cash stock-based compensation charges of $3.1 million.
Investing Activities
Investing activities used $15.0 million of cash for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company paid Xencor $15.0 million to settle an option to acquire 10% of the Company’s common stock on a fully diluted basis which was issued to acquire the Company’s acquired in-process research and development intangible asset.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold 1,439,480 shares of its common stock under its 2020 ATM agreement for net proceeds of approximately $28.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company sold 713,192 shares of its common stock under the 2021 ATM agreement for net proceeds of approximately $14.9 million.
During July 2021, the Company completed a registered direct offering whereby the Company sold 1,818,182 shares of its common stock to investors for net proceeds of $36.9 million.
During June 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with SVB and an affiliate of SVB, providing for a $15.0 million term loan.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received approximately 1.2 million in connection with the exercise of stock options and warrants.
During July 2020, the Company completed an underwritten public offering in which it sold 2,500,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share. Aggregate net proceeds from the underwritten public offering were approximately $23.1 million, net of approximately $1.9 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company purchased 220,000 shares from an investor for approximately $1.0 million. In addition, the Company sold 196,000 shares of its common stock to Lincoln Park for cash proceeds of approximately $1.0 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company issued and sold 178,600 shares of common stock at an average price of $5.45 per share under the ATM agreement for net cash proceeds of approximately $0.8 million.