ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This report contains forward-looking statements, as defined in Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will,” “should,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential” or “continue,” the negative of such terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions. Actual events or results may differ materially.
Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable based on our current expectations and projections, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Moreover, neither we, nor any other person, assume responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the forward-looking statements. We are under no obligation to update any of the forward-looking statements after the filing of this Annual Report to conform such statements to actual results or to changes in our expectations.
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. Readers are also urged to carefully review and consider the various disclosures made by us which attempt to advise interested parties of the factors which affect our business, including without limitation the disclosures made in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report under the Caption “Risk Factors.”
Risk factors that could cause actual results to differ from those contained in the forward-looking statements include but are not limited to: our history of losses; our lack of products that have received regulatory approval; uncertainties inherent in clinical trials and product development programs, including but not limited to the fact that pre-clinical and clinical results may not be indicative of results achievable in other trials or for other indications, that the studies or trials may not be successful or achieve desired results, that preclinical studies and clinical trials may not commence, have sufficient enrollment or be completed in the time periods anticipated, that results from one study may not necessarily be reflected or supported by the results of other similar studies, that results from an animal study may not be indicative of results achievable in human studies, that clinical testing is expensive and can take many years to complete, that the outcome of any clinical trial is uncertain and failure can occur at any time during the clinical trial process, and that our electroporation technology and DNA vaccines may fail to show the desired safety and efficacy traits in clinical trials; the availability of funding; the ability to manufacture vaccine candidates; the availability or potential availability of alternative therapies or treatments for the conditions targeted by us or our collaborators, including alternatives that may be more efficacious or cost-effective than any therapy or treatment that we and our collaborators hope to develop; our ability to receive development, regulatory and commercialization event-based payments under our collaborative agreements; whether our proprietary rights are enforceable or defensible or infringe or allegedly infringe on rights of others or can withstand claims of invalidity; and the impact of government healthcare laws and proposals.
Overview
We are a biotechnology company focused on bringing to market precisely designed DNA medicines and vaccines to help protect people from infectious diseases, including COVID-19, and to help treat people with cancer, and conditions associated with human papillomavirus ("HPV"). We have shown in clinical trials that our DNA vaccine candidates can be delivered into cells in the body via a proprietary smart device allowing the nucleic-acid delivered gene products to activate functional T cell and antibody responses against targeted pathogens and cancers.
Our DNA medicines pipeline is comprised of three types of product candidates: prophylactic DNA vaccines, therapeutic DNA immunotherapies, and DNA encoded monoclonal and bispecific antibodies ("dMAbs" and “dBTAs”), all of which utilize the two components of our integrated platform, SynCon® and CELLECTRA®.
Our proprietary SynCon® technology creates optimized plasmids, which are circular strands of DNA that instruct a cell to produce proteins or antigens to help the person’s immune system respond with antibodies and immune cells which recognize and then help block viruses and destroy cancerous or pre-cancerous cells.
Our patented CELLECTRA nucleic-acid delivered gene products smart delivery devices facilitate uptake of our DNA medicines into the cell, which has been a key limitation of historical DNA-based technology approaches. Human clinical trial data from more than 15,000 CELLECTRA® smart device administrations across more than 5,000 participants to date have shown a tolerable safety profile.
Our corporate strategy is to develop, seek regulatory approval for and commercialize our novel DNA medicines to address unmet global health needs. We continue to advance and clinically validate an array of DNA medicine candidates that target infectious diseases, such as COVID-19, as well as HPV-associated diseases and cancer.
Our partners and collaborators include ApolloBio Corporation, AstraZeneca, Advaccine Biopharmaceuticals Suzhou Co, The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (Gates), Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations ("CEPI"), Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency ("DARPA"), The U.S. Department of Defense ("DoD"), HIV Vaccines Trial Network, the U.S. Defense Threat Reduction Agency’s Medical CBRN Defense Consortium ("MCDC"), International Vaccine Institute ("IVI"), Kaneka Eurogentec, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Ology Bioservices, the Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Plumbline Life Sciences, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Richter-Helm BioLogics, Thermo Fisher Scientific, the University of Pennsylvania, the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, and The Wistar Institute.
We or our collaborators are currently evaluating the feasibility of, conducting or planning clinical studies of our DNA medicines for COVID-19, which includes both homologous and heterologous boosting approaches; Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, or MERS; Lassa fever; Ebola; as well as HPV-associated precancers, including cervical, vulvar, and anal dysplasia; HPV-associated cancers, including head & neck, cervical, anal, penile, vulvar, and vaginal; other HPV-associated disorders, such as recurrent respiratory papillomatosis, or RRP; glioblastoma multiforme, or GBM; and prostate cancer.
All of our product candidates are in the research and development phase. We have not generated any revenues from the sale of any products, and we do not expect to generate any such revenues for at least the next several years. We earn revenue from license fees and milestone revenue and collaborative research and development agreements. Our product candidates will require significant additional research and development efforts, including extensive preclinical and clinical testing. All product candidates that we advance to clinical testing will require regulatory approval prior to commercial use, and will require significant costs for commercialization. We may not be successful in our research and development efforts, and we may never generate sufficient product revenue to be profitable.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.2 billion. We expect to continue to incur substantial operating losses in the future due to our commitment to our research and development programs, the funding of preclinical studies, clinical trials and regulatory activities and the costs of general and administrative activities.
Impacts of COVID-19 on Our Business
Operationally, we have experienced some disruptions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our clinical trial operations have been adversely affected, including our ability to initiate and conduct our planned trials on our expected timelines and our ability to recruit and retain participants in our trials. Our data collection timelines have also been impacted, as an increasing number of trial participants are either not able or do not feel safe going into healthcare facilities, which is necessary for the collection and completion of data samples. As a result, it is taking longer than anticipated to complete the data collection process.
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused supply chain disruptions and supply shortages globally. As a result, we have experienced delays and disruptions in obtaining clinical supplies, manufacturing supplies and components, and have had to secure new vendors for certain supplies and components at higher prices. Some manufacturing supplies and components remain in limited supply with uncertain delivery dates.
In 2020, a number of governmental orders and other public health guidance measures were implemented across much of the United States, including in the locations of our offices, laboratories, clinical trial sites and third parties on whom we rely. We have implemented a work from home policy allowing employees who can work from home to do so, while those needing to work in laboratory facilities work in shifts to reduce the number of people gathered together at one time. We have also implemented a mask-wearing mandate for all on-site activities. Non-essential business travel has been suspended, and online and teleconference technology is used to meet virtually rather than in person. We have taken measures to secure our research and development project activities, while work in laboratories has been organized to reduce risk of COVID-19 transmission.
Our liquidity has also not been negatively impacted to date by the pandemic. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we raised $47.7 million and $454.5 million, respectively, in net proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock through "at-the-market" equity offering programs and in January 2021 we closed an underwritten public offering with net proceeds to us of $162.1 million, which further enhanced our liquidity and capital resources. As of December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments were $401.3 million, compared to $411.6 million as of December 31, 2020.
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our employees, collaborators and service providers. The extent to which the pandemic will impact our business and operations will depend on future developments, including travel restrictions to, from and within the United States and other countries, and the effectiveness of actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease, including mass vaccination efforts, that are highly uncertain. For additional information on the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations, see the “Risk Factors” section above in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The SEC defines critical accounting policies as those that are, in management’s view, important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management’s judgment. Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. We base our estimates on experience and on various assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates. We believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgements and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Collaboration Agreements and Revenue Recognition
We assess whether our collaboration agreements are subject to Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 808: Collaborative Arrangements (“Topic 808”) based on whether they involve joint operating activities and whether both parties have active participation in the arrangement and are exposed to significant risks and rewards. To the extent that the arrangement falls within the scope of Topic 808 and we conclude that our collaboration partner is not a customer, we present such payments as a reduction of research and development expense. If payments from our collaboration partner to us represent consideration from a customer, then we account for those payments within the scope of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”).
We enter into collaborative arrangements with partners that typically include payment of one or more of the following: (i) license fees; (ii) product supply services; (iii) milestone payments related to the achievement of developmental, regulatory, or commercial goals; and (iv) royalties on net sales of licensed products. At contract inception, we assess the goods or services agreed upon within each contract and assess whether each good or service is distinct and determine those that are performance obligations. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
As part of the accounting for these arrangements, we must develop estimates and assumptions that require judgment of management to determine the underlying stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation which determines how the transaction price is allocated among the performance obligation. The standalone selling price may include items such as forecasted revenues, development timelines, discount rates and probabilities of technical and regulatory success. We evaluate each performance obligation to determine if it can be satisfied at a point in time or over time. In addition, variable consideration must be evaluated to determine if it is constrained and, therefore, excluded from the transaction price. Differences in the allocation of the transaction price between delivered and undelivered performance obligations can impact the timing of revenue recognition but do not change the total revenue recognized under any agreement.
For collaboration arrangements that include license fees, we recognize revenues from non-refundable, upfront fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the licensee and the licensee is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
For collaboration arrangements that include milestone payments (variable consideration), we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. This assessment is based on our past experience with our collaboration partner, market insight and partner communication. Milestone payments that are not within our or our collaboration partner’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are generally not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achieving such milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license, collaboration or other revenues and earnings in the period of adjustment and could be material.
For collaboration arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and for which the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue in the period the underlying sales occur. To date, we have not recognized any royalty revenue resulting from any of our collaborative arrangements.
Research and Development Expenses - Clinical Trial Accruals
Our activities have largely consisted of research and development efforts related to developing electroporation delivery technologies, DNA vaccines, DNA immunotherapies and dMABs. For clinical trial expenses, judgements used in estimating accruals rely on estimates of total costs incurred based on participant enrollment, completion of studies and other events. Accrued clinical trial costs are subject to revisions as trials progress. Revisions are charged to expense in the period in which the facts that give rise to the revision become known. Historically, revisions have not resulted in material changes to research and development expense; however a modification in the protocol of a clinical trial or cancellation of a trial could result in a charge to our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information regarding recent accounting pronouncements is contained in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, included elsewhere in this report.
Results of Operations
The consolidated financial data for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 is presented in the following table and the results of these periods are used in the discussion thereafter.
*Not meaningful
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue primarily consisted of revenues under collaborative research and development arrangements, including arrangements with affiliated entities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Our year over year total revenue decreased $5.6 million, or 76%. The decrease in revenue was primarily due to revenue earned from Advaccine in connection with upfront and milestone payments, and milestone revenue earned from our affiliated entity Plumbline Life Sciences, Inc. ("PLS"), for the year ended December 31, 2020 that did not occur for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
The $155.0 million increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases of:
•$39.5 million in drug manufacturing, outside services and clinical study expenses related to INO-4800;
•$35.0 million in expenses related to manufacturing capacity access fees;
•$21.9 million related to the acquisition and installation of manufacturing equipment related to INO-4800;
•$13.6 million in engineering services and expensed equipment and inventory related to our CELLECTRA® 3PSP device array automation project;
•$12.8 million in expensed materials purchased in preparation for the manufacturing of INO-4800; and
•$12.1 million in employee and contractor compensation.
These increases were primarily offset by an increase in contra-research and development expense recorded from grant agreements of $6.2 million, among other variances.
Contributions received from current grant agreements and recorded as contra-research and development expense were $53.7 million and $47.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase year over year was primarily due to increases of $5.9 million, $3.6 million and $2.4 million earned from the DoD OTA Agreement, CEPI Lassa and MERS grant and reimbursements from Advaccine, respectively, partially offset by decreases of $3.2 million and $3.2 million, earned from CEPI and Gates, respectively, related to INO-4800 and device development activities, among other variances.
General and Administrative Expenses
The $16.5 million increase in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to increases of:
•$5.3 million in employee and consultant stock-based compensation;
•$3.9 million in employee compensation;
•$2.7 million in insurance expenses; and
•$2.2 million in legal expenses.
The increase was also due to less contra-general and administrative expense recorded related to gain on foreign exchange of $2.8 million, among other variances.
Employee stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite service period. Total employee stock-based compensation cost for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $25.0 million and $14.5 million, of which $13.4 million and $8.0 million was included in research and development expenses and $11.6 million and $6.5 million was included in general and administrative expenses, respectively. The increase for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to an increase in options granted and a higher weighted average grant date fair value for the awards granted in the first quarter of 2021 and grants vesting during the period.
Interest Income
The $51,000 increase in interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to more interest earned on our higher balance of short-term investment holdings.
Interest Expense
The $6.8 million decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to less interest expense recorded from our convertible senior notes, or the Notes, due to the partial conversions of the Notes
into shares of our common stock in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and the full conversion of the December 2019 Bonds into shares of our common stock in March 2021, as well as no interest expense recorded on our August 2019 Bonds due to their full conversion into shares of our common stock in August 2020.
Gain (Loss) on Investment in Affiliated Entity
The gain (loss) on investment in affiliated entity for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $(554,000) resulting from the change in the fair market value of our investment in PLS, and for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $36.6 million, resulting from the change in the fair market value of our investments in GeneOne and PLS. During the third quarter of 2020, we sold our full equity interest in GeneOne. We record our investment in PLS at its market value based on the closing price of the shares on the Korea New Exchange Market at each balance sheet date, with changes in fair value reflected in the consolidated statements of operations.
Net Unrealized Gain (Loss) on Available-for-Sale Equity Securities
The net unrealized gain (loss) on available-for-sale equity securities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $(3.2) million and $1.7 million, respectively, resulted from a change in the fair market value of the investments.
Share in Net Loss of Geneos
The share in net loss of Geneos represents our share of Geneos' losses during the period after deconsolidation in June 2020.
Income Taxes
Since inception, we have incurred operating losses and accordingly have not recorded a provision for U.S. income taxes for any of the periods presented. Utilization of net operating losses and tax credits are subject to a substantial annual limitation due to ownership change limitations provided by the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or IRC. As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carry forwards for U.S. federal, California and Pennsylvania income tax purposes of $864.5 million, $146.5 million and $89.0 million, respectively, net of the net operating losses that will expire due to IRC Section 382 limitations. We also had U.S. federal and state research and development tax credits of $35.1 million and $4.4 million, respectively, net of the federal research and development credits that will expire due to IRC Section 383 limitations. The net operating losses and credits began to expire during 2021.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, you may refer to Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Historically, our primary uses of cash have been to finance research and development activities including clinical trial activities in the oncology, DNA vaccines and other immunotherapy areas of our business. Since inception, we have satisfied our cash requirements principally from proceeds from the sale of equity securities, indebtedness and grants and government contracts.
Working Capital and Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and short-term investments of $401.3 million and working capital of $382.7 million, as compared to $411.6 million and $429.5 million as of December 31, 2020, respectively.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $215.7 million and $178.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The variance was primarily due to increased research and development expenses offset by the timing and changes in working capital balances.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $175.3 million and $58.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The variance was primarily the result of timing differences in short-term investment purchases, sales and maturities, offset by the proceeds from the sale of our investment in GeneOne in 2020 of $40.1 million. Our capital expenditures were $1.2 million and $1.5 million, respectively, and we do not expect our capital expenditure requirements to increase materially.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $211.5 million and $465.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to less proceeds from the sale of common stock under ATM sales agreements in 2021 compared to 2020, offset by the net proceeds from the January 2021 underwritten public offering.
Issuances of Common Stock
On November 9, 2021, we entered into an ATM Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with outside sales agents (collectively, the “Sales Agents”) under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock with aggregate gross proceeds of up to $300.0 million, through the Sales Agents.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Sales Agreement, the Sales Agents may sell the common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering”. The Sales Agents will use commercially reasonable efforts to sell the common stock from time to time, based upon instructions from us, including any price, time or size limits or other customary parameters or conditions we may impose. We will pay the Sales Agents a commission of up to three percent (3.0%) of the gross sales proceeds of any common stock sold through the Sales Agents under the Sales Agreement, and we have provided the Sales Agents with certain indemnification rights. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 6,955,341 shares of common stock under the Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $47.7 million.
On January 25, 2021, we closed an underwritten public offering of 20,355,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $8.50 per share. The net proceeds, after deducting the underwriters' discounts and commissions and other estimated offering expenses payable by us, were $162.1 million.
In May 2018, we entered into an At-the-Market Equity Offering Sales Agreement, or the 2018 Sales Agreement, with an outside placement agent, or the Placement Agent, to sell shares of our common stock with aggregate gross proceeds of up to $100.0 million, from time to time, through an “at-the-market” equity offering program under which the Placement Agent would act as sales agent. In the first quarter of 2020, we entered into amendments to the 2018 Sales Agreement to increase the amount of our common stock that could be sold through the Placement Agent under the 2018 Sales Agreement to an aggregate offering price of up to $250.0 million. During the three months ended March 31, 2020, we sold 43,148,952 shares of common stock under the 2018 Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $208.2 million. Following these sales, there was no remaining capacity under the 2018 Sales Agreement.
On April 3, 2020, we entered into a sales agreement, or the 2020 Sales Agreement, with the same Placement Agent to sell shares of our common stock. On that same day, we filed a prospectus supplement for the offer and sale of our common stock pursuant to the 2020 Sales Agreement for aggregate gross proceeds of up to $150.0 million. On May 12, 2020 we filed an additional prospectus supplement for the offer and sale of our common stock pursuant to the 2020 Sales Agreement for an additional $100.0 million of gross proceeds, bringing the maximum gross proceeds of sales under the 2020 Sales Agreement to $250.0 million. Through December 31, 2020, we sold 22,915,934 shares of common stock under the 2020 Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $246.2 million. On November 8, 2021, we terminated the 2020 Sales Agreement.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, stock options to purchase 1,310,263 shares of common stock were exercised for aggregate net proceeds of $6.7 million, which proceeds were offset by tax payments made related to net share settlement of RSU awards of $4.6 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, stock options to purchase 2,178,252 shares of common stock were exercised for aggregate net proceeds of $12.3 million, which proceeds were offset by tax payments made related to net share settlement of RSU awards of $4.0 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, stock options to purchase 42,969 shares of common stock were exercised for aggregate net proceeds of $113,000, which proceeds were offset by tax payments made related to net share settlement of RSU awards of $893,000.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.2 billion and we expect to continue to operate at a loss for some time. The amount of the accumulated deficit will continue to increase, as it will be expensive to continue research and development efforts. These activities will require additional financing. If these activities are successful and if we receive approval from the FDA to market our product candidates, then we will need to raise additional funding to market and sell the approved products and equipment. We cannot predict the outcome of the above matters at this time. We are evaluating potential collaborations as an additional way to fund operations. We believe that our current cash and short-term investments are sufficient to meet our planned working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months from the date of this report.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, future minimum payments due under our contractual obligations are set forth in the table below. We expect to be able to satisfy these obligations, both in the short-term and in the longer-term, with cash on hand and proceeds from sales of our common stock under the Sales Agreement.
(1) Amounts represent remaining contractual amounts due under our Notes, including interest based on the fixed rate of 6.5% per year. Although these Notes mature in March 2024, they may be converted into shares of our common stock prior to maturity if certain conditions are met. We may also redeem the Notes prior to their maturity if certain conditions are met. Any redemption prior to maturity would result in repayments of the principal amounts sooner than the scheduled repayments as indicated in the table. See Note 9, "Convertible Debt” in the Consolidated Financial Statements section of this report for further discussion.
(2) We have entered into operating leases for our facilities, which expire from 2023 to 2029, and operating leases for office equipment, which expire in 2024. In the fourth quarter of 2019, we entered into two subleases for a portion of our Plymouth Meeting corporate headquarters facility through December 31, 2022 and March 31, 2025. As of December 31, 2021, we expect to receive aggregate future minimum lease payments totaling $814,000 (non-discounted) over the duration of the sublease agreements, which expected payments are not included in the table above.
(3) We have entered into agreements with contract manufacturers for INO-4800 that contain minimum purchase requirements by us in 2022.
In the normal course of business, we are a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to which we may be obligated to indemnify the other party. It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these types of agreements due to the conditional nature of our obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Historically, payments made by us under these types of agreements have not had a material effect on our business, consolidated results of operations or financial condition.