Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. This report contains certain forward-looking statements relating to future events or our future financial performance. These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in this report. You are cautioned not to place undue reliance on this information which speaks only as of the date of this report. Except as required by law, we assume no responsibility for updating any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise. For a discussion of the important risks related to our business and future operating performance, see the discussion under the caption “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and under the caption “Factors Which May Influence Future Results of Operations” below.
Overview
Inseego Corp. is a leader in the design and development of fixed and mobile wireless solutions (advanced 4G and 5G NR), IIoT and cloud solutions for Fortune 500 enterprises, service providers, small and medium-sized businesses, governments, and consumers around the globe. Our product portfolio consists of fixed and mobile device-to-cloud solutions that provide compelling, intelligent, reliable and secure end-to-end IoT services with deep business intelligence. Inseego’s products and solutions, designed and developed in the U.S., power mission critical applications with a “zero unscheduled downtime” mandate, such as our 5G FWA gateway solutions, 4G and 5G mobile broadband, IIoT applications such as SD WAN failover management, asset tracking and fleet management services. Our solutions are powered by our key wireless innovations in mobile and FWA technologies, including a suite of products employing the 5G NR standards, and purpose-built SaaS cloud platforms.
We have been at the forefront of the ways in which the world stays connected and accesses information, and protects and derives intelligence from that information. With multiple first-to-market innovations across a number of wireless technologies, including 5G, and a strong and growing portfolio of hardware and software innovations for IIoT solutions, Inseego has been advancing technology and driving industry transformations for over 30 years. It is this proven expertise, commitment to quality, obsession with innovation and a relentless focus on execution that makes us a preferred global partner of service providers, distributors, value-added resellers, system integrators, and enterprises worldwide.
On July 30, 2021, we completed the sale of Ctrack South Africa. Initial cash proceeds of $36.6 million were received. Final cash proceeds were subject to certain post-closing working capital adjustments which totaled $2.6 million, $2.2 million of which was received on October 29, 2021, and the remaining $0.4 million was offset with our existing accounts payable balance to Convergence.
Business Segment Reporting
We do not provide separate segment reporting for our various lines of business. Our Chief Executive Officer, who is also our Chief Operating Decision Maker, evaluates the business as a single entity and reviews financial information and makes business decisions based on the overall results of the business. As such, our operations constitute a single operating segment and one reportable segment.
Factors Which May Influence Future Results of Operations
Net Revenues. We believe that our future net revenues will be influenced by a number of factors including:
•economic environment and related market conditions;
•increased competition from other fleet and vehicle telematics solutions, as well as suppliers of emerging devices that contain wireless data access or device management features;
•acceptance of our products by new vertical markets;
•growth in the aviation ground vertical;
•rate of change to new products;
•deployment of 5G infrastructure equipment;
•adoption of 5G end point products;
•competition in the area of 5G technology;
•product pricing; and
•changes in technologies.
Our revenues are also significantly dependent upon the availability of materials and components used in our hardware products.
We anticipate introducing additional products during the next twelve months, including SaaS and additional service offerings, industrial IoT hardware and services, and other mobile and fixed wireless devices targeting the emerging 5G market. We continue to develop and maintain strategic relationships with service providers and other wireless industry leaders such as Verizon Wireless, T-Mobile and Qualcomm. Through strategic relationships, we have been able to maintain market penetration by leveraging the resources of our channel partners, including their access to distribution resources, increased sales opportunities and market opportunities.
Cost of Net Revenues. Cost of net revenues includes all costs associated with our contract manufacturers, distribution, fulfillment and repair services, delivery of SaaS services, warranty costs, amortization of intangible assets, royalties, operations overhead, costs associated with cancellation of purchase orders and costs related to outside services. Also included in cost of net revenues are costs related to inventory adjustments, as well as any write downs for excess and obsolete inventory and abandoned product lines. Inventory adjustments are impacted primarily by demand for our products, which is influenced by the factors discussed above.
Operating Costs and Expenses. Our operating costs consist of three primary categories: research and development, sales and marketing and general and administrative costs.
Research and development is at the core of our ability to produce innovative, leading-edge products. These expenses consist primarily of engineers and technicians who design and test our highly complex products and the procurement of testing and certification services.
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of our sales force and product-marketing professionals. In order to maintain strong sales relationships, we provide co-marketing, trade show support and product training. We are also engaged in a wide variety of marketing activities, such as awareness and lead generation programs as well as product marketing. Other marketing initiatives include public relations, seminars and co-branding with partners.
General and administrative expenses include primarily corporate functions such as accounting, human resources, legal, administrative support and professional fees. This category also includes the expenses needed to operate as a publicly traded company, including compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended, SEC filings, stock exchange fees and investor relations expense. Although general and administrative expenses are not directly related to revenue levels, certain expenses such as legal expenses and provisions for bad debts may cause significant volatility in future general and administrative expenses which may, in turn, impact net revenue levels.
As part of our business strategy, we may review acquisition or divestiture opportunities that we believe would be advantageous or complementary to the development of our business. Given our current cash position and recent losses, any additional acquisitions we make would likely involve issuing stock in order to provide the purchase consideration for the acquisitions. If we make any additional acquisitions, we may incur substantial expenditures in conjunction with the acquisition process and the subsequent assimilation of any acquired business, products, technologies or personnel.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations in dollars (in thousands) and expressed as a percentage of net revenues, derived from the accompanying consolidated financial statements for the periods indicated.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net revenues. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $262.4 million, a decrease of $51.4 million, or 16.4%, compared to the same period in 2020.
The following table summarizes net revenues by our two product categories (dollars in thousands):
IoT & Mobile Solutions. The decrease in IoT & Mobile Solutions net revenues is primarily due to decreases in our enterprise and carrier offerings, and lower sales of LTE gigabit hotspots as the COVID-19 pandemic demand eased, partially offset by increased sales of our second-generation 5G hotspot related to our MiFi business and increased revenues in our Inseego Subscribe business due to subscriber growth.
Enterprise SaaS Solutions. Enterprise SaaS Solutions net revenues decreased year-over-year as a result of the divestiture of Ctrack South Africa as of July 30, 2021. SaaS revenue was no longer generated in Africa, Pakistan or the Middle East beginning in August 2021. See Part IV Item 15 Note 5. Business Divestiture. Following the divestiture of Ctrack South Africa, we continue to provide telematics solutions in the rest of the world, including in Europe and Australia. Such impact was partially offset by an increase in Enterprise SaaS Solutions net revenue throughout the rest of the world as a result of the lifting of COVID-19 related installation restrictions during fiscal 2021.
Cost of net revenues. Cost of net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $186.5 million, or 71.1% of net revenues, compared to $223.0 million, or 71.1% of net revenues, for the same period in 2020.
The following table summarizes cost of net revenues by our two product categories (dollars in thousands):
IoT & Mobile Solutions. The decrease in IoT & Mobile Solutions cost of net revenues is primarily a result of lower sales of LTE gigabit hotspots.
Enterprise SaaS Solutions. Enterprise SaaS Solutions cost of net revenues decreased as a result of the divestiture of Ctrack South Africa on July 30, 2021. See Part IV Item 15 Note 5. Business Divestiture.
Gross profit. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $75.9 million, or a gross margin of 28.9%, compared to $90.8 million, or a gross margin of 28.9%, for the same period in 2020. The gross margin percentage remained stable due to an unfavorable product mix and a decrease in Enterprise SaaS Solutions as a result of the divestiture of Ctrack South Africa which has a higher gross margin, offset by higher Inseego Subscribe revenue.
The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $52.7 million, or 20.1% of net revenues, compared to $45.0 million, or 14.3% of net revenues, for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily a result of increased staffing, test units, and other development spending related to 5G product programs.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $38.2 million, or 14.6% of net revenues, compared to $35.8 million, or 11.4% of net revenues, for the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily a result of higher spend on the marketing of our 5G products. The increase in sales and marketing expenses was partially offset by a decrease in payroll costs for Ctrack South Africa employees, given the divestiture that was completed on July 30, 2021. See Part IV Item 15. Note 5. Business Divestiture.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $28.3 million, or 10.8% of net revenues, compared to $30.7 million, or 9.8% of net revenues, for the same period in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to the decrease in payroll costs for Ctrack South Africa employees, given the divestiture that was completed on July 30, 2021. See Part IV Item 15. Note 5. Business Divestiture. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was partially offset by the impact of bonus grants to employees who contributed to completion of the Ctrack South Africa sale. See Part IV Item 15. Note 9. Share-based Compensation in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Amortization of purchased intangible assets. The amortization of purchased intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $2.1 million and $3.2 million, respectively. The decrease was related to the divestiture of Ctrack South Africa as well as certain purchased intangibles becoming fully amortized for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Impairment of capitalized software. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded losses of $1.2 million and $1.4 million, respectively, on capitalized software development costs related to an internal enterprise resource planning project.
The following table summarizes other income (expense) (dollars in thousands):
Gain on sale of Ctrack South Africa. Gain on sale of Ctrack South Africa during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $5.3 million, related to the gain recognized on sale of Ctrack South Africa, while there was no such gain for the same period in fiscal 2020.
Loss on debt conversion and extinguishment, net. The loss on debt conversion and extinguishment, net for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.4 million and $76.4 million, respectively. These amounts represent the loss on debt conversion of the 2025 Notes during fiscal 2021 and the debt conversion and extinguishment of the 2022 Notes during fiscal 2020, respectively.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $6.9 million and $9.9 million, respectively. The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to the lower interest rate on the 2025 Notes, as compared to the 2022 Notes and our previous term loan, partially offset by the higher principal amount of the 2025 Notes.
Other income, net. Other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.8 million, which primarily included the fair value adjustment related to our interest make-whole payment on the 2025 Notes as well as foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Other income, net for the same period in 2020 was $1.0 million, which primarily consisted of the fair value adjustment related to our interest make-whole payment on the 2025 Notes as well as foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
The following table summarizes income tax provision, net income attributable to noncontrolling interests, and Series E preferred stock dividends and deemed dividends from the preferred stock exchange (dollars in thousands):
Income tax provision. Income tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.2 million and $0.7 million, respectively, which, in each case, primarily related to certain of our profitable subsidiaries in foreign jurisdictions. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 is different than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a valuation allowance recorded against additional tax assets generated during the year and certain profitable foreign subsidiaries.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 there was $214,000 and $29,000, respectively, of net income attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Series E Preferred Stock dividends and deemed dividend from the preferred stock exchange. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded dividends of $4.2 million and $2.9 million, respectively, on our Series E Preferred Stock. The increase was primarily attributable to the impact of the deemed dividend of $1.1 million as part of the preferred stock exchange, offset by a decrease in the recurring preferred stock dividends as 10,000 shares of Series E Preferred Stock were extinguished in September 2021, resulting in a lower preferred stock dividends accrued through the end of 2021. See Part IV Item 15. Note 8. Stockholders’ Equity in the accompanying consolidated financial statements for further information.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
Net revenues. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $313.8 million, an increase of $94.3 million, or 43.0%, compared to the same period in 2019.
The following table summarizes net revenues by our two product categories (dollars in thousands):
IoT & Mobile Solutions. The increase in IoT & Mobile Solutions net revenues is primarily a result of increased sales in our LTE gigabit hotspots, the introduction of our second-generation 5G hotspot related to our MiFi business, and increased revenues in our Inseego Subscribe business due to subscriber growth. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been an increase in demand for our products due to a dramatic increase around the world in remote or tele-working and learning.
Enterprise SaaS Solutions. Enterprise SaaS Solutions net revenues were down year-over-year due to the effects of strengthening U.S. Dollar foreign exchange rates on international sales and the effect of COVID-19.
Cost of net revenues. Cost of net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $223.0 million, or 71.1% of net revenues, compared to $155.5 million, or 70.9% of net revenues, for the same period in 2019.
The following table summarizes cost of net revenues by our two product categories (dollars in thousands):
IoT & Mobile Solutions. The increase in IoT & Mobile Solutions cost of net revenues is primarily a result of increased sales of our LTE gigabit hotspots, and 5G hotspots, as well as associated expenses such as freight and royalties. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been an increase in demand in our products due to a dramatic increase around the world in remote or tele-working and learning.
Enterprise SaaS Solutions. Enterprise SaaS Solutions cost of net revenues decreased as a result of lower Ctrack system revenue, partially offset by the effect of strengthening U.S. Dollar foreign exchange rates on international costs.
Gross profit. Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $90.8 million, or a gross margin of 28.9%, compared to $64.0 million, or a gross margin of 29.1%, for the same period in 2019. The slight decrease in the gross profit percentage was primarily attributable to an unfavorable product mix offset by improvements in IoT & Mobile Solutions gross margin.
The following table summarizes operating costs and expenses (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $45.0 million, or 14.3% of net revenues, compared to $23.9 million, or 10.9% of net revenues, for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily a result of increased staffing, test units, and other development spending related to 5G product programs.
Sales and marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $35.8 million, or 11.4% of net revenues, compared to $28.9 million, or 13.2% of net revenues, for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily a result of an increase in headcount.
General and administrative expenses. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $30.7 million, or 9.8% of net revenues, compared to $27.3 million, or 12.4% of net revenues, for the same period in 2019. The increase was primarily a result of an increase in employment costs attributable to an increase in headcount and non-recurring legal expenses.
Amortization of purchased intangible assets. The amortization of purchased intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $3.2 million and $3.4 million, respectively.
Impairment of capitalized software. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss of $1.4 million on capitalized software development costs. There was no such expense for the same period in 2019.
The following table summarizes other income (expense) (dollars in thousands):
Loss on debt conversion and extinguishment, net. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a loss of $76.4 million, which primarily represents the loss on debt conversion and extinguishment of the 2022 Notes, including a $7.9 million inducement expense incurred in connection with certain conversions of the 2022 Notes, and a $67.2 million loss recorded on debt conversion of the 2025 Notes. There was no such expense for the same period in 2019.
Interest expense, net. Interest expense, net, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $9.9 million and $20.4 million, respectively. Interest expense was primarily a result of the interest expense and amortization of the debt discount and debt issuance costs related to our previous term loan, the 2022 Notes and the 2025 Notes. The decrease in interest expense was due to the conversion of debt into equity in 2020, payment in full of our previous term loan during 2020, as well as a lower interest rate on the 2025 Notes, as compared to the 2022 Notes.
Other income, net. Other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.0 million, which primarily included the fair value adjustment related to our interest-make-whole payment on the 2025 Notes as well as foreign currency transaction gains and losses. Other income, net for the same period in 2019 was $0.4 million, which primarily consisted of foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
The following table summarizes income tax provision, net income attributable to noncontrolling interests, and Series E preferred stock dividends and deemed dividends from the preferred stock exchange (dollars in thousands):
Income tax provision. Income tax provision for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 was $0.7 million and $0.5 million, respectively, which primarily related to certain of our profitable subsidiaries in foreign jurisdictions.
The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 is different than the U.S. statutory rate primarily due to a valuation allowance recorded against additional tax assets generated during the year and certain profitable foreign subsidiaries.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interests. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 there was $0.03 million and $0.02 million, respectively, of net income or loss attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Series E Preferred Stock dividends. During the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recorded $2.9 million and $0.4 million, respectively, of accrued Series E Preferred Stock dividends.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $46.5 million, as well as $3.3 million of restricted cash that will become available in July 2022, compared with cash and cash equivalents of $40.0 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $52.8 million compared to working capital as of December 31, 2020 of $38.4 million.
On July 30, 2021, we completed the sale of our Ctrack South Africa operations in Africa, Pakistan and the Middle East. Initial cash proceeds of $36.6 million were received. Net cash proceeds received were $31.5 million, net of cash divested of $5.0 million. Final cash proceeds were subject to certain post-closing working capital adjustments which totaled $2.6 million, out of which $2.2 million was received on October 29, 2021, and the remaining $0.4 million was offset with our existing accounts payable balance to an affiliate of Convergence, an investment management firm in South Africa.
On January 25, 2021, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Canaccord Genuity LLC (the “Agent”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Agent, up to $40.0 million of shares of our common stock (the “ATM Offering”) pursuant to the Company’s Registration Statement on Form S-3ASR (File No. 333-238057), which was filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on May 7, 2020 and amended on February 14, 2022. In January 2021, we sold 1,516,073 shares of common stock, at an average price of $20.11 per share, for net proceeds of $29.4 million, after deducting underwriter fees and discounts of $0.9 million, and other offering fees, pursuant to the ATM Offering. As of December 31, 2021, there was approximately $9.5 million of shares of our common stock available for issuance pursuant to the ATM Offering.
During the quarter ended September 30, 2020, certain holders of the 2025 Notes converted approximately $13.5 million in principal amount of the 2025 Notes into 1,177,156 shares of the Company’s common stock in accordance with the terms of such notes. As of December 31, 2021, our outstanding debt primarily consisted of $161.9 million in principal amount of 2025 Notes.
In the first quarter of 2020, $59.9 million of our 2022 Notes were exchanged for common stock in private exchange transactions. Additionally, in the second quarter of 2020, we restructured our outstanding debt by completing a $100.0 million registered public offering (the “Offering”) of 2025 Notes and also entered into privately-negotiated Exchange Agreements, pursuant to which an aggregate of $45.0 million in principal amount of the 2022 Notes were exchanged for an aggregate of $32.0 million in cash and $80.4 million in principal amount of the 2025 Notes (the “Private Exchange Transactions”). We also used a portion of the proceeds from the Offering to repay in full our previous term loan. In the third quarter of 2020, we redeemed the remaining $2,000 principal amount of the 2022 Notes.
In order to make continued growth investments, on March 6, 2020, we issued and sold 25,000 shares of our Series E Preferred Stock, for an aggregate purchase price of $25.0 million. There are currently 25,000 shares of Series E Preferred Stock outstanding with an aggregate liquidation preference of $25 million. Each share of Series E Preferred Stock entitles the holder thereof to receive, when, as and if declared by the Company out of assets legally available therefor, cumulative cash dividends at an annual rate of 9.00% payable quarterly in arrears on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on October 1, 2019. If dividends are not declared and paid in any quarter, or if such dividends are declared but holders of the Series E Preferred Stock elect not to receive them in cash, the quarterly dividend will be deemed to accrue and will be added to the Series E Base Amount. The Series E Preferred Stock has no voting rights unless otherwise required by law. The Series E Preferred Stock is perpetual and has no maturity date. However, we may, at our option, redeem shares of the Series E Preferred Stock, in whole or in part, on or after July 1, 2022, at a price equal to 110% of the Series E Base Amount plus (without duplication) any accrued and unpaid dividends. The “Series E Base Amount” means $1,000 per share, plus any accrued but unpaid dividends, whether or not declared by the Company’s board of directors, subject to appropriate adjustment in the event of any stock dividend, stock split, combination or other similar recapitalization with respect to the Series E Preferred Stock. In the event of a liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company, the holders of the Series E Preferred Stock will be entitled to receive, after satisfaction of liabilities to creditors and subject to the rights of holders of any senior securities, but before any distribution of assets is made to holders of common stock or any other junior securities, the Series E Base Amount plus (without duplication) any accrued and unpaid dividends.
We have a history of operating and net losses and overall usage of cash from operating and investing activities. Our management believes that our cash and cash equivalents, together with anticipated cash flows from operations, will be sufficient to meet our cash flow needs for the next twelve months from the filing date of this report. Our ability to attain more profitable operations and continue to generate positive cash flow is dependent upon achieving a level and mix of revenues adequate to support our evolving cost structure. If events or circumstances occur such that we do not meet our operating plan as expected, or if we become obligated to pay unforeseen expenditures as a result of ongoing litigation, we may be required to raise capital, reduce planned research and development activities, incur additional restructuring charges or reduce other operating expenses which could have an adverse impact on our ability to achieve our intended business objectives.
Our liquidity could be compromised if there is any interruption in our business operations, a material failure to satisfy our contractual commitments or a failure to generate revenue from new or existing products. There can be no assurance that any required or desired restructuring or financing will be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. Ultimately, our ability to attain profitability and to generate positive cash flow is dependent upon achieving a level of revenues adequate to support our evolving cost structure and increasing working capital needs. If events or circumstances occur such that we do not meet our operating plan as expected, we may be required to raise additional capital, reduce planned research and development activities, incur additional restructuring charges or reduce other operating expenses which could have an adverse impact on our ability to achieve our intended business objectives. There can be no assurance that any required or desired restructuring or financing will be available on terms favorable to us, or at all. If additional funds are raised by the issuance of equity securities, Company stockholders could experience dilution of their ownership interests and securities issued may have rights senior to those of the holders of the Company’s common stock. If additional funds are raised by the issuance of debt securities, we may be subject to additional limitations on our operations. Additionally, we are uncertain of the full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will impact our business, operations and financial results.
Settlement Agreement
Pursuant to the amended merger agreement with respect to our acquisition of R.E.R. Enterprises, Inc. (“RER”) and its wholly-owned subsidiary and principal operating asset, Feeney Wireless, LLC (which has been renamed Inseego North America, LLC), we agreed to pay a total of $15.0 million in deferred purchase price in five cash installments over a four-year period, beginning in March 2016. We also agreed to provide earn-out consideration to the former stockholders of RER in the form of $6.1 million in cash over a four-year period, beginning in March 2016, and issuance of up to 2,920,000 shares of our common stock in three equal annual installments, beginning in March 2016, contingent upon retention of certain key personnel of RER.
On May 11, 2017, we initiated a lawsuit against the former stockholders of RER in the Court of Chancery of the State of Delaware seeking recovery of damages for civil conspiracy, fraud in the inducement, unjust enrichment and breach of fiduciary duty. On January 16, 2018, the former stockholders of RER filed an answer and counterclaim in the matter seeking recovery of certain deferred and earn-out payments allegedly owed to them by the Company in connection with the Company’s acquisition of RER. On July 26, 2018, the Company and the former stockholders of RER entered into a mutual general release and settlement agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”) pursuant to which the parties agreed to release all claims against each other and we agreed to (i) pay the former stockholders of RER $1.0 million in cash by August 17, 2018, (ii) immediately instruct our transfer agent to permit the transfer or sale of 973,333 shares of the Company’s common stock that the Company had issued to the former stockholders of RER in March 2017, (iii) immediately issue 500,000 shares of the Company’s common stock to the former stockholders of RER, (iv) within 12 months following the execution of the Settlement Agreement, deliver to the former stockholders of RER an additional $1.0 million in cash, common stock, or a combination thereof, at the Company’s option, (v) within 24 months following the execution of the Settlement Agreement deliver to the former stockholders of RER an additional $1.0 million in cash, common stock, or a combination thereof, at the Company’s option, and (vi) file one or more registration statements with respect to the resale of the shares of the Company’s common stock issued to the former stockholders of RER pursuant to the Settlement Agreement. On July 24, 2020, the Company issued 89,928 shares in satisfaction of all remaining liabilities under the Settlement Agreement.
Historical Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our consolidated statements of cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $25.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $20.1 million for the same period in 2020. Net cash used in operating
activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to the net cash used by changes in working capital, and the adjustments to the net loss such as share-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization, including the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, partially offset by the gain on sale of Ctrack South Africa and a non-cash fair value adjustment on derivative instrument. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization, including the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, and share-based compensation expense as add backs to the net loss incurred during the period. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to the net losses incurred during the period, partially offset by non-cash charges for depreciation and amortization, including the amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, and share-based compensation expense.
Investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.1 million compared to $34.7 million used in investing activities for the same period in 2020. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily from the proceeds from sale of Ctrack South Africa, partially offset by purchases of intangible assets and additions to capitalized software, as well as purchases of property, plant and equipment. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to the purchases of property, plant and equipment and capitalization of certain costs related to the development of software to be sold in our products, in large part due to the increase in development in support of 5G products and services as well as certain internally developed software projects. Cash used in investing activities during the same period in 2019 was primarily attributable to the purchases of property, plant and equipment and the capitalization of certain costs related to the development of software to be sold in our products.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $29.9 million, compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $42.1 million for the same period in 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to net proceeds received from the ATM Offering, stock option exercises and purchases through our employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by principal payments under finance lease arrangements. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to the proceeds received from the issuance and sale of Series E Preferred Stock and the exercise of warrants to purchase common stock, as well as proceeds received from stock option exercises and purchases made under the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by net repayments of bank and overdraft facilities, principal payments under our previous term loan and taxes paid on vested restricted stock units. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to the proceeds received from the issuance and sale of Series E Preferred Stock and the exercise of warrants to purchase common stock, as well as proceeds received from stock option exercises and purchases made under the employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by net repayments of bank and overdraft facilities, principal payments under our previous term loan and taxes paid on vested restricted stock units.
Contractual Obligations
In order to mitigate the risk of material shortages and price increases, we enter into non-cancellable purchase obligations with certain key contract manufacturers for the purchase of goods and services in the three to four quarters following the balance sheet date. Our purchase obligations consist of agreements to purchase goods and services entered into in the ordinary course of business. As of December 31, 2021, our material contractual obligations consisted of the following:
•$161.9 million in outstanding principal amount of 2025 Notes with required interest payments; see Part IV Item 15 Note 6. Debt;
•operating lease liabilities that are included on our consolidated balance sheet; see Part IV Item 15 Note 12. Leases; and
•other non-cancellable unconditional purchase obligations; see Part IV Item 15 Note 11. Commitments and Contingencies.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Software Development Costs for External Use
Software development costs for external use are expensed as incurred until technological feasibility has been established, at which time those costs are capitalized as intangible assets until the software is available for general release to customers.
The establishment of technological feasibility and the ongoing assessment for recoverability of capitalized computer software development costs require considerable judgment by management with respect to certain external factors including, but not limited to, technological feasibility, anticipated future gross revenues, estimated economic life and changes in software and hardware technologies. Capitalized software development costs are comprised primarily of salaries, other direct payroll-related costs and payments to third party vendors.
Capitalized software development costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated economic life. Costs incurred to enhance existing software or after the software is available for general release to customers are expensed in the period they are incurred and included in research and development expense in the consolidated statements of operations. The straight-line recognition method approximates the manner in which the expected benefit will be derived. At each balance sheet date, the unamortized capitalized software development costs for external use is compared to the net realizable value of that product by analyzing critical inputs such as expected future lifetime revenue. The amount by which unamortized software costs exceed the net realizable value, if any, is recognized as a charge to amortization expense in the period it is determined.