Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes thereto appearing within Part IV. Item 15. Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this 2021 10-K Report. The following discussion may contain forward-looking statements, and our actual results may differ materially from the results suggested by these forward-looking statements. Some factors that may cause our results to differ materially from the results and events anticipated or implied by such forward-looking statements are described in Item 1A - Risk Factors and under Forward-Looking Statements.
We have elected to omit in this 2021 10-K Report, discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the Consolidated Financial Statements presented. Refer to Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations located in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 (herein incorporated by reference), filed with the SEC on March 1, 2021, for management's discussion of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019.
Business Overview
We are principally engaged in the distribution of fuel and related products and services in the aviation, land and marine transportation industries. Our intention is to become a leading global energy management company offering a full suite of energy advisory, management and fulfillment services, technology solutions, payment management solutions, as well as sustainability products and services across the renewable energy market. For additional discussion on our businesses, climate change and the associated risks, see Part I, Item 1. - Business and Item 1A - Risk Factors within this 2021 10-K Report.
COVID-19
Throughout 2020 and 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact on the global economy as a whole, and the transportation industries in particular. Many of our customers in these industries, especially commercial airlines, experienced a substantial decline in business activity arising from the various measures enacted by governments around the world to contain the spread of the virus. While travel and economic activity has begun to improve in certain regions, activity in many parts of the world continues to be negatively impacted by travel restrictions and lockdowns. For additional discussion on the risks relating to the pandemic, see Item 1A. - Risk Factors within this 2021 10-K Report.
Reportable Segments
We operate in three reportable segments consisting of aviation, land, and marine, where we offer fuel and related products and services to customers in these transportation industries.
See Part I, Item 1. - Business and Note 13. Business Segments, Geographic Information and Major Customers for additional information about our business segments.
Aviation Segment
Our aviation segment has benefited from growth in our fuel and related services offerings, as well as our improving logistics capability and the geographic expansion of our aviation fueling operations into additional international airport locations. However, the global travel restrictions and sharp decrease in demand for air travel resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted the overall aviation market, and accordingly, our results of operations throughout 2020 and 2021. We have experienced improvements in demand and related volume increases in certain regions, principally North America, and are experiencing an accelerating recovery in Western Europe. The continued recovery in demand will be highly contingent on the timing and extent of governmental actions or restrictions globally in response to any increases in infection rates and the overall recovery of the global economy and passenger travel generally.
In addition, our aviation segment has historically benefited from significant sales to government customers, particularly the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ("NATO") in Afghanistan, which accounted for a material portion of our aviation segment's profitability in recent years. The level of troop deployments and military-related activities can cause our government customer sales to vary significantly and materially impact our operating results. Specifically, in 2020 the U.S. government and NATO began to significantly reduce the level of troops in Afghanistan and we experienced a corresponding material decline in demand as a result. The final withdrawal of troops in the area was completed during the third quarter of 2021.
Land Segment
We believe our land segment is well positioned to continue growing market share, both organically and through leveraging the capabilities of our acquisitions, serving to further enhance our commercial and industrial platforms to deliver value-added solutions to customers across the U.S. In addition, to participate in accelerating the energy transition, we continue to focus on the expansion of our sustainability offerings, which include consulting, renewable fuel products, and carbon management and renewable energy solutions through World Kinect, our global energy management brand. Our land segment can be impacted by market and weather conditions. In periods where we experience historically extreme or unseasonable weather conditions, demand for our products may be affected. In addition, our land segment also similarly benefited from sales to NATO in Afghanistan in recent years, however, such activity materially declined and ultimately concluded in 2021 in connection with the U.S. and NATO troop withdrawal.
In connection with our efforts to sharpen our portfolio of businesses and accelerate growth in our core business activities, we have divested of certain businesses and focused on investing in businesses that we believe will drive enhanced operating efficiencies and generate long-term shareholder value. For example, in the third quarter of 2020, we completed the sale of MSTS and in January 2022, we closed the acquisition of Flyers. We believe that the addition of Flyers' operations, which include transportation, commercial fleet fueling, lubricants distribution, and the supply of wholesale, branded and renewable fuels, will enable us to create an expanded national platform to deliver value-added solutions to commercial and industrial customers across the United States. See Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information. In addition to our acquisition and divestiture activities, we also heightened our focus in 2021 on restructuring our existing land business in North America, including reorganizing and relocating certain business activities, as well as implementing changes to the operational and management structure of the business to allow for greater scalability and quicker integration of new businesses to capture synergies. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we were able to complete all necessary activities and close the restructuring and expect the ultimate financial benefit to be realized as new businesses are acquired and integrated into our land segment. See Note 5. Restructuring for additional information.
Marine Segment
Through much of 2019 and into early 2020, we experienced improved profitability in our marine segment due to higher average fuel prices, combined with our heightened focus on cost management and the continued reshaping of our business portfolio. In particular, the IMO 2020 regulations resulted in certain supply imbalances and price volatility which positively impacted our operating results in those periods. However, beginning in the latter part of the first quarter of 2020 and continuing through 2021, we experienced a material decline in volume and related profitability primarily due to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the marine transportation industry. While we
have experienced some improvements in demand, we expect our marine segment’s operating performance to continue to be impacted by, among other things, uncertain demand from cruise lines and other sectors of the shipping industry, as well as competitive market conditions.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following provides a summary of our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenue. Our consolidated revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $31.3 billion, an increase of $11.0 billion, or 54%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by increased revenue of $4.6 billion, $3.8 billion, and $2.6 billion in the aviation, land, and marine segments, respectively, as discussed further below.
Gross profit. Our consolidated gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $788.2 million, a decrease of $63.6 million, or 7%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by decreased gross profit of $51.1 million and $46.5 million in the marine and land segments, respectively, partially offset by increased gross profit of $34.0 million in the aviation segment, as discussed further below.
Operating Expenses. Consolidated total operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $645.6 million, a decrease of $68.3 million, or 10%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was driven by a reduction in the provision for credit losses due to a stabilization of customer credit risk, the sale of MSTS, and the impairment charge recognized in 2020 as part of the global office footprint rationalization (the "2020 impairment"). These decreases were partially offset by an increase in employee compensation and benefit costs primarily related to increased incentive compensation to reward and retain key employees in a competitive job market.
Non-Operating Income (Expenses), net. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net non-operating expense of $42.5 million, compared to net non-operating income of $23.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $66.4 million was primarily attributable to the gain on the sale of MSTS in 2020, partially offset by a decrease in foreign currency losses and an increase in interest income in 2021.
Income Taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our income tax provision was $25.8 million and our effective income tax rate was 26%, as compared to an income tax provision of $52.1 million and an effective income tax rate of 32% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $26.2 million was primarily attributable to the tax on the gain on the sale of MSTS in 2020, as well as a $3.2 million net discrete tax benefit for 2021 as compared to a $4.5 million net discrete tax expense for 2020. See Note 11. Income Taxes for additional information.
Aviation Segment Results of Operations
The following provides a summary of the aviation segment results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues in our aviation segment were $12.8 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $4.6 billion, or 57%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was driven by higher average prices and increased volumes. Average jet fuel price per gallon sold increased by 43% in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the rise in global oil prices. Total aviation volumes increased by 1.2 billion, or 25%, to 5.9 billion gallons in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as travel restrictions eased, primarily in the North American market, and demand for passenger air travel continued to recover.
Our aviation segment gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $386.9 million, an increase of $34.0 million, or 10%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to the recovery in demand for passenger air travel, partially offset by a reduction in our government-related activity in Afghanistan and the sale of MSTS.
Our aviation segment income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $163.4 million, an increase of $78.9 million, or 93%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a reduction in operating expenses combined with the increase in gross profit. Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $44.9 million primarily due to a $46.4 million reduction in the provision for credit losses driven by the stabilization of customer credit risk as the global aviation industry continues to recover and the 2020 impairment, partially offset by an increase in compensation and employee benefit costs as discussed above.
Land Segment Results of Operations
The following provides a summary of the land segment results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues in our land segment were $10.4 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.8 billion, or 56%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by a 52% increase in the average fuel price per gallon or gallon equivalent sold in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of the rise in global oil prices. Total land volumes increased by 0.2 billion, or 4%, to 5.3 billion gallon or gallon equivalents in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our land segment gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $301.1 million, a decrease of $46.5 million, or 13%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross profit was primarily attributable to the sale of MSTS, the reduction in our government-related activity in Afghanistan, and a decrease in demand in the U.K., partially offset by improved performance in our natural gas business in North America driven by extreme weather conditions in the first quarter of 2021.
Our land segment income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $44.6 million, a decrease of $27.9 million, or 38%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. In 2021, the decrease in gross profit was partially offset by the overall reduction in operating expenses, driven by the sale of MSTS in 2020, partially offset by increased compensation and employee benefit costs and restructuring expenses.
Marine Segment Results of Operations
The following provides a summary of the marine segment results of operations for the periods indicated:
Revenues in our marine segment were $8.1 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $2.6 billion, or 47%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by a 39% increase in the average price per metric ton of bunker fuel sold as a result of the rise in global oil prices. Total volumes increased by 1.0 million metric tons, or 6%, to 18.4 million metric tons in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Our marine segment gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $100.3 million, a decrease of $51.1 million, or 34%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in gross profit was primarily attributable to highly competitive market conditions in 2021, combined with a decline relative to the strong results in the first half of 2020, which benefited from the implementation of IMO 2020.
Our marine segment income from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $20.7 million, a decrease of $37.9 million, or 65%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in income from operations was primarily due to the $51.1 million decrease in gross profit, partially offset by a $13.2 million reduction in operating expenses. The decrease in operating expenses was driven by a lower provision for credit losses, together with the 2020 impairment and costs associated with the restructuring program recognized in 2020, partially offset by increased compensation and employee benefit costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity to fund working capital, as well as make strategic investments to further our growth strategy, is a significant priority for us. Our views concerning liquidity are based on currently available information and if circumstances change significantly, whether as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic or otherwise, the future availability of trade credit or other sources of financing may be reduced, and our liquidity would be adversely affected accordingly.
Sources of Liquidity and Factors Impacting Our Liquidity
Our liquidity, consisting principally of cash and availability under our Credit Facility, fluctuates based on a number of factors, including the timing of receipts from our customers and payments to our suppliers, changes in fuel prices, as well as our financial performance.
We rely on credit arrangements with banks, suppliers and other parties as an important source of liquidity for capital requirements not satisfied by our operating cash flow. Future market volatility, generally, and any persistent weakness in global energy markets may adversely affect our ability to access capital and credit markets or to obtain funds at reasonable interest rates or on other advantageous terms. In addition, since our business is impacted by the availability of trade credit to fund fuel purchases, an actual or perceived decline in our liquidity or business generally could cause our suppliers to reduce our credit lines, seek credit support in the form of additional collateral or otherwise materially modify our payment terms.
During times of high fuel prices, our customers may not be able to purchase as much fuel from us because of their credit limits with us and the resulting adverse impact on their business could cause them to be unable to make payments owed to us for fuel purchased on credit. Furthermore, when fuel prices increase our working capital requirements increase and our own credit limits could prevent us from purchasing enough fuel from our suppliers to meet our customers’ demands, or we could be required to prepay for fuel purchases, any of which would adversely impact our liquidity.
Conversely, extended periods of low fuel prices, particularly when coupled with low price volatility, can also have an adverse effect on our results of operations and overall profitability. This can occur due to many factors, such as reduced demand for our price risk management products and decreased sales to our customers involved in the oil exploration sector. Low fuel prices also facilitate increased competition by reducing financial barriers to entry and enabling existing, lower-capitalized competitors to conduct more business as a result of lower working capital requirements.
Based on the information currently available, we believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 and available funds from our Credit Facility, together with cash flows generated by operations, are sufficient to fund our working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Credit Facility and Term Loans. Our availability under our Credit Facility is limited by, among other things, our consolidated total leverage ratio, which is defined in the Credit Agreement and is based, in part, on our adjusted consolidated earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("Adjusted EBITDA") for the four immediately preceding fiscal quarters. The Credit Agreement generally limits the total amount of indebtedness we may incur to not more than 3.75 to 1. In connection with the acquisition of Flyers in January 2022, the applicable leverage ratio is 4.5 to 1 until the end of 2022 pursuant to the terms of the Credit Facility.
As a result of the foregoing, as well as other covenants and restrictions contained in our Credit Facility, our availability under the Credit Facility may fluctuate from period to period. In addition, our failure to comply with the covenants contained in our Credit Facility and our Term Loans could result in an event of default. An event of default, if not cured or waived, would permit acceleration of any outstanding indebtedness under the Credit Facility and our Term Loans, trigger cross-defaults under certain other agreements to which we are a party and impair our ability to obtain working capital advances and issue letters of credit, which would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. See Note 8. Debt, Interest Income, Expense and Other Finance Costs for additional information.
Other Credit Lines. Additionally, we have other uncommitted credit lines primarily for the issuance of letters of credit, bank guarantees and bankers’ acceptances. These credit lines are renewable on an annual basis and are subject to fees at market rates. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our outstanding letters of credit and bank guarantees under these credit lines totaled $404.0 million and $328.4 million, respectively.
Receivables Purchase Agreements. We also have accounts receivable programs under receivables purchase agreements ("RPAs") that allow us to sell a specified amount of qualifying accounts receivable and receive cash consideration equal to the total balance, less a discount margin, which varies based on the outstanding accounts receivable at any given time. The RPA agreements provide the constituent banks with the ability to add or remove customers from these programs in their discretion based on, among other things, the level of risk exposure the bank is willing to accept with respect to any particular customer. The fees the banks charge us to purchase the receivables from these customers can also be impacted for these reasons. See Note 2. Accounts Receivable for additional information.
See Item 1A. - Risk Factors in Part 1 within this 2021 10-K Report for additional information.
Future Uses of Liquidity
Cash is primarily used to fund working capital to support our operations as well as for strategic acquisitions and investments, such as the acquisition of Flyers discussed below.
As of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations were as follows (in millions):
(1)Debt and interest obligations include principal and interest payments on fixed-rate and variable-rate, fixed-term debt based on their maturity dates. See Note 8. Debt, Interest Income, Expense and Other Finance Costs for additional information.
(2)We enter into lease arrangements for the use of offices, operational facilities, vehicles, vessels, storage tanks and other assets for our operations around the world. See Note 15. Leases for additional information.
(3)As part of our risk management program, we enter into derivative instruments intended to mitigate risks associated with changes in commodity prices, foreign currency exchange rate, and interest rates. Our obligations associated with these derivative instruments fluctuate based on changes in the fair value of the derivatives. See Note 4. Derivative Instruments and Note 12. Fair Value Measurements for additional information.
(4)We have fixed purchase commitments associated with our risk management program, as well as a purchase contract, that runs through 2026, under which we agreed to purchase annually between 1.9 million barrels and 2.0 million barrels of aviation fuel at future market prices. See Note 9. Commitments and Contingencies for additional information.
Future material cash requirements and off-balance sheet arrangements, in addition to the contractual obligations in the table above, include the following:
Acquisition of Flyers. On January 3, 2022, we closed the acquisition of Flyers for total consideration of $792.7 million, subject to customary adjustments relating to net working capital, indebtedness and transaction expenses. At closing, $642.7 million was paid in cash, $50.0 million was satisfied through the delivery of the Company's common stock, and the remaining $100.0 million remains payable to the seller, with one-half to be released on each of the first and second anniversary of the closing of the acquisition. The consideration at closing was funded through approximately $326 million of cash on hand and incremental borrowings under our Credit Facility subsequent to December 31, 2021. See Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
Capital Expenditures. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred capital expenditures in the ordinary course of business of approximately $39.2 million. In 2022, we expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase to levels more reflective of those experienced prior to the pandemic.
Unrecognized Income Tax Liabilities. As of December 31, 2021, we have recorded gross liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits ("Unrecognized Tax Liabilities"), including penalties and interest, of $98.2 million. The timing of any settlement of our Unrecognized Tax Liabilities with the respective taxing authority cannot be reasonably estimated.
Letters of Credit and Bank Guarantees. In the normal course of business, we are required to provide letters of credit to certain suppliers. A majority of these letters of credit expire within one year from their issuance and expired letters of credit are renewed as needed. As of December 31, 2021, we had issued letters of credit and bank guarantees totaling $450.7 million under our Credit Facility and other uncommitted credit lines.
Surety Bonds. In the normal course of business, we are required to post bid, performance and other surety-related bonds. The majority of the surety bonds posted relate to our aviation and land segments. We had outstanding bonds that were executed in order to satisfy various security requirements of $54.9 million as of December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following table reflects the major categories of cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 (in millions). For additional details, please see the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Operating Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $173.2 million compared to net cash provided of $604.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The $430.9 million decrease in operating cash flows was principally due to an increase in net working capital of $451.3 million due to a recovery in activity as compared to the pandemic-related impacts in 2020, as well as higher average fuel prices in 2021, partially offset by increased operating results of $19.5 million.
Investing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $58.3 million, compared to net cash provided of $72.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by $39.2 million in capital expenditures and $37.1 million for the acquisition of a business in the land segment in the fourth quarter of 2021, partially offset by net cash proceeds of $25.0 million from the collection of a note receivable related to the sale of MSTS. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by net cash proceeds of $259.6 million received from the sale of MSTS, partially offset by cash paid for the acquisition of the UVair fuel business of $128.6 million, as discussed in Note 3. Acquisitions and Divestitures, and capital expenditures of $51.3 million.
Financing Activities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $113.6 million, compared to net cash used of $213.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by repurchases of our common stock in the aggregate amount of $50.5 million, dividend payments on our common stock of $28.7 million, and net repayments of debt under our Credit Facility of $23.9 million. Net cash used in financing activities of $213.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by net repayments of debt under our Credit Facility of $112.0 million, repurchases of our common stock in the aggregate amount of $68.3 million, and dividend payments on our common stock of $25.6 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this 2021 10-K Report, which has been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to unbilled revenue and associated costs of sales, allowance for credit losses, goodwill and identifiable intangible assets, certain accrued liabilities, and income taxes. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We have identified the areas described below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations given the uncertainties associated with the assumptions underlying each estimate. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other significant accounting policies, see Note 1. Basis of Presentation, New Accounting Standards and Significant Accounting Policies.
Description Judgments and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
Impairment Assessments of Goodwill, Long-Lived Assets, and Equity Investments
We evaluate goodwill for impairment at least annually, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. We periodically evaluate whether the carrying value of long-lived assets (property and equipment, identifiable intangible assets, and leases) and equity investments have been impaired when circumstances indicate the carrying value of those assets may not be recoverable.
These assessments require us to make accounting estimates that require consideration of forecasted financial information. Significant judgment is involved in performing these estimates as they are developed based on forecasted assumptions. As of December 31, 2021, the assumptions used, particularly the expected growth rates, the profitability embedded in our projected cash flow, the discount rate and the market-based multiples, were defined in the context of current and future potential impacts of COVID-19 on our business and other business factors. Management also considered the volatility in the company's market capitalization since the beginning of the pandemic and evaluated the potential impact that this volatility may have had on the estimated fair value of our reporting units.
Based on the assessments performed, and supported by the available information as of December 31, 2021, we concluded that the carrying value of our long-lived assets and equity investments were recoverable and that the fair value of our land and aviation reporting units were not less than their respective carrying values. However, at this time, we are unable to predict with specificity the ultimate impact of the pandemic, as it will depend on the magnitude, severity and duration, as well as how quickly, and to what extent, normal economic and operating conditions resume on a sustainable basis globally. Accordingly, if the impact of the pandemic, and its associated reduction in business are more severe or longer in duration than we have assumed, such impact could potentially result in impairments.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Credit Losses
We maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based upon our historical experience with our customers, any specific customer collection issues that we have identified from current financial information and business prospects, as well as forward-looking information from market sources. We consider historical payment trends of our customers together with internal and external information about the economic outlook, geopolitical risks and macroeconomic events, which may not fully capture the current or future creditworthiness of our customers, particularly in difficult economic periods. As a result of the challenges inherent in estimating which customers are less likely to remit amounts owed to us, our provision for estimated credit losses may not always be sufficient. Any write-off of accounts receivable in excess of our provision for credit losses could adversely affect our results of operations and cash flow.
Business Combinations
A business combination occurs when an entity obtains control of a "business." To conclude if the definition of a business is met, we need to conclude whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets which requires significant judgment to determine the fair value. The determination of whether the acquired activities and assets constitute a business is critical because the accounting for a business combination differs significantly from that of an asset acquisition. Business combinations are accounted for using a fair value model. In contrast, asset acquisitions are accounted for using a cost accumulation and allocation model.
Significant judgment is involved in the determination of fair values in the context of acquisitions as fair values are generally developed based on forecasted assumptions. Other factors affecting the concluded fair value are assumptions and estimates regarding the industry and economic factors as well as expected growth, profitability and risks embedded in the new acquired activities. If estimates or assumptions used to estimate fair values are materially incorrect, future earnings through depreciation and amortization expense could be impacted. In addition, if forecasts supporting the valuation of the long-lived assets, intangibles, or goodwill are not achieved, impairments could arise.
Description Judgments and Uncertainties Effect if Actual Results Differ from Assumptions
Revenue Recognition
The majority of our consolidated revenues are generated through the sale of fuel and fuel-related products. We generally recognize fuel sales on a gross basis as we have control of the products before they are delivered to our customers. In drawing this conclusion, we consider various factors, including inventory risk management, latitude in establishing the sales price, discretion in the supplier selection and that we are normally the primary obligor in our sales arrangements. Our determination of whether to recognize revenue on a gross or net basis can materially impact the amount of revenue we report.
Income Taxes
We estimate total income tax expense based on statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in various jurisdictions in which we operate. Deferred income taxes are recognized for the future tax effects of temporary differences between financial and income tax reporting using tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are recorded when it is likely a tax benefit will not be realized for a deferred tax asset. We record unrecognized tax benefit liabilities for known or anticipated tax issues based on our analysis of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due.
Changes in tax laws and rates, such as The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the "Tax Act") enacted on December 22, 2017, could affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. Changes in projected future earnings could affect the recorded valuation allowances in the future. Our calculations related to income taxes contain uncertainties due to judgment used to calculate tax liabilities in the application of complex tax regulations across the tax jurisdictions where we operate. Our analysis of unrecognized tax benefits contains uncertainties based on judgment used to apply the more likely than not recognition and measurement thresholds.
Due to the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution of our tax related balances or valuation allowances may result in a payment that is materially different from the current estimate of the tax liabilities. To the extent we prevail in matters for which unrecognized tax benefit liabilities have been established, or are required to pay amounts in excess of our recorded unrecognized tax benefit liabilities, our effective tax rate in a given financial statement period could be materially affected.
Derivatives
We enter into financial derivative contracts to mitigate our risk of fuel market price fluctuations in aviation, land and marine fuel as well as changes in interest and foreign currency exchange rates and also to offer our customers fuel pricing alternatives to meet their needs. These instruments may be designated as cash flow or fair value hedges, or accounted for as non-designated derivatives. All derivative instruments are measured and recorded at fair value. When available, quoted market prices or prices obtained through external sources are used to determine a contract's fair value. For contracts for which quoted market prices are not available, fair value is determined based on pricing models developed primarily from historical information and the expected relationship with quoted market prices. Measurement of the fair value of our derivatives also requires the assessment of certain risks related to non-performance, which requires a significant amount of judgment. While we currently believe that our derivative contracts will be effective in mitigating the associated price risks, it is possible that our derivative instruments will be ineffective at mitigating material changes in prices, which could have an adverse impact on our financial position and results of operations. If our estimates of fair value are inaccurate, we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. See