Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the section titled “Risk Factors.” Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future. Unless otherwise noted, any reference to a year preceded by the word “fiscal” refers to the fiscal year ended June 30 of that year.
Overview
Intapp is a leading provider of industry-specific, cloud-based software solutions for the global professional and financial services industry. We empower the world’s premier private capital, investment banking, legal, accounting, and consulting firms with the technology they need to meet rapidly changing client, investor, and regulatory requirements, deliver the right insights to the right professionals, and operate more competitively.
Our Intapp Platform is purpose-built to modernize these firms. The platform facilitates greater team collaboration, digitizes complex workflows to optimize deal and engagement execution, and leverages proprietary AI to help nurture relationships and originate new business. By better connecting their most important assets-people, processes, and data-our platform helps firms increase client fees and investment returns, operate more efficiently, and better manage risk and compliance.
How We Generate Revenue
We generate revenues primarily from software subscriptions, typically with one-year or multi-year contract terms. We sell our software through a direct enterprise sales model, which targets clients based on end market, geography, firm size, and business need. We invested in developing a multi-tenant cloud version of our platform and launched our initial software-as-a-service (“SaaS”) solutions in 2017. We recognize revenues from SaaS subscriptions ratably over the term of the contract, while we recognize revenues from the license component of on-premise subscriptions upfront and the support component of such subscriptions ratably over the support term. We generally price our subscriptions based on the modules deployed as well as the number of users adopting our solution.
We expect the vast majority of our new ARR growth in the future to be from the sale of SaaS subscriptions.
We generate a majority of our non-recurring revenues from professional services. Our clients utilize these services to configure and implement one or more modules of the Intapp Platform, integrate those modules with the existing platform and with other core systems in their IT environment, upgrade their existing deployment, and provide training for their employees. Other professional services include strategic consulting and advisory work, which are generally provided on a standalone basis.
Our total revenues for fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $272.1 million, $214.6 million and $186.9 million, respectively. Net losses attributable to us for fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $99.7 million, $46.8 million and $45.9 million, respectively.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Market Adoption of our Cloud Platform. Our future growth depends on our ability to win new professional and financial services clients and expand within our existing client base, primarily through the continued acceptance of our cloud business. Our cloud business has historically grown faster than our overall business, and represents an increasing proportion of our ARR. We must demonstrate to new and existing clients the benefits of selecting our cloud platform, and support those deployments once live with reliable and secure service. From a sales perspective, our ability to add new clients and expand within existing accounts depends upon a number of factors, including the quality and effectiveness of our sales personnel and marketing efforts, and our ability to convince key decision makers within professional and financial services firms to embrace the Intapp Platform over point solutions, internally developed solutions, and horizontal solutions.
Net Revenue Retention. We measure our ability to grow and retain ARR from existing clients using a metric we refer to as net revenue retention. We calculate this by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all clients as of the twelve months prior to the applicable fiscal period, or prior period ARR. We then calculate the ARR from these same clients as of the current fiscal period, or current period ARR. We then divide the current period ARR by the prior period ARR to calculate the net revenue retention.
This metric accounts for changes in our recurring revenue base from cross-sell (additional solution capabilities sold), upsell (additional seats sold), price changes, and client attrition (including contraction of solution capabilities, contraction of seats and client churn). We have averaged a net revenue retention rate of more than 114% and 110% in fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively, due to a steady increase in ARR from upsell and cross-sell motions. However, if our clients do not continue to see the ability of our platform to generate return on investment relative to other software alternatives, net revenue retention could suffer and our operating results may be adversely affected.
Continued Investment in Innovation and Growth. We have made substantial investments in research and development and sales and marketing to achieve a leadership position in our market and grow our revenues and client base. We intend to continue to invest in research and development to build new capabilities and maintain the core technology underpinning our differentiated platform. In addition, we expect to invest in sales and marketing to broaden our reach with new clients in the United States and abroad and deepen our penetration with existing clients. With our revenue growth objectives, we expect to continue to make such investments for the foreseeable future. We are continuing to gradually increase our general and administrative spending to support our growing operational needs.
We have a track record of successfully identifying and integrating complementary businesses within the professional and financial services industry. To complement our organic investment in innovation and accelerate our growth, we will continue to evaluate acquisition opportunities that help us extend our platform, broaden and deepen our market leadership, and add new clients.
COVID-19 Expenses. In March 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic to ensure the safety of our employees, we implemented a global work from home policy and suspended international and domestic travel. We began easing these restrictions as we entered fiscal year 2022, including by re-opening offices and resuming some essential business travel and in-person marketing events. As a result, we have seen an increase in travel-related and marketing expenses. In March 2022, we announced a broad return to office on a voluntary basis and in the long term, we expect to adopt a hybrid work model to allow flexibility for our employees. We continue to closely monitor the status of COVID-19 cases in the community to ensure the health and safety of our employees and clients and may reinstate travel and meeting restrictions from time to time in response to future COVID surges.
Business Impact of Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine. In March 2022, in response to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, we implemented contingency plans to ensure the safety of personnel and continuity of our contract research and development activity located in Ukraine, Russia and Belarus, including relocation of certain resources to other geographic locations and transitioning work previously performed by such teams to other teams outside of the conflict zone in the European Union, U.K. and Americas. We have officially ended all work performed by our contract resources in Russia and Belarus. As a result, we expect a minor increase in research and development expenses due to increased labor rates pertaining to contract resources and relocation costs in connection with such resources, from Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus, to other jurisdictions and backfilling positions in other jurisdictions for those not willing or able to relocate. Any such increase is expected to be offset in part by cost reductions in future discretionary spending.
Key Business Metrics
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Annual Recurring Revenues (“ARR”)
ARR represents the annualized recurring value of all active SaaS and on-premise subscription contracts at the end of a reporting period. Contracts with a term other than one year are annualized by taking the committed contract value for the current period divided by number of days in that period then multiplying by 365. As a metric, ARR mitigates fluctuations in revenue recognition due to certain factors, including contract term and the sales mix of SaaS contracts and subscription licenses. ARR does not have any standardized meaning and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenues and deferred revenues and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those elements of our financial statements. ARR is not a forecast and the active contracts at the end of a reporting period used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended or renewed by our clients.
ARR was $270.5 million and $212.3 million as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively, an increase of 27%.
Cloud ARR
Cloud ARR is the portion of our ARR which represents the annualized recurring value of our active SaaS contracts. We believe Cloud ARR provides important information about our ability to sell new SaaS subscriptions to existing clients and to acquire new SaaS clients.
Cloud ARR was $162.9 million and $109.7 million as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, an increase of 48%, and represented 60% and 52% of ARR for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Number of Clients
We believe our ability to increase the number of clients on our platform is a key indicator of the growth of our business and our future business opportunities. We define a client at the end of any reporting period as an entity with at least one active subscription as of the measurement date. As of June 30, 2022, we had over 2,100 clients.
Our client base includes some of the largest and most reputable professional and financial services firms globally. These clients have the financial and operating resources needed to purchase, deploy, and successfully use the full capabilities of our software platform, and as such, we believe the number of our clients with contracts greater than $100,000 of ARR is an important metric for highlighting our progress on the path to full adoption of our platform by our professional and financial services clients. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, we had 506 and 420 clients, respectively, with contracts greater than $100,000 of ARR, of which 41 and 31 clients, respectively, had contracts greater than $1.0 million of ARR.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate recurring revenues from the sale of our SaaS solutions, subscriptions to our term software applications, and from providing support for those applications. We generate non-recurring revenues primarily by delivering professional services for the configuration, implementation and upgrade of our solutions. Our recurring revenues accounted for 87%, 89% and 87% of our total revenues during fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
SaaS and Support
We recognize revenues from our SaaS solutions ratably over the term of the contract beginning once the SaaS environment is provisioned and made available to clients. The initial term of our SaaS contracts is generally one to three years in duration.
Support revenues consist of non-cancelable support which is included with our subscription licenses and entitles clients to receive technical support and software updates, on a when and if available basis. We recognize revenues for support ratably over the term of the support contract which corresponds to the underlying subscription license agreement. We expect to continue to generate a relatively consistent stream of revenues from support services we provide to our existing subscription license clients. However, over time as we focus on new sales of our SaaS solutions and encourage existing subscription license clients to migrate to SaaS solutions, we expect revenues from support to decrease as a percentage of total revenues.
Subscription License
Our subscription licenses provide the client with the right to functional intellectual property and are distinct performance obligations as the client can benefit from the subscription licenses on their own. The transaction price allocated to subscription license arrangements is recognized as revenues at a point in time when control is transferred to the client, which generally occurs at the time of delivery for a new contract or commencement of the renewal term for renewals. Subscription license fees are generally payable in advance on an annual basis over the term of the license arrangement, which is typically noncancelable.
Professional Services
Our professional services primarily consist of implementation, configuration and upgrade services provided to clients. These engagements are billed to clients either on a time and materials or milestone basis; revenues are recognized as invoiced or in proportion to the work performed, respectively. We expect the demand for our professional services to increase due to client growth and the need for implementation, upgrade, and migration services for new and existing clients. This demand will be affected by the mix of professional services that are provided by us versus provided by our third-party implementation partners. Our professional services are currently loss making (after allocated overhead costs for facilities and IT) and accounted for 13%, 11% and 13% of our total revenues during fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Revenues
Our cost of revenues consists primarily of expenses related to providing SaaS subscription, support and professional services to our clients, including personnel costs (salaries, bonuses, benefits and stock-based compensation) and related expenses for client support and services personnel, as well as cloud infrastructure costs, third-party expenses, amortization of capitalized internal-use software costs and acquired intangible assets, and allocated overhead costs. We do not have any cost of revenues related to our subscription licenses. We expect our cost of revenues to increase in absolute dollars as we expand our SaaS client base over time as this will result in increased cloud infrastructure costs and increased costs for additional personnel to provide technical support services to our growing client base.
Cost of SaaS and Support
Our cost of SaaS and support revenues comprises the direct costs to deliver and support our products, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, as well as allocated overhead costs for facilities and IT, third-party hosting fees related to cloud services, amortization of capitalized internal-use software development costs and amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Cost of Professional Services
Our cost of professional services revenues comprises the personnel-related costs for our professional services employees and contractors responsible for delivering implementation, upgrade and migration services to our clients. This includes salaries, bonuses, benefits, stock-based compensation, and allocated overhead costs for facilities and IT. We expect the cost of professional services revenues to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to hire personnel to provide implementation, upgrade and migration services to our growing client base.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for engineering and product development employees, costs of third-party services, and allocations of various overhead, cloud hosting costs and facilities costs. We expect our research and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we continue to dedicate substantial internal resources to develop, improve and expand the functionality of our solutions. As noted above, we also expect a minor increase in research and development expenses in connection with the relocation of contract resources primarily from Russia and Belarus to other geographic locations and transitioning work previously performed by such teams to other teams outside of the conflict zone in the European Union, U.K. and Americas.
Sales and Marketing
Our sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for personnel-related costs for our sales and marketing employees as well as commission payments to our sales employees, costs of marketing events and online advertising, allocations of various overhead and facilities costs and travel and entertainment expenses. We capitalize client acquisition costs (principally commissions paid to sales personnel) and subsequently amortize these costs over the expected period of benefit. In the medium-term, we expect to see an increase in sales and marketing expense as we continue to expand our direct sales force to take advantage of opportunities for growth and resume in-person meetings, conferences, and attendance at trade shows as the COVID-19 pandemic wanes.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs as well as professional services and facilities costs related to our executive, finance, human resources, information technology and legal functions. Being a new public company, we expect to incur significant additional accounting and legal costs related to compliance with rules and regulations enacted by the SEC, including the additional costs of achieving and maintaining compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, as well as additional insurance, investor relations and other costs associated with being a public company.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment consists of the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs upon the repayment of our debt obligations.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of the interest on our debt, which was repaid in full in July 2021, and the amortization of deferred financing costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of realized and unrealized foreign exchange gains and losses resulting from fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates on monetary assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than the U.S. dollar.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
Our income tax benefit (expense) consists of an estimate of federal, state, and foreign income taxes based on enacted federal, state, and foreign tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented, expressed in total dollar terms and as a percentage of total revenues (percentages may not add up due to rounding):
(2)
Includes acquisition-related transaction costs of $1.9 million and $1.6 million for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
Revenues
Recurring Revenues
Recurring revenues from the sale of our SaaS solutions, from subscriptions to our term software solutions, and from providing support for these solutions increased by $47.1 million, or 25%, compared to the prior year.
Our SaaS and support revenues grew $48.9 million, or 34%, in fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021, due to sales to new clients and expansion of existing clients from both cross-selling and upselling sales motions. The continuation of clients migrating from using our on-premise solutions to our cloud solutions also contributed to the growth.
Subscription license revenues decreased $1.8 million, or 4%, in fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. This reflects our continued emphasis on selling new subscriptions as SaaS and migrating our existing on-premise clients to our SaaS solutions.
Professional Services
Professional services revenues increased by $10.3 million, or 42%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. This reflects a continuation in demand for implementation, upgrade and migration services, which were adversely impacted by COVID-19 during fiscal year 2021.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of SaaS and Support
Cost of SaaS and support revenues increased by $10.5 million, or 26%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. The increase can be attributed primarily to increases in personnel-related costs of $4.5 million mainly due to annual pay raises and headcount increases, amortization expense of $2.4 million relating to capitalized software development costs and intangible assets, royalty expense of $1.5 million relating to third-party products, allocated overhead costs of $1.1 million and hosting costs of $0.9 million to support our growth as we scale our business.
Cost of Professional Services
Cost of professional services revenues increased by $14.2 million, or 42%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021, primarily due to an increase in personnel-related costs by $8.2 million due to annual raises and increased headcount, subcontractor costs of $3.6 million, and other allocated overhead costs of $2.4 million as we expanded our teams to provide implementation and migration services to our growing client base.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased by $32.7 million, or 23%, primarily driven by the growth in SaaS and support revenues, which was partially offset by increases in professional services costs as we invested in headcount to support our implementation, upgrade and migration services, and royalty expenses incurred on sales of third-party products.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $23.6 million, or 46%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $13.1 million, primarily due to an increase in stock awards granted combined with an increase in the grant date fair value of such awards. Personnel-related costs increased by $5.4 million primarily due to increased headcount and salary raises, and relocation costs for subcontractors in Ukraine, Russia, and Belarus to other locations. Contractor costs increased by $2.9 million due to incremental development activities related to our cloud offerings. Cloud hosting costs increased by $1.5 million due to increased usage in support of development activities. Allocated overhead costs increased by $0.7 million due to increased facility costs and headcount.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $42.0 million, or 60%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $18.6 million, primarily due to an increase in stock awards granted combined with an increase in the grant date fair value of such awards. Personnel-related costs increased by $15.1 million due to increased headcount, salary raises, and higher sales commissions driven by increased sales. Marketing expenses increased by $5.9 million due to marketing research, company events and a modest return to in-person activities resulting from the easing of Covid-19-related restrictions on travel and our IPO. Allocated overhead costs increased by $1.3 million due to increased headcount and overall costs to support the growth in our business. Amortization expense relating to intangible assets increased by $1.1 million.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $43.7 million, or 103%, for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. The increase was primarily driven by personnel-related costs associated with being a public company. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $24.0 million mainly due to an increase in stock awards granted combined with an increase in the grant date fair value of such awards. Personnel-related costs increased by $8.5 million, primarily due to increased headcount and salary raises. Third-party professional fees increased by $8.6 million and insurance expense increased by $5.6 million, in each case largely due to the costs associated with being a public company. Facility and software license costs increased by $1.8 million driven by higher headcount and the impact of a one-time rent credit which was received in the prior year. These increases were partially offset by an increase of $4.8 million in costs allocated to other functions due to proportionate increases in headcount within other functions.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
*Not meaningful
Loss on debt extinguishment of $2.4 million during fiscal year 2022 related to the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs upon the full repayment of our debt under the Prior Credit Facility in July 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $24.3 million in fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021. The decrease was mainly due to the full repayment of our debt under the Prior Credit Facility in July 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
The change in other income (expense), net, was primarily due to the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates on our monetary asset and liability balances denominated in currencies other than the U.S. Dollar, primarily British Pounds. We had foreign exchange losses on our net monetary asset position as a result of the British Pound weakening against the U.S. Dollar during fiscal year 2022 compared to foreign exchange gains in fiscal year 2021.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
Income tax benefit was $3.4 million for fiscal year 2022 compared to an income tax expense of $0.5 million recorded during fiscal year 2021. The change in our income tax benefit (expense) was primarily due to a reduction in deferred tax liability in a foreign subsidiary in fiscal year 2022. The income tax benefit (expense) for fiscal years 2022 and 2021 are primarily attributable to taxes in a number of foreign jurisdictions.
Comparison of the Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Recurring Revenues
Recurring revenues from the sale of our SaaS solutions, from subscriptions to our term software solutions, and from providing support for these solutions increased by $27.5 million, or 17%, compared to the prior year.
Our SaaS and support revenues grew $30.0 million, or 26%, in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, principally due to increased sales to new clients and additional orders and renewals by existing clients.
Subscription license revenues decreased $2.5 million, or 5%, in fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior year, primarily due to fewer multi-year deals originating or renewing in fiscal year 2021 compared to the prior year and our trend to migrate subscription clients to cloud. We anticipate subscription license revenues as a percentage of our total revenues may vary quarter to quarter and will continue to decrease as we continue to emphasize the sale of SaaS solutions to our clients and cloud migration.
Professional Services
Professional services revenues increased by $0.3 million, or 1%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. In the early part of fiscal year 2021, we saw a slowdown in new sales and related demand for implementation services as well as reduced demand for upgrade services due to COVID-19. We saw a recovery in demand for implementation, upgrade and migration services in the second half of the fiscal year which helped offset the impact of the COVID-19 slowdown experienced earlier.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Cost of SaaS and Support
Cost of SaaS and support revenues increased by $3.0 million, or 8%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase can be attributed primarily to an increase in cost of hosting services as we expanded our cloud offerings and royalty expenses associated with third-party products in our software offerings.
Cost of Professional Services
Cost of professional services revenues increased by $0.9 million, or 3%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily due to an increase in headcount-related costs due to new hires and an increase in the annual bonus, partially offset by a decrease in travel related costs due to the impact of COVID-19.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased by $24.7 million, or 21%, driven by the growth in SaaS and support revenues together with cost savings due to reduced travel related costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, which was offset by a reduction in subscription license revenues and an increase in royalty expenses and professional services costs.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $8.8 million, or 21%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily due to headcount-related costs as we continued to invest in the development of our future product offerings. Of this amount, $5.9 million was attributable to a combination of increased headcount, the impact of annual pay raises and an increase in accrued bonus, and $1.0 million was attributable to contract labor costs. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $2.9 million due to an increase in option grants made in fiscal year 2021 combined with an increase in the fair value of the common stock underlying such grants. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in travel related costs of $0.9 million due to COVID-19 related restrictions.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $11.1 million, or 19%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020, primarily driven by increased headcount-related costs, partially offset by reduced travel and marketing expenses. Personnel costs increased by $9.4 million due to an increase in headcount, the impact of annual pay raises and higher commission expense due to new sales growth. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $5.8 million due to an increase in option grants made in fiscal year 2021 combined with an increase in the fair value of the common stock underlying such grants. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $4.8 million in travel related costs and marketing expenses resulting from the curtailment of business travel and in-person corporate marketing events caused by COVID-19.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $13.9 million, or 49%, for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The increase was primarily driven by personnel expenses and costs associated with our preparations to go public. Stock-based compensation expense increased by $5.3 million due to an increase in option grants made in fiscal year 2021 combined with an increase in the fair value of the common stock underlying such grants. Personnel expenses increased by $2.8 million, primarily due to an increased bonus accrual in fiscal year 2021. We also incurred increased expenditures for consultants and professional services of $6.1 million. These increases were partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in travel and entertainment and company event related expenses resulting from the suspension of business travel and in-person company events due to COVID-19.
Restructuring
Restructuring expense decreased by $2.9 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The decrease was as a result of a re-organization and restructuring plan undertaken by management in April 2020 and consists of severance and employee benefit costs. There were no such activities in fiscal year 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $3.2 million in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020. The reduction was primarily driven by a decrease in the variable interest rate on our debt.
Other Income (Expense), Net
The increase in other income (expense), net for fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 was primarily attributable to unrealized and realized foreign exchange gains arising on our cash and accounts receivable balances denominated in British Pound as a result of the British Pound strengthening against the U.S. Dollar during fiscal year 2021. Our cash and accounts receivable balances denominated in other currencies were immaterial.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $0.5 million for fiscal year 2021 compared to an income tax expense of $0.4 million recorded during fiscal year 2020. The income tax expense for fiscal years 2021 and 2020 are primarily attributable to taxes in foreign jurisdictions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of June 30, 2022, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $54.3 million. We finance our liquidity needs primarily through collections from clients and the issuance of equity securities. We generally bill and collect from our clients annually in advance. Our billings are subject to seasonality with billings in the fourth quarter higher than the other quarters.
In July 2021, we received net proceeds of $283.0 million upon the completion of our IPO. We used $278.0 million of the net proceeds from the offering to fully repay amounts outstanding under our Prior Credit Facility, consisting of $273.0 million outstanding under the term loan and $5.0 million outstanding under the revolving credit facility. The remainder of the proceeds was used in operations.
We expect that operating losses could continue in the future as we continue to invest in the growth of our business. We believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash as of June 30, 2022, along with our JPMorgan Credit Facility described below, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next twelve months.
On October 5, 2021, we entered into a Credit Agreement with a group of lenders led by JPMorgan. The Credit Agreement provides for a five-year, senior secured revolving credit facility of $100.0 million with a sub-facility for letters of credit in the aggregate amount of up to $10.0 million. As of June 30, 2022, no amounts have been borrowed under the JPMorgan Credit Facility. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to, our ability to grow our revenues and the timing and extent of investment across our organization necessary to support growth in our business. In addition, we may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses or technologies. We may need to seek additional equity or debt financing in order to meet these future capital requirements. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or on terms that are acceptable to us, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities for the periods indicated (in thousands):
(1)
Includes debt-related cash interest payments of $6.0 million, $24.1 million and $22.1 million during fiscal years 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating Activities
During fiscal year 2022, net cash provided by operating activities was $14.2 million, as our operating loss of $99.7 million was reduced by $113.9 million of adjustments. These adjustments consisted of $90.1 million of non-cash charges (principally comprising stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization) and net cash inflow of $23.8 million from net changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenues of $35.3 million due to our revenue growth, an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $15.6 million due to an increase in accrued bonuses and timing of payments, and a decrease of $1.3 million in unbilled receivables. These changes were partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $18.2 million due to growth in our revenues and the timing of
collections from our clients, an increase in deferred commissions of $8.0 million consistent with our revenue growth and a decrease in other liabilities of $3.1 million, primarily due to a decrease in our accrued interest as our debt under the Prior Credit Facility was repaid in full in July 2021.
During fiscal year 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $9.7 million, primarily resulting from our operating loss of $46.8 million, which was offset by $37.1 million of adjustments. These adjustments consisted of $32.6 million of non-cash charges (principally comprising stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization), and net cash inflow of $4.5 million from net changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $10.7 million due to an increase in accrued bonuses and timing of payments, and an increase in deferred revenues of $28.8 million consistent with our revenue growth. These changes were partially offset by an increase in accounts and other receivable of $26.0 million due to the timing of billing and collections on our outstanding receivables, an increase in prepaid expenses of $4.7 million and an increase in deferred commissions of $3.9 million consistent with our revenue growth.
During fiscal year 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $1.4 million, primarily resulting from our operating loss of $45.9 million, which was offset by $44.5 million of adjustments. These adjustments consisted of $17.8 million of non-cash charges (principally comprising depreciation and amortization and stock-based compensation expense), and net cash inflow of $26.7 million from net changes in operating assets and liabilities. The net cash inflow from changes in operating assets and liabilities was primarily driven by a decrease in accounts and other receivable of $7.7 million as we increased collections on our outstanding receivables, an increase in deferred revenues of $18.0 million consistent with our revenue growth and an increase in other liabilities of $9.0 million which primarily related to accrued interest on our debt and deferred rent. These changes were partially offset by an increase in unbilled revenues of $3.8 million and deferred commissions of $3.4 million consistent with our revenue growth and a decrease in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $1.3 million due to timing of payments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities consists of business acquisitions, purchases of property and equipment, leasehold improvements, and capitalization of internal-use software costs.
During fiscal year 2022, net cash used in investing activities was $7.3 million, consisting of $2.5 million of cash consideration paid for our acquisition of Billstream, capitalized internal-use software costs of $4.2 million and capital expenditures of $0.6 million.
During fiscal year 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $25.6 million, consisting of $20.6 million of cash consideration (net of cash acquired) paid for our acquisition of Repstor, Limited (“Repstor”), capitalized internal-use software costs of $2.5 million and capital expenditures of $2.5 million on property and equipment consisting largely of leasehold improvements to our facilities in Charlotte, North Carolina.
During fiscal year 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $5.1 million, consisting of capitalized internal-use software costs of $2.5 million and capital expenditures of $2.6 million on property and equipment.
Financing Activities
During fiscal year 2022, net cash provided by financing activities was $6.6 million, primarily comprised of $292.8 million in net proceeds from our IPO completed in July 2021, $10.2 million of proceeds from stock option exercises and $1.2 million of proceeds from employee stock purchase plan, partially offset by $278.0 million used for the repayment of borrowings, $10.4 million of payment for contingent consideration related to the acquisition of Repstor, $4.4 million of payments related to deferred offering costs in connection with our IPO, $3.9 million of payments related to tax withholding for vested equity awards and $0.8 million of payments related to deferred financing costs in connection with our JPMorgan Credit Facility.
During fiscal year 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $32.4 million, primarily comprised of $29.0 million from the issuance of common stock and $15.7 million proceeds from option exercises, partially offset by $5.4 million of payments related to offering costs in connection with our IPO, $5.0 million for the repayment of borrowings on our revolving line of credit and $1.9 million of payments for the repurchase of common stock.
During fiscal year 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $27.2 million, primarily resulting from $16.5 million net proceeds for the issuance of convertible preferred stock, $3.6 million proceeds from option exercises and shareholder contribution and $10.0 million of net proceeds from borrowings on our revolving line of credit, offset by payments of $2.8 million to repurchase shares and options in the tender offer in October 2019.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash commitments as of June 30, 2022 were as follows:
Operating lease obligations consist of obligations under non-cancelable operating leases for office space with expiration through June 2030. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Purchase obligations primarily consist of non-cancelable obligations under third-party cloud hosting and support service agreements and software subscriptions. See Note 8 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Acquisition-related obligations consist of deferred purchase consideration for the Billstream acquisition in June 2022, contingent consideration associated with the Repstor acquisition in June 2021 under which certain performance measures have been achieved, and holdbacks associated with these acquisitions. See Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
In addition to the obligations described above, in connection with the acquisition of Billstream, we are also obligated to pay contingent consideration up to a maximum of $5.0 million in the second quarter of fiscal year 2024, if certain performance measures are achieved. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP, however, management believes evaluating our ongoing operating results may be enhanced if investors have additional non-GAAP financial measures. Specifically, management reviews non-GAAP gross profit, non-GAAP recurring gross profit, and non-GAAP operating profit (loss), each of which is a non-GAAP financial measure, to manage our business, make planning decisions, evaluate our performance and allocate resources and, for the reasons described below, considers them to be useful indicators, for both management and investors, of our financial performance over time. These non-GAAP financial measures, which may be different than similarly-titled measures used by other companies, should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit
We define non-GAAP gross profit as GAAP gross profit before the portion related to cost of revenues of stock-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, and certain restructuring costs. We believe non-GAAP gross profit provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of gross profit.
The following table provides a reconciliation of gross profit to non-GAAP gross profit (in thousands):
Non-GAAP Recurring Gross Profit
We define non-GAAP recurring gross profit as GAAP total recurring revenues less GAAP total cost of recurring revenues adjusted for the portion of cost related to stock-based compensation expense and amortization of intangible assets. We believe non-GAAP recurring gross profit provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of recurring gross profit as management is focused on increasing sales associated with our recurring revenue stream.
The following table provides a reconciliation of recurring gross profit to non-GAAP recurring gross profit (in thousands):
Non-GAAP Operating Profit (Loss)
We define non-GAAP operating profit (loss) as GAAP operating loss excluding stock-based compensation expense, amortization of intangible assets, change in fair value of contingent consideration, acquisition-related transaction costs and restructuring costs. We believe non-GAAP operating profit (loss) provides investors and other users of our financial information consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of GAAP operating loss.
The following table provides a reconciliation of GAAP operating loss to non-GAAP operating profit (loss) (in thousands):
Indebtedness
As of June 30, 2021, we had an outstanding balance under our Prior Credit Facility of $273.0 million under a term loan and $5.0 million under the associated revolving credit facility. The balance was fully repaid in July 2021 using proceeds from the IPO.
On October 5, 2021, we entered into a Credit Agreement with a group of lenders led by JPMorgan. The Credit Agreement provides for a five-year, senior secured revolving credit facility of $100.0 million with a sub-facility for letters of credit in the aggregate amount of up to $10.0 million. Future borrowings under the JPMorgan Credit Facility will bear interest, at our election, at an annual rate of either (a) LIBOR plus a percentage spread (ranging from 1.75% to 2.50%) or (b) an alternate base rate (as described in the Credit Agreement) plus a percentage spread (ranging from 0.75% to 1.50%), in each case based on our total net leverage ratio. In addition, a commitment fee accrues with respect to the unused amount of the JPMorgan Credit Facility at an annual rate ranging from 0.25% to 0.40%, based on our total net leverage ratio. Subject to certain exceptions, our total net leverage ratio as of the end of each fiscal quarter may not exceed 3.50 to 1.00. We were in compliance with all of the covenants as of June 30, 2022.
As of June 30, 2022, no amounts have been borrowed under the JPMorgan Credit Facility.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The process of preparing our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires the use of estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses. These estimates and judgments are based on historical experience, future expectations and other factors and assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. The most significant estimates and judgments are reviewed on an ongoing basis and are revised when necessary. Actual amounts may differ from these estimates and judgments.
A summary of our significant accounting policies is contained in Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue recognition requires judgment and the use of estimates, especially in identifying and evaluating the various non-standard terms and conditions in our contracts with clients and their effect on reported revenues.
We derive our revenues primarily from the following four sources, which represent our performance obligations:
i.
Sales of our SaaS solutions;
ii.
Sales of subscriptions to license our on-premises software;
iii.
Provision of support activities; and
iv.
Provision of professional services.
The estimates and assumptions requiring significant judgment under our revenue recognition policy in accordance with ASC 606 are as follows:
Determination of the transaction price
We determine the transaction price based on the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for transferring our services and products to the client. We estimate variable consideration included in the transaction price if, in our judgment, it is probable that no significant future reversal of cumulative revenues under the contract will occur.
In instances where the timing of revenue recognition differs from the timing of invoicing, we have determined that contracts generally do not include a significant financing component. The primary purpose of our invoicing terms is to provide clients with simplified and predictable ways of purchasing our products and services, not to receive financing from clients or to provide clients with financing.
Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
If the contract contains a single performance obligation, we allocate the entire transaction price to the single performance obligation. Contracts that contain multiple performance obligations require an allocation of the transaction price to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price (“SSP”). The determination of SSP involves judgment and is generally based on the contractually stated, observable prices of the promised goods and services charged when sold separately to client. The majority of our contracts contain multiple performance obligations (such as when subscription licenses are sold with support and implementation services) and are typically capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. In a contract with multiple performance obligations, we allocate revenues to each performance obligation at the inception of the contract. Some of our performance obligations have observable inputs that are used to determine the SSP of those distinct performance obligations. Where SSP is not directly observable, we determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs.
Stock-Based Compensation
We calculate compensation expense related to stock option awards made to employees, consultants and directors based on the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant. We determine the grant date fair value of our stock option awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and for awards without performance conditions the related stock-based compensation is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations on a straight-line basis, over the period in which a participant is required to provide service in exchange for the stock-based award, which is generally four years. We recognize forfeitures of stock-based awards as they occur.
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires significant judgement. The determination of the grant date fair value of stock-based awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model is affected by our estimated common stock fair value as well as other subjective assumptions including the expected term of the awards, the expected volatility over the expected term of the awards, expected dividend yield and risk-free interest rates. The assumptions used in our option-pricing model represent management’s best estimates and are as follows:
•
Fair Value of Common Stock. Prior to our initial public offering, we were privately held and thus we have historically estimated the fair value of common stock based on contemporaneous valuations and other factors deemed relevant by management. For valuations after the completion of our initial public offering, we determined the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
•
Expected Term. The expected term of employee stock options reflects the period for which we believe the option will remain outstanding based on historical experience and future expectations.
•
Expected Volatility. As we have limited trading history for our common stock, the selected volatility used is representative of expected future volatility. We base expected future volatility on the historical and implied volatility of comparable publicly traded companies over a similar expected term. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our stock price becomes available.
•
Expected Dividend Yield. We have never declared or paid any cash dividends and do not presently intend to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rates. We base the risk-free interest rate on the applicable rate for a U.S. Treasury issue with a term that closely approximates the expected life of the option grant at the date nearest the option grant date.
We have issued performance-based stock options that vest based upon continued service through the vesting term and achievement of certain annual contract value targets established by the Board of Directors for a predetermined period. We measure stock-based compensation expense for performance-based stock options based on the estimated grant date fair value determined using the Black-Scholes valuation model, and we recognize compensation expense for such awards in the period in which it becomes probable that the performance target will be achieved.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess purchase price over fair value of net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in our business combinations. We test goodwill for impairment on an annual basis during the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. We have determined that we have one reporting unit for purposes of our annual impairment evaluation. As part of the annual goodwill impairment test, we perform a quantitative assessment to determine whether a goodwill impairment shall be recognized. If, as a result of this quantitative assessment, the carrying amount of our reporting unit is more than its fair value, an impairment charge in the amount of such excess is recorded to goodwill.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recent accounting pronouncements and our assessment of their impact.
Emerging Growth Company Status
In April 2012, the JOBS Act was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act for complying with new or revised accounting standards. We have elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with certain new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We also intend to rely on certain other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements under the JOBS Act, including: not having to (1) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act or (2) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”) regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) the last day of fiscal year in which we have more than $1.07 billion in annual revenues; (2) the date we qualify as a “large accelerated filer,” which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of the most recently completed second fiscal quarter, and we have been required to file annual, quarterly and current reports under the Exchange Act for at least twelve months, and we have filed at least one annual report pursuant to the Exchange Act; (3) the date on which we have, during the previous three-year period, issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities; and (4) the last day of fiscal year ending after the fifth anniversary of our initial public offering.