ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements that are included elsewhere in this report. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under Cautionary Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Information, Part I. Item 1. Business and Item 1A. Risk Factors. We use words such as "anticipate," "estimate," "plan," "project," "continuing," "ongoing," "expect," "believe," "intend," "may," "will," "should," "could," and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements.
Company Overview
Inuvo is a technology company that develops and sells information technology solutions for marketing and advertising. These solutions predictively identify and message online audiences for any product or service across devices, formats, and channels including video, mobile, connected TV, linear TV, display, social, search and native. These solutions allow Inuvo’s clients to engage with their customers and prospects in a manner that drives responsiveness. Inuvo facilitates the delivery of hundreds of millions of marketing messages to consumers every single month and counts among its clients numerous world- renowned names across industries.
The Inuvo solution incorporates a proprietary form of artificial intelligence, or AI, branded the IntentKey. This patented machine learning technology uses interactions with Internet content as a source of information from which to predict consumer intent. The AI can identify and advertise to the reasons why consumers are purchasing products and services not who those consumers are. In this regard, the technology is designed for a privacy conscious future and focused on the components of the advertising value chain most responsible for return on advertising spend, the intelligence behind the advertising decision.
Inuvo technology can be consumed both as a managed service and software-as-a-service. For clients, Inuvo has also developed a collection of propriety websites collectively branded as Bonfire Publishing where content is created specifically to attract qualified consumer traffic for clients through the publication of information across a wide range of topics including health, finance, travel, careers, auto, education and lifestyle. These sites also provide the means to market test various Inuvo advertising technologies.
There are many barriers to entry associated with the Inuvo business model, including a proficiency in large scale information processing, predictive software development, marketing data products, analytics, artificial intelligence, integration to the internet of things ("IOT"), and the relationships required to execute within the IOT. Inuvo’s intellectual property is protected by 17 issued and eight pending patents.
Hitachi Credit Agreement
On March 12, 2020, we closed on the Loan and Security Agreement dated February 28, 2020 with Hitachi. Under the terms of
the Loan and Security Agreement, Hitachi has provided us with a $5,000,000 line of credit commitment. We are permitted to
borrow (i) 90% of the aggregate Eligible Accounts Receivable, plus (ii) the lesser of (A) 75% of the aggregate Unbilled
Accounts Receivable or (B) 50% of the amount available to borrow under (i), up to the maximum credit commitment. The
interest rate under the Hitachi agreement is 2% in excess of the Wall Street Journal Prime Rate, with a minimum rate of 6.75%
per annum, on outstanding amounts. The principal and all accrued but unpaid interest are due on demand. In the event of a default under the terms of the Loan and Security Agreement, the interest rate increases to 6% greater than the interest rate in effect from time to time prior to a default. The Loan and Security Agreement contains certain affirmative and negative covenants to which we are also subject.
We agreed to pay Hitachi a commitment fee of $50,000, with one half due upon the execution of the agreement and the balance
due six months thereafter. We are obligated to pay Hitachi a commitment fee of $15,000 annually. We are also obligated to
pay Hitachi a quarterly service fee of 0.30% on the monthly unused amount of the maximum credit line. In addition to a $2,000
document fee we have paid to Hitachi, if we exited our relationship with Hitachi before March 1, 2022, we are obligated to pay
Hitachi an exit fee of $50,000. On March 12, 2020, we drew $5,000,000 under this agreement, using $2,959,573 of these
proceeds to satisfy all of our obligations under a credit agreement with Western Alliance Bank. The balance was used for working capital and was repaid in 2020. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no outstanding balances due under the Loan and Security Agreement with Hitachi.
2021 Overview
We had an extraordinary year in 2021 despite recurring pandemic induced disruptions occurring across supply chains and labor markets. Year-over-year (YOY) revenue was up 34% closing out the fourth quarter of the year at $19.7 million, an increase of 53% YOY and 17% quarter-over-sequential quarter. Both the ValidClick and IntentKey platforms had strong YOY revenue gains; ValidClick by 22% and the IntentKey by 75%. For the first time in 2021, our strategy of bringing together the capabilities of both platforms to serve joint clients was realized. Gross margins declined slightly in 2021 compared to 2020. We reported gross margins of 73.4% in 2021 compared to 81.4% in 2020, primarily due to change in revenue mix.
The ValidClick and IntentKey platforms provide a similar service to clients, where ultimately their purpose is the delivery of high converting consumers to maximize return on advertising spend. The distinction between the platforms is mostly related to the channels each platform serves, social and search for ValidClick and programmatic for the IntentKey. As the number of joint clients grows, the need to distinguish between the platforms diminishes.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
First identified in late 2019 and known now as COVID-19, the outbreak has impacted millions of individuals and businesses
worldwide. In response, many countries have implemented measures to combat the outbreak which has had an unprecedented
economic consequence. We did not experience an impact from COVID-19 through the end of fiscal year 2019 and had only
minor impact from COVID-19 in the first quarter of 2020. Because we operate in the digital advertising industry, unlike a brick
and mortar-based company, predicting the impact of the coronavirus pandemic on our company is difficult. Beginning in late
April 2020, we experienced a significant reduction in marketing budgets and a decrease in monetization rates which impacted
ValidClick more severely than IntentKey. This resulted in a significant reduction in our overall revenue run rates during 2020
with the low point occurring during May 2020.
In response to COVID-19, we curtailed expenses, including compensation and travel throughout 2020 in addition to other
actions. Additionally, in April 2020, we obtained the $1.1 million PPP Loan which we used primarily for payroll costs. The
PPP Loan was fully forgiven by the SBA on November 2, 2020.
Beginning mid-June 2020, we began to experience an improvement in overall daily revenue. Due to the unprecedented
sustainability of COVID-19 on our business, we were unable to predict with any certainty how our clients would adapt their
business strategies within the context of COVID-19 and therefore how our revenue run rate would change as a result. We,
therefore, focused our resources on areas we believed could have more immediate revenue potential, attempting to reduce
expenses and raising additional capital so as to mitigate operating disruptions while the impact of COVID-19 abates. Since the
start of 2021 with the roll out of vaccinations, we have seen an increase in our client’s willingness to spend on advertising and thereby an improvement in our revenue run rates.
Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We experienced 34% higher year over year revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the same period in 2020. Revenue from both platforms, ValidClick and IntentKey, exceeded the prior year. ValidClick YOY revenue was up by 22% and IntentKey YOY revenue by 75%. Both platforms acquired new customers within the year, benefiting from the agreement with a business development partner discussed in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements and because of the economic improvements associated with the COVID-19 pandemic recovery. Revenue in 2020 was affected by the COVID-19 pandemic which had a material impact on advertising budgets beginning in April of 2020. The renegotiation of payment terms and conditions as a trade-off for higher gross margins with ValidClick marketing clients in the quarter ended June 30, 2020 also contributed to the lower revenue in 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily generated by payments to advertising exchanges that provide access to a supply of advertising inventory where we serve advertisements using information predicted by the IntentKey platform and, to a lesser extent, payments to website publishers and app developers that host advertisements we serve through ValidClick. Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 time periods was primarily generated by payments to website publishers and app developers that host advertisements we serve through ValidClick. The components of the cost of revenue have shifted, as the IntentKey platform revenue becomes a greater percentage of net revenue and as the ValidClick service has continued to expand its owned and operated publishing assets. The increase in the cost of revenue was largely due to the acquisition of new customers as mentioned in the Net Revenue section above and the renegotiation of payment terms and conditions with a ValidClick marketing partner in the quarter ended June 30, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Marketing costs consists mostly of traffic acquisition costs (“TAC”) and includes those expenses required to attract an audience to the ValidClick platform. The increase in marketing costs was largely due to higher TAC that resulted in the increase in ValidClick revenue discussed above in the Net Revenue section.
Compensation expense was higher for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same time period in 2020 due primarily to higher stock-based compensation expense and to a lesser extent to salaries, benefits, commissions and incentive pay. Our total employment, both full and part-time, was 78 at December 31, 2021 compared to 75 at December 31, 2020.
Selling, general and administrative costs were lower for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same time period in 2020 primarily due to lower IT costs and lower depreciation and amortization costs. In addition, professional fees were lower in 2021 than the prior year.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net, was approximately $87 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was primarily composed of interest expense on finance lease obligations, the Hitachi Loan and Security Agreement and our marketable securities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, interest expense, net, was approximately $254 thousand and composed of interest expense on financed receivables, finance lease obligations and the PPP loan.
Other income, net
Other income, net, was approximately $257 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 and included the reversal of deferred revenue from the contract cancellation discussed in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements of
approximately $415 thousand and reversal of an accrued sales reserve of $50 thousand, partially offset by the unrealized losses on trading securities discussed in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, other income, net, was $997 thousand and was primarily due to the $1.1 million PPP loan being fully forgiven on November 2, 2020. The PPP loan helped fund compensation expenses. Partially offsetting the PPP loan was a $103 thousand other expense due to the change of the fair market value of the derivative liability associated with convertible promissory notes that were extinguished by May 2020.
I
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we have approximately $13.3 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our net working capital was $12.4 million. We have encountered recurring losses and cash outflows from operations, which historically we have funded through equity offerings and debt facilities. In addition, our investment in internally developed software consists primarily of labor costs which are of a fixed nature. Through December 31, 2021, our accumulated deficit was $144.0 million.
Our principal sources of liquidity are the sale of our common stock and our credit facility with Hitachi described in Note 7 to
our Consolidated Financial Statements. During March 2020 and April 2020, we raised approximately $1.5 million in gross
proceeds, before expenses, through sales of our common stock and in April 2020 we received a $1.1 million PPP Loan. On June
8, 2020, we raised an additional $5.5 million in gross proceeds, before expenses, through the sale of our common stock and on
July 27, 2020, we raised an additional $10.75 million in gross proceeds, before expenses, through sales of our common stock.
On January 19, 2021, we raised an additional $8 million in gross proceeds, before expenses, through the sale of our common
stock, and on January 22, 2021, we raised an additional $6.25 million in gross proceeds, before expenses, through sales of our
common stock.
In March 2021, we contracted with an investment management company to manage our cash in excess of current operating
needs. We placed $2 million in cash equivalent accounts and $10 million in an interest-bearing account. At December 31, 2021,
our funds with the investment management company were approximately $8 million and were invested in cash equivalent accounts and marketable debt and equity securities. A detail of the activity is described in Note 3 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
On May 28, 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement (the "Sales Agreement") with A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners, as sales agent (the "Sales Agent"), pursuant to which we may offer and sell through or to the Sales Agent shares of our common stock (the "ATM Program") up to an aggregate amount of gross proceeds of $35,000,000. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not issue any shares of common stock or receive any aggregate proceeds from the ATM Program, and we did not pay any commissions to the Sales Agent. Any shares of common stock offered and sold in the ATM Program will be issued pursuant to our universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the “Shelf Registration Statement”). The ATM Program will terminate upon (a) the election of the Sales Agent upon the occurrence of certain adverse events, (b) 10 days’ advance notice from one party to the other, or (c) the sale of the balance available under our Shelf Registration Statement. Under the terms of the Sales Agreement, the Sales Agent is entitled to a commission at a fixed rate of 3.0% of the gross proceeds from each sale of shares under the Sales Agreement.
We have focused our resources behind a plan to grow our AI technology, the IntentKey, where we have a technological advantage and higher margins. If we are successful in implementing our plan, we expect to return to a positive cash flow from operations. However, there is no assurance that we will be able to achieve this objective.
We believe our current cash position and credit facility will be sufficient to sustain operations for at least the next twelve
months from the date of this filing. If our plan to grow the IntentKey product is unsuccessful, we may need to fund operations through private or public sales of securities, debt financings or partnering/licensing transactions over the long term.
In April 2020, the Company experienced a significant reduction in advertiser marketing budgets across both the ValidClick and
IntentKey platforms as a direct consequence of COVID-19. These reductions adversely impacted our overall revenue
throughout 2020. As a result, in May 2020 and June 2020 we implemented a temporary compensation change for senior
officers and employees. Certain employees with salaries in excess of $100,000 per year had forgone a percentage of the cash portion of their salary and instead received an equivalent restricted stock grant. We curtailed expenses, including compensation and travel and issued a work from home policy to protect our employees and their families from virus transmission associated with co-workers. Though we continue to monitor the pandemic and related government guidelines and regulations, we have returned to a hybrid working model where employees are working partially from the office and partially from home.
Cash Flows
The table below sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the years ended 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows - Operating
Net cash used in operating activities was $5,276,257 during 2021. We reported a net loss of $7,600,649, which included non-cash expenses; depreciation and amortization of $3,143,168, amortization of right of use assets $322,746 and stock-based compensation of $2,179,254; partially offset by the $1.4 million referral agreement and the reversal of $420,000 in deferred revenue discussed in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. The change in operating assets and liabilities was a net use of cash of $3,077,525 primarily due to an increase in accrued liabilities of $1,264,687 and the accounts payable balance by $796,456, offset by an increase in the accounts receivable balance by $3,045,690. Our terms are such that we generally collect receivables prior to paying trade payables. Our Media sales arrangements typically have slower payment terms than the terms of related payables.
During 2020, cash used in operating activities was $5,599,335. We reported a net loss of $7,304,569 which included the non-cash expenses of depreciation and amortization of $3,237,930, amortization of right of use assets $367,981 and stock-based compensation expenses of $858,683. The change in operating assets and liabilities was a net use of cash of $656,529.
Cash Flows - Investing
Net cash used in investing activities was $4,597,885 and $1,185,335 for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities in 2021 consisted of capitalized internal development costs and purchase of marketable securities. Cash used in investing activities in 2020 consisted of capitalized internal development costs.
Cash Flows - Financing
Net cash provided by financing activities was $12,459,441 and $14,302,346 during 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily from proceeds from the sale of common stock.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported periods. The following disclosure supplements the descriptions of our accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements regarding significant areas of judgement. The estimates and assumptions that management makes affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, net revenues and expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The estimates and assumptions used are based upon management’s regular evaluation of the relevant facts and circumstances as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. Actual results may differ from the estimates and assumptions used in preparing the accompanying consolidated financial statements, and such differences could be material. A discussion of some of our more significant accounting policies and estimates follows.
Revenue recognition - Both of our platforms generate revenue from ad placements and clicks on advertisements on websites, some of which we own. We recognize revenue from ad placements and clicks in the period in which they occur. We also recognize revenue from serving impressions when we complete all or a part of an order from an advertiser. The revenue is recognized in the period that the impression is served. Revenues are recognized net of adjustments based on the traffic generated and is billed monthly. We subsequently settle these transactions with our business partners at which time adjustments for invalid traffic may impact the amount collected. Payments to publishers who display advertisements on our behalf and payments to ad exchanges are recognized as cost of revenue. There have been no material changes to our estimates of revenue for the periods presented within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounts receivable - Accounts receivable consists of trade receivables from customers. We record accounts receivable at its net realizable value, recognizing an allowance for doubtful accounts based on our best estimate of probable credit losses on our existing accounts receivable. Balances are written off against the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the possibility of recovery is considered remote.
Goodwill - Goodwill is recorded as the difference, if any, between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the net tangible and intangible assets acquired. We perform an impairment test annually as of December 31, 2021. As a result, we perform our annual goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of our reporting unit with its carrying amount. We generally determine the fair value of our reporting unit using the income approach methodology of valuation that includes the undiscounted cash flow method as well as other generally accepted valuation methodologies. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value, the amount it exceeds fair value is equivalent to the amount of impairment loss.
Intangible Assets - We allocate a portion of the purchase price of acquisitions to identifiable intangible assets and we amortize definite-lived assets over their estimated useful lives. We consider our indefinite-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Trade names are not amortized as they are believed to have an indefinite life. Trade names are reviewed annually for impairment under ASC 350. We also acquire intangible assets outside of acquisitions and record them at their fair value and amortize them over their estimated useful lives. We recorded no impairment of intangible assets during 2021 or 2020.
Capitalized Software Costs - We capitalize certain costs related to internally developed software and amortize these costs using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the software, generally two years. We do not sell internally developed software. Certain development costs not meeting the criteria for capitalization, in accordance with ASC 350-40 Internal-Use Software, are expensed as incurred.