Item 7. Management s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Forward-Looking Statements
This discussion includes certain forward-looking statements about our business and our expectations, including statements relating to revenues, international revenues, revenue growth rates, gross margin, operating expenses, amortization expense, earnings per share, available cash and operating cash flow. Any such statements are subject to risk that could cause the actual results to vary materially from expectations. For a further discussion of the various risks that may affect our business and expectations, see the section titled “Risk Factors” contained in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The risks and uncertainties discussed therein do not reflect the potential future impact of any mergers, acquisitions or dispositions. In addition, any forward-looking statements represent our estimates only as of the day this Annual Report was filed with the SEC and should not be relied upon as representing our estimates as of any subsequent date. While we may elect to update forward-looking statements at some point in the future, we specifically disclaim any obligation to do so, even if our estimates change.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage fertility company dedicated to expanding the assisted reproductive technology (“ART”) marketplace by making fertility care accessible and inclusive to people around the world. Our flagship product is INVOcell, a revolutionary medical device that allows fertilization and early embryo development to take place in vivo within the woman’s body. Our primary mission is to implement new medical technologies aimed at increasing the availability of affordable, high-quality, patient-centered fertility care. This treatment solution is the world’s first intravaginal culture technique for the incubation of oocytes and sperm during fertilization and early embryo development. This technique, designated as “IVC”, provides patients a more natural, intimate and more affordable experience in comparison to other ART treatments. The IVC procedure can deliver comparable results at a lower cost than traditional in vitro fertilization (“IVF”) and is a significantly more effective treatment than intrauterine insemination (“IUI”). Our commercialization strategy is focused on the opening of dedicated “INVO Centers” offering the INVOcell and IVC procedure (with three centers in North America now operational), in addition to continuing to sell our technology solution into existing fertility clinics.
Unlike conventional infertility treatments such as IVF where the oocytes and sperm develop into embryos in an expensive laboratory incubator, the INVOcell allows fertilization and early embryo development to take place in the woman’s body. This allows for many benefits in the IVC procedure, including:
● Eliminates expensive and time-consuming lab procedures, allowing clinics and doctors to increase patient capacity and reduce costs;
● Provides a natural, stable incubation environment;
● Offers a more personal, intimate experience in creating a baby; and
● Reduces the risk of errors and wrong embryo transfers.
In both current utilization of the INVOcell, and in clinical studies, the IVC procedure has proven to have equivalent pregnancy success and live birth rates as IVF.
Operations
We operate with a core internal team and outsource certain operational functions in order to help advance our efforts as well as reduce fixed internal overhead needs and costs and in-house capital equipment requirements. Our most critical management and leadership functions are carried out by our core management team. We have contracted out the manufacturing, assembly, packaging, labeling, and sterilization of the device to a medical manufacturing company and a sterilization specialist to perform the gamma sterilization process.
To date, we have completed a series of important steps in the successful development and manufacturing of the INVOcell:
● Manufacturing: We are ISO 13485:2016 certified and manage all aspects of production and manufacturing with qualified suppliers. Our key suppliers have been steadfast partners since our company first began and can provide us with virtually an unlimited capability to support our growth objectives, with all manufacturing performed in the New England region of the U.S..
● All raw materials utilized for the INVOcell are medical grade and commonly used in medical devices (e.g., medical grade silicone, medical grade plastic). Our principal molded component suppliers are well-established companies in the molding industry and are either ISO 13485 or ISO 9001 certified. The molded components are supplied to our contract manufacturer for assembly and packaging of the INVOcell system. The contract manufacturer is ISO 13485 certified, and U.S. Food & Drug Administration (“FDA”) registered.
● CE Mark: INVO Bioscience received the CE Mark in October 2019. The CE Mark permits the sale of devices in Europe, Australia and other countries that recognize the CE Mark, subject to local registration requirements.
● US Marketing Clearance: the safety and efficacy of the INVOcell has been demonstrated and cleared for marketing and use by the FDA in November 2015.
● Clinical: we are actively seeking to expand the labeling on our device, the indication for use, to cover a day 5 incubation period, in addition to the currently approved use of day 3 incubation. This may be accomplished with a prospective clinical study, which we previously designed and had the Institutional Review Board (“IRB”) approve to evaluate the modified INVOcell system for effectiveness of achieving fertilization, implantation, embryo development, clinical pregnancy, and live birth after day 5 continuous vaginal incubation (clinicaltrials.gov identifier: NCT04246268). The objective of this study would be to assess the efficacy, safety, comfort and retention of the INVOcell with the retention device and demonstrate superior efficacy following day 5 vaginal incubation as compared to the current day 3 vaginal incubation indication. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we elected to place the trial on hold, but expect to move it forward with some improved design parameters this year. In the meantime, and as a result of available retrospective, real-market usage (day 5) data, we initiated an effort to pursue a 510(k) filing utilizing retrospective data as a separate effort to achieve our label enhancement. This retrospective effort remains ongoing and active in 2022.
Market Opportunity
The global ART marketplace is a large, multi-billion industry growing at a strong pace in many parts of the world as increased infertility rates, increased patient awareness, acceptance of treatment options, and improving financial incentives such as insurance and governmental assistance continue to drive demand. According to the European Society for Human Reproduction 2020 ART Fact Sheet, one in six couples worldwide experience infertility problems. Additionally, the worldwide market remains vastly underserved as a high percentage of patients in need of care continue to go untreated each year for many reasons, but key among them are capacity constraints and cost barriers. While there have been large increases in the use of IVF, there are still only approximately 2.6 million ART cycles, including IVF, IUI and other fertility treatments, performed globally each year, producing around 500,000 babies. This amounts to less than 3% of the infertile couples worldwide being treated and only 1% having a child though IVF. The industry remains capacity constrained which creates challenges in providing access to care to the volume of patients in need. A survey by “Resolve: The National Infertility Association,” indicates the two main reasons couples do not use IVF is cost and geographical availability (and/or capacity).
In the United States, infertility, according to the American Society of Reproductive Medicine (2017), affects an estimated 10%-15% of the couples of childbearing-age. According to the Centers for Disease Control (“CDC”), there are approximately 6.7 million women with impaired fertility. Based on preliminary 2020 data from CDC’s National ART Surveillance System, approximately 326,000 IVF cycles were performed at 449 IVF centers, leaving the U.S. with a large, underserved patient population, which is similar to most markets around the world.
Competitive Advantages
We believe that the INVOcell, and the IVC procedure it enables, have the following key advantages:
Lower cost than IVF with equivalent efficacy. The IVC procedure can be offered for less than IVF due to lower cost of supplies, labor, capital equipment and general overhead. The laboratory equipment needed to perform an IVF cycle is expensive and requires ongoing costs as compared to what is required for an IVC cycle. As a result, we also believe INVOcell and the IVC procedure enable a clinic and its laboratory to be more efficient as compared to conventional IVF.
The IVC procedure is currently being offered at practicing clinics at a range of $5,000 - $11,000 per cycle and from $4,500 to $7,000 at the existing INVO Centers, thereby making it more affordable than conventional IVF (which tends to average $12,000 to $17,000 per cycle or higher).
Improved efficiency providing for greater capacity and improved access to care and geographic availability. In many parts of the world, including the U.S., IVF clinics tend to be concentrated in higher population centers and are often capacity constrained in terms of how many patients a center can treat, since volume is limited by the number of capital-intensive incubators available in IVF clinic labs. With the significant number of untreated patients along with the growing interest and demand for services, the industry remains challenged to provide sufficient access to care and to do so at an economical price. We believe INVOcell and the IVC procedure it enables can play a significant role in helping to address these challenges. According to the 2020 CDC Report, there are approximately 449 IVF centers in the U.S. We estimate that by adopting the INVOcell, IVF clinics can increase fertility cycle volume by up to 30% without adding to personnel, space and/or equipment costs. Our own INVO Centers also address capacity constraints by adding to the overall ART cycle capacity and doing so with comparable efficacy to IVF outcomes as well as at a lower per cycle price. Moreover, we believe that we are uniquely positioned to drive more significant growth in fertility treatment capacity in the future by partnering with existing OB/GYN practices. In the U.S., there are an estimated 5,000 OB/GYN offices, many of which offer fertility services (usually limited to consultation and IUI, but not IVF). Since the IVC procedure requires a much smaller lab facility, less equipment and fewer lab personnel (in comparison to conventional IVF), it could potentially be offered as an extended service in an OB/GYN office. With proper training and a lighter lab infrastructure, the INVOcell could expand the business for these physicians and allow them to treat patients that are unable to afford IVF and provide patients with a more readily accessible, convenient, and cost-effective solution. With our three-pronged strategy (IVF clinics, INVO Centers and OB/GYN practices), in addition to lowering costs, we believe INVOcell and the IVC procedure can address our industry’s key challenges, capacity and cost, by their ability to expand and decentralize treatment and increase the number of points of care for patients in need. This powerful combination of lower cost and added capacity has the potential to open up access to care for underserved patients around the world.
Greater patient involvement. With the IVC procedure, the patient uses their own body for fertilization, incubation, and early embryo development which creates a greater sense of involvement, comfort, and participation. In some cases, this may also free people from barriers related to due to ethical or religious concerns, or fears of laboratory mix-ups.
Sales and Marketing
Our product commercialization efforts are focused on identifying distributors and partners within targeted geographic regions that we believe can best promote, market and sell the INVOcell and support our efforts to expand access to advanced fertility treatment for the large number of underserved infertile people hoping to have a baby. We believe that the IVC procedure is an effective and affordable treatment option that greatly reduces the need for more expensive IVF lab facilities and allows providers to pass on related savings to patients without compromising efficacy. We have been cleared to sell the INVOcell in the United States since November 2015 after receiving de novo class II clearance from the FDA. Our primary focus has been on establishing INVO Centers to promote the INVOcell and the IVC procedure, selling the INVOcell directly to U.S. fertility clinics, and developing key international market partnerships around the world.
We anticipate that we will experience quarterly fluctuations in our revenue as we expand the sales of the INVOcell to new markets in the U.S. and globally. We continue to seek partners that will contractually commit to meeting agreeable performance objectives that are consistent with our goals and objectives.
Ferring
On November 12, 2018, we entered into a U.S. Distribution Agreement (the “Ferring Agreement”) with Ferring International Center S.A. (“Ferring”), which closed on January 14, 2019. Pursuant to the Ferring Agreement, among other things, we granted Ferring an exclusive license in the United States to market, promote, distribute, and sell the INVOcell. Ferring was responsible, at its own cost, for all commercialization activities for in the United States. We retained a limited exception to the exclusive license granted to Ferring allowing us, subject to certain restrictions, to establish up to five INVO Centers in the United States, which as of March 2, 2021, was amended to seven centers. We retained all commercialization rights for the INVOcell outside of the United States.
On November 2, 2021, Ferring notified us of its intention to terminate the Ferring Agreement, which required 90-days prior written notice. Accordingly, the Ferring Agreement officially terminated on January 31, 2022. Pursuant to the terms of the Ferring Agreement, upon notice of termination, Ferring was required to use commercially reasonable efforts to transition any customers to us and otherwise facilitate the orderly transition of the distribution from Ferring to us. By its terms, our Supply Agreement with Ferring also terminated on January 31, 2022.
The Ferring license was deemed to be a functional license that provides the counterparty with a “right to access” to our intellectual property during the subscription period and accordingly, revenue is recognized over a period of time, which is generally the subscription period. During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, we recognized $3.6 million and $0.7 million of revenue related to the Ferring license agreement, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no deferred revenue related to the Ferring Agreement as it was recognized in the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2021 in relation to the contract termination. The likelihood of Ferring exercising its rights became remote at the time notice of termination was received therefore INVO recognized the full remaining amount of the deferred revenue.
International Distribution Agreements
We have entered into exclusive distribution agreements for a number of international markets. These agreements usually have an initial term with renewal options and require the distributors to meet minimum annual purchases, which vary depending on the market. We are also required to register the product in each market before the distributor can begin importing, a process and timeline that can vary widely depending on the market.
The following table sets forth a list of our current international distribution agreements:
(a) Our Mexico JV. Please note that the registration is temporarily in the name of Proveedora de Equipos y Productos, S.A. de C.V. and will be transferred to Positib Fertility as soon as practicable.
Investment in Joint Ventures and Partnerships
As part of our commercialization strategy, we entered into a number of joint ventures and partnerships designed to establish new INVO Centers.
The following table sets forth a list of our current joint venture arrangements:
The following table sets forth a list of our current partnership arrangements:
Alabama JV Agreement
On March 10, 2021, our wholly owned subsidiary, INVO Centers, LLC (“INVO CTR”), entered into a limited liability company agreement with HRCFG, LLC (“HRCFG”) to form a joint venture for the purpose of establishing an INVO Center in Birmingham, Alabama. The name of the joint venture LLC is HRCFG INVO, LLC (the “Alabama JV”). The responsibilities of HRCFG’s principals include providing clinical practice expertise, performing recruitment functions, providing all necessary training, and providing day-to-day management of the clinic. The responsibilities of INVO CTR include providing certain funding to the Alabama JV and providing access to and being the exclusive provider of the INVOcell to the Alabama JV. INVO CTR will also perform all required, industry specific compliance and accreditation functions, and product documentation for product registration.
The Alabama JV opened to patients on August 9, 2021, and initial treatment cycles commenced in September 2021.
The Alabama JV is accounted for using the equity method in our financial statements. As of December 31, 2021 we invested $1.7 million in the Alabama JV in the form of a note. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Alabama JV recorded a net loss of $0.6 million of which we recognized a loss from equity method investment of $0.3 million.
Georgia JV Agreement
On June 28, 2021, INVO CTR entered into a limited liability company agreement (the “Bloom Agreement”) with Bloom Fertility, LLC (“Bloom”) to establish a joint venture entity, formed as “Bloom INVO LLC” (the “Georgia JV”), for the purposes of commercializing INVOcell, and the related IVC procedure, through the establishment of an INVO Center, (the “Atlanta Clinic”) in the Atlanta, Georgia metropolitan area.
In consideration for INVO’s commitment to contribute up to $800,000 within the 24-month period following execution of the Bloom Agreement to support the start-up operations of the Georgia JV, the Georgia JV issued 800 of its units to INVO CTR and in consideration for Bloom’s commitment to contribute physician services having an anticipated value of up to $1,200,000 over the course of a 24-month vesting period, the Georgia JV issued 1,200 of its units to Bloom.
The responsibilities of Bloom include providing all medical services required for the operation of the Atlanta Clinic. The responsibilities of INVO CTR include providing certain funding to the Georgia JV, lab services quality management, and providing access to and being the exclusive provider of the INVOcell to the Georgia JV. INVO CTR will also perform all required, industry specific compliance and accreditation functions, and product documentation for product registration.
The Georgia JV opened to patients on September 7, 2021, and commenced initial treatment cycles in November 2021.
The results of the Georgia JV are consolidated in our financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, INVO invested $0.5 million in the Georgia JV in the form of capital contributions as well as $0.5 million in the form of a note. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Georgia JV recorded a net loss of $0.4 million. Noncontrolling interest in the Georgia JV was $0. See Note 3 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on the Georgia JV.
Mexico JV Agreement
Effective September 24, 2020, INVO CTR entered into a Pre-Incorporation and Shareholders Agreement with Francisco Arredondo, MD PLLC (“Arredondo”) and Security Health LLC, a Texas limited liability company (“Ramirez”, and together with INVO CTR and Arredondo, the “Shareholders”) under which the Shareholders will commercialize the IVC procedure and offer related medical treatments in Mexico. Each party owns one-third of the Mexican incorporated company, Positib Fertility, S.A. de C.V. (the “Mexico JV”).
The Mexico JV will operate in Monterrey, Nuevo Leon, Mexico and any other cities and places in Mexico as approved by the Mexico JV’s board of directors and Shareholders. In addition, the Shareholders agreed that the Mexico JV will be our exclusive distributor in Mexico. The Shareholders also agreed not to compete directly or indirectly with the Mexico JV in Mexico.
The Mexico JV opened to patients on November 1, 2021, and commenced initial treatment cycles beginning in January 2022.
The Mexico JV is accounted for using the equity method in our financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, INVO invested $0.1 million in the Mexico JV. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Mexico JV recorded a net loss of $0.04 million of which we recognized a loss from equity method investment of $0.01 million.
Malaysia JV Agreement
On November 23, 2020, we entered into a joint venture agreement with SNS Murni SDN BHD (“SNS Murni”), a company incorporated in Malaysia, to establish an exclusive joint venture in Malaysia to (i) introduce, promote and market technologies related to the INVOcell and IVC Procedure in dedicated government-owned fertility clinics in Malaysia, and (ii) establish INVO Centers in Malaysia. The joint venture is co-managed and owned 50% by each of INVO Bioscience and SNS Murni. As of December 31, 2021, no joint venture entity had been formed.
North Macedonia JV Agreement
On November 23, 2020, we entered into a joint venture agreement with Ginekaliks Dooel (“Ginekaliks”), a limited liability company incorporated in the Republic of North Macedonia, to establish an exclusive joint venture to (i) commercialize, introduce, promote and market technologies related to the INVOcell and IVC procedure in the Republic of North Macedonia, and (ii) establish an INVO Center. The joint venture will be co-managed and owned 50% by each of INVO and Ginekaliks. As of December 31, 2021, no joint venture entity had been formed.
India JV Agreement
On January 13, 2020, we entered into a joint venture agreement (the “Medesole Agreement”) with Medesole Healthcare and Trading Private Limited, India (“Medesole”), an Indian corporation that promotes and distributes healthcare technologies, medical equipment and allied services to hospitals, clinics and primary health care centers in India and the Middle East.
Pursuant to the Medesole Agreement, INVO and Medesole formed a joint venture entity incorporated and registered in India, which would operate under the name Medesole INVO Bioscience India Private Limited (the “India JV”). After formation, we would grant to the India JV all required licenses for promoting, marketing and selling our INVOcell® technology in India. INVO and Medesole intended for the India JV to open and operate INVO Centers only in India.
The India JV would be co-managed and owned 50% by each of INVO and Medesole, who would share equally in the expenditures, revenue and profits of the India JV. The Agreement has a term of three years and may be terminated by either party on 180 days’ prior written notice. As of December 31, 2021, no joint venture entity had been formed. On March 29, 2021, INVO terminated the Medesole Agreement pursuant to its terms after mutual agreement with Medesole that Medesole would not be able to fulfil its commitments under the Medesole Agreement in a timely fashion.
Lyfe Medical Center I, LLC Partnership Agreement
On April 9, 2021, we entered into a partnership agreement (the “Lyfe Agreement”) with Lyfe Medical Center I, LLC (“Lyfe”) in connection with Lyfe’s intention to establish an INVO Center in the Bay Area of California (the “Bay Area Clinic”). Pursuant to the Lyfe Agreement, we will provide embryology laboratory services in connection with the IVC procedure and other fertility-related treatments (the “Lab Services”) to be provided by Lyfe to its patients at the Bay Area Clinic. Under the terms of the Lyfe Agreement, we will receive 40% of the net income received by the Bay Area Clinic for the performance of the Lab Services. As of December 31, 2021, the Bay Area Clinic was not yet operational.
Results of Operations
During 2021 we believe we made substantial progress toward our commercialization goals. As one of our key objectives for the year, we set out to develop an entirely new commercial pathway for our solutions: opening jointly owned fertility centers focused on offering INVOcell and the IVC procedure to patients. We successfully accomplished this major milestone with the opening of three new centers in the latter part of the year, with the first starting in Birmingham, Alabama, followed by Atlanta, Georgia, and finally in Monterrey, Mexico. All three centers are now fully operational and treating patients. We also made key personnel additions to our operating team to support our key objectives. Our recently added marketing resources are working to enhance our branding and messaging to support both the new INVO Centers as well as our distribution partners around the world. Our dedicated team is looking to aggressively drive awareness of the INVOcell and IVC procedure to help accelerate adoption of and expand fertility care through the utilization of our technology. Going forward, we anticipate opening additional INVO Centers in key domestic and international markets. We believe we have initially identified more than 20 markets in the U.S. alone as excellent potential locations for an INVO Center. We also continue to work toward expanding our distribution efforts to promote and sell into existing fertility clinics. Beginning in 2022, we re-assumed control of the U.S. market distribution efforts with the termination of the Ferring Agreement. We have elected to sell directly ourselves (rather than through a distributor) to the existing, established fertility clinics in the U.S. market and we believe we have added the necessary resources to do so effectively.
From a market strategy perspective, our commercialization efforts continue to focus on the substantial, underserved patient population and on expanding access to advanced fertility treatments. We believe our solutions can help address the key challenges of affordability and capacity to provide care to the vast number of patients that go untreated every year. This represents the major opportunity for INVOcell and the IVC procedure it enables. While the ongoing pandemic may have delayed our progress in some markets, the fertility industry has and continues to expand, and we believe our growing volume of partners (both distributors and JVs) affords us a strong forward-looking outlook. We believe our INVO Center approach adds much needed capacity and affordability and aligns with our key mission to open access to care to the underserved.
The ART market also continues to benefit from a number of industry tailwinds, including 1) the large under-served potential patient population, 2) increasing infertility rates around the world 3) growing awareness and education of fertility treatment options, 4) a growing acceptance of fertility treatment, 5) improvements in procedure techniques and hence improvements in pregnancy success rates and 6) generally improving insurance (private and public) reimbursement trends.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $4.2 million and $1.0 million, respectively, representing an increase of $3.2 million, or 301% in the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due to recognizing the remaining $3.0 million of deferred revenue related to the termination of the Ferring Agreement.
Gross Profit
Gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4.0 million and $0.9 million, respectively. Gross margin was 97% and 91% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $9.0 million and $6.0 million, respectively, of which $2.7 million and $1.8 million, respectively, was for non-cash, stock-based compensation expense. The increase of approximately $2.9 million or 49% was primarily the result of approximately $0.9 million in increased non-cash, stock-based compensation, approximately $0.7 million in increased personnel expense, approximately $0.5 million in increased expenses related to the operations of the consolidated Georgia JV and $0.4 million in legal and startup costs related to new and potential INVO Centers.
Research and Development Expenses
We began to fund additional research and development (“R&D”) efforts in 2020 as part of our 5-day label expansion efforts. R&D expenses were $0.2 million and $0.4 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Loss from equity investment
Loss from equity investments for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $0.3 million and $0, respectively. The increase in loss is due to the investment in Alabama JV becoming operational in the third quarter of 2021. The clinic was only open for part of the period and was still in the early ramp-up phase.
Other Income
Other income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $0.2 million and $0, respectively. The increase of $0.2 million was the result of the extinguishment of our Paycheck Protection Program note and related interest being forgiven.
Interest Expense and Financing Fees
Interest expense and financing fees were for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1.3 million and $2.8 million, respectively. The decrease of approximately $1.5 million, or approximately 55%, was primarily due to an decrease in amortization of discount, debt issuance cost and interest on the 2020 Convertible Notes (see Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements) and was a non-cash related expense.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, we had unused federal net operating loss carryforwards (“NOLs”) of $25.8 million. These losses expire in various amounts at varying times beginning in 2027 with a portion carrying on indefinitely. Unless expiration occurs, these NOLs may be used to offset future taxable income and thereby reduce our income taxes otherwise payable.
We recorded a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets at December 31, 2021 and 2020 totaling $6.8 and $6.4 million, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the years ending December 31, 2021, and 2020, we had net losses of approximately $6.7 million and $8.3 million, respectively. The increase in net loss was due to increased operating expenses and interest expense, partially offset by an increase in product revenue. Approximately $4.2 million of the net loss was related to non-cash expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company had working capital of approximately $5.1 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to approximately $8.3 million as of December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s stockholder’s equity was approximately $7.3 million compared to approximately $5.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Cash used in operation for the year of 2021 was approximately $6.0 million, compared to approximately $4.8 million for the year of 2020.
During 2020, we raised approximately $13.8 million in debt and equity financings. During 2021, we received proceeds of approximately $3.7 million for the sale of common stock, we converted approximately $1.5 million of outstanding debt to equity and received approximately $0.4 million of proceeds from unit purchase option and warrant exercises. Our current plan includes opening additional INVO Centers over the next 12 months. Until we can generate a sufficient amount of cash from operations and to the extent additional funds are necessary to meet our longer-term liquidity needs and to execute our business strategy, we may need to raise additional funding, as we have done in the past, by way of debt and/or equity financings. Such additional funding may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all.
If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may have to significantly scale back our operations or delay, scale back or discontinue development of our products. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of additional debt or equity securities, it could result in dilution to our existing stockholders and increased fixed payment obligations, and these securities may have rights senior to those of our common stock. If we incur indebtedness, we could become subject to covenants that would restrict our operations, such as limitations on our ability to incur additional debt, limitations on our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Any of these events could significantly harm our business, financial condition and prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the year ended December 31:
As of December 30, 2021, we had approximately $5.7 million in cash compared to approximately $10.1 million as of December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities in 2021, was approximately $6.0 million, compared to approximately $4.8 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in net cash used in operations was primarily due to the increase in operating expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities of approximately $2.2 million was primarily related to payments to acquire equipment for and the necessary investments in our INVO Center joint ventures. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in investing activities of approximately $0.2 million was related to new molds and trademarks.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities of approximately $3.8 million was primarily related to proceeds from the sale of common stock and the exercise of unit purchase options and warrants. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities of approximately $13.8 million related to the proceeds from the 2020 Convertible Notes and our underwritten public offering.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition presented in this section is based upon our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. During the preparation of the financial statements, we are required to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate, based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, our results, which allows us to form a basis for making judgments on the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates based on variance with our assumptions and conditions. A summary of significant accounting policies is included below. Management believes that the application of these policies on a consistent basis enables us to provide useful and reliable financial information about our operating results and financial condition.
See Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a summary of significant accounting policies and the effect on our financial statements.
Stock Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation under the provisions of ASC 718-10 Share-Based Payment. This statement requires us to measure the cost of employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. That cost is recognized over the period in which the employee is required to provide service or performance goals in exchange for the award, which is usually immediate but sometimes over a vesting period. Warrants granted to non-employees are recorded as an expense over the requisite service period based on the grant date and the estimated fair value of the grant, which is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue on arrangements in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. The core principle of ASC 606 is to recognize revenues when promised goods or services are transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled for those goods or services ASC 606 requires companies to assess their contracts to determine the timing and amount of revenue to recognize under the new revenue standard. The model has a five-step approach:
1. Identify the contract with the customer.
2. Identify the performance obligations in the contract.
3. Determine the total transaction price.
4. Allocate the total transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract.
5. Recognize as revenue when (or as) each performance obligation is satisfied.
Variable Interest Entities
Our consolidated financial statements include the accounts of INVO Bioscience, Inc., its wholly owned subsidiaries, and variable interest entities (“VIE”), where we are the primary beneficiary under the provisions of ASC 810, Consolidation (“ASC 810”). A VIE must be consolidated by its primary beneficiary when, along with its affiliates and agents, the primary beneficiary has both: (i) the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance; and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive the benefits of the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. We reconsider whether an entity is still a VIE only upon certain triggering events and continually assesses its consolidated VIEs to determine if it continues to be the primary beneficiary.
Equity Method Investments
Investments in unconsolidated affiliates in which we exert significant influence but do not control or otherwise consolidate are accounted for using the equity method. Equity method investments are initially recorded at cost. These investments are included in investment in joint ventures in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. Our share of the profits and losses from these investments is reported in loss from equity method investment in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations. Management monitors its investments for other-than-temporary impairment by considering factors such as current economic and market conditions and the operating performance of the investees and records reductions in carrying values when necessary.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
None.