ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (this “MD&A”) has been prepared based on information known to management as of March 11, 2022. This MD&A is intended to help the reader understand the consolidated audited financial statements of the Company.
Overview
Assure is a best-in-class provider of outsourced intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (“IONM”) and an emerging provider of remote neurology services that help make surgeries safer. The Company delivers a turnkey suite of clinical and operational services to support surgeons and medical facilities during invasive procedures. This includes scheduling of the interoperative neurophysiologist (“INP”) and supervising practitioner, real time monitoring, patient advocacy and subsequent billing for the services. IONM has been well established as a standard of care and risk mitigation tool for various surgical verticals such as neurosurgery, spine, cardiovascular, orthopedic, ear, nose, and throat, and other surgical procures that place the nervous system at risk.
In 2021, Assure provided IONM services for approximately 258 surgeons in 150 hospitals and surgery centers located in: Arizona, Colorado, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Texas and Utah. Our continued geographic expansion initiatives, including facility-wide outsourcing agreements with medical facilities and hospital networks, coupled with the surgical vertical expansion efforts, extending the Company’s reach into remote neurology services and selective acquisitions are expected to generate substantial growth opportunities going forward. In the future, it may be necessary for us to raise additional funds for the continuing development of our business plan.
The Company has financed its cash requirements primarily from revenues generated from its services, by utilizing debt facilities and from the sale of common stock.
See “Item 1. Business” for a complete description of our business.
COVID-19
Our business and results of operations have been, and continues to be, adversely affected by the global COVID-19 pandemic and related events and we expect its impact to continue. The impact to date has included periods of significant volatility in various markets and industries, including the healthcare industry. The volatility has had, and we anticipate it will continue to have, an adverse effect on our customers and on our business, financial condition and results of operations, and may result in an impairment of our long-lived assets, including goodwill, increased credit losses and impairments of investments in other companies. In particular, the healthcare industry, hospitals and providers of elective procedures have been and may continue to be impacted by the pandemic and/or other events beyond our control, and further volatility could have an additional negative impact on these industries, customers, and our business. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic and, to a lesser extent, the impact on other industries, including automotive, electronics and real estate, increased fuel costs, U.S. restrictions on trade, and transitory inflation have impacted and may continue to impact the financial conditions of our customers and the patients they serve.
In addition, actions by United States federal, state and foreign governments to address the COVID-19 pandemic, including travel bans, stay-at-home orders and school, business and entertainment venue closures, also had and may continue to have a significant adverse effect on the markets in which we conduct our businesses. COVID-19 poses the risk that our workforce, suppliers, and other partners may be prevented from conducting normal business activities for an extended period of time, including due to shutdowns or stay-at-home orders that may be requested or mandated by governmental authorities. We have implemented policies to allow our employees to work remotely as a result of the pandemic as we reviewed processes related to workplace safety, including social distancing and sanitation practices recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The COVID-19 pandemic could also cause delays in acquiring new customers and executing renewals and could also impact our business as consumer behavior changes in response to the pandemic.
Since the start of the second quarter of 2021, there has been increased availability and administration of vaccines against COVID-19, as well as an easing of restrictions on social, business, travel, and government activities and functions, including healthcare and elective surgeries, and we have experienced a gradual resumption of economic activities in our industries. On the other hand, infection rates continue to fluctuate in various regions and new strains of the virus, including the Delta variant, remain a risk, which may give rise to implementation of restrictions in the geographic areas that we serve. In addition, there are ongoing global impacts resulting from the pandemic, including disruption of the supply chains,
product shortages, increased delivery costs, increased governmental regulation, strains on healthcare systems, and delays in shipments, product development, technology launches and facility access.
We have been closely monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our business, including legislation to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 such as the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act which was enacted in March 2020, and the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 which was enacted in March 2021. Although a significant portion of our anticipated revenue for 2021 is derived from fixed-fee and minimum-guarantee arrangements, primarily from large, well-capitalized customers which we believe somewhat mitigates the risks to our business, our per-unit and variable-fee based revenue will continue to be susceptible to the volatility, supply chain disruptions, microchip shortages and potential market downturns induced by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The full extent of the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s operational and financial performance is uncertain and will depend on many factors outside the Company’s control, including, without limitation, the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic; the availability, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines; the spread of new variants of COVID-19; the continued and renewed imposition of protective public safety measures; the impact of COVID-19 on integration of acquisitions, expansion plans, implementation of telemedicine, restrictions on elective procedures, delays in payor remittance and increased regulations; and the impact of the pandemic on the global economy and demand for consumer products. Although we are unable to predict the full impact and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, we are actively managing our financial expenditures in response to continued uncertainty. Further discussion of the potential impacts on our business from the COVID-19 pandemic is provided under Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors of this Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table provides selected financial information from the condensed consolidated financial statements of income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. All dollar amounts set forth in the table below are expressed thousands of dollars, except share and per share amounts.
Revenue
Total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $29.2 million and $3.5 million, respectively, net of implicit price concessions. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recorded an allowance for implicit price
concessions of $7.4 million and $27.3 million, respectively. The 2020 price concession was primarily related to a significant decline in the estimated revenue accrual rate based upon updated cash collection rates.
Technical and professional service revenue is recognized in the period in which IONM services are rendered, at net realizable amounts due from third party payors when collections are reasonably assured and can be estimated. The majority of the Company’s services are rendered on an out-of-network basis and billed to third-party insurers. We estimate out-of-network technical and professional revenue per case based upon our historical cash collection rates from private health insurance carriers. Our revenue estimation process for out-of-network revenue is based on the collection experience from insurance cases that are between 1-24 months old as management believes the more recent collection experience is more indicative of future per case collection rates.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Assure managed approximately 17,400 cases compared to approximately 9,900 cases in the same period in the prior year, a 76% increase in managed case volume The increase is primarily related to organic sales growth in new markets such as Arizona, Nebraska and Nevada, the acquisition of Sentry on April 30, 2021, and the launch of tele neurologist services during the second quarter of 2021.
Other revenue consists of revenue from managed service arrangements on a contractual basis. Revenue from services rendered is recorded after services are rendered.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 were $14.3 million compared to $7.9 million for the same period in 2020, an 81% increase. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the number of neuromonitoring cases increased 76% compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 which drove the costs of revenues increase. Cost of revenues consist primarily of the cost of our internal billing and collection department, technologist and reader wages, third-party reader fees, internal and external collection costs and medical supplies. Technologist wages and medical supplies vary with the number of neuromonitoring cases. The cost of our internal billing and collection department increased as we have ramped up this department and as the number of cases they are responsible for invoicing increases.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses were $14.8 million and $9.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase period-to-period was primarily related to higher legal fees to support our Nasdaq listing, acquisition of Sentry in April 2021 and debt financing with Centurion, increased head count as we continued to build various administrative functions including accounting, human resources and information technologies to support our planned growth. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred legal and audit expenses related to the filing of our registration statement on Form S-1 and our initial Form 10-K with the Securities and Exchange Commission which are nonrecurring expenses.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses remained consistent at $1.1 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was $1.1 million and $1.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is primarily related to the increase in ROU asset balances compared to the prior year.
Earnings (loss) from equity method investments
Assure recognizes its pro-rata share of the net loss generated by the non-wholly-owned PEs. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recognized $225 thousand of income from equity method investments compared to $1.2
million of losses for the year ended December 31, 2020. The variance is primarily associated with recording of the previously mentioned implicit price concessions which were significantly larger in 2020 than 2021.
Gain on Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness
During April 2020, the Company received an unsecured loan under the United States Small Business Administration Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) pursuant to the recently adopted Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “PPP Loan”) in the amount of $1.2 million. During November 2020, the Company filed an application for forgiveness of the PPP Loan. During December 2020, the Company was granted forgiveness of the PPP Loan. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a gain on forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $1.2 million. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021 , however, the Company received notice in the first quarter of 2022, the remaining PPP loan of approximately $1.7 million was forgiven..
Gain on extinguishment of acquisition debt
During 2019, the Company acquired Neuro-Pro Monitoring for $7 million and was funded via promissory notes with the sellers of Neuro-Pro Monitoring. The Company repaid the promissory notes during December 2020 which is resulted in a gain on extinguishment of acquisition debt of $188 thousand. There were no similar transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Accretion expense
The Company recorded non-cash accretion expense of $556 thousand and $782 thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company accretes the difference between the fair value of the convertible notes and the face value of the convertible debt over the term of the convertible note.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net was $1.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $530 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase year-over-year is primarily due to higher outstanding debt balances.
Income tax benefit
For the year ended December 31, 2021 income tax benefit was $829 thousand compared to $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company had an effective tax rate of 23.1% and 12.6% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Company’s estimated annual tax rate is impacted primarily by the amount of taxable income earned in each jurisdiction the Company operates in and permanent differences between financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis.
Financial Position, Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our cash position as of December 31, 2021 was $4.0 million compared to the December 31, 2020 cash balance of $4.4 million. Working capital was $34.1 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $17.4 million at December 31, 2020. We believe that our working capital balance and our estimated cash flows from operations during 2022 will support our operating activities and our obligations for the next 12 months. However, if we pursue continued rapid growth we do not expect our existing working capital will be sufficient and we may need to seek equity or debt financing. We rely on payments from multiple private insurers and hospital systems that have payment policies and payment cycles that vary widely and are subject to change. Because we are primarily an out-of-network biller to private insurance companies, the collection times for our claims can last in excess of 24 months. Accounts receivables outstanding greater than 24 months are fully reserved and written off.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we collected approximately $14.3 million of cash from operations compared to collecting approximately $13.8 million in the same prior year period. As of December 31, 2021, accounts receivable, which are recorded net of implicit price concessions, was $27.8 million compared to $15.0 million at December 31, 2020.
The increase in our accounts receivable balance during 2021 is primarily due organic growth as we enter new markets, the impact of M&A, specifically the acquisition of Sentry in 2021 and the launch of our in-house tele neurology services. When we enter new markets, we experience a time lag in credentialling with payors on average of four months. We experienced similar delays with the launch of our tele neurology services which began in the second quarter 2021. We received $308 thousand in cash distributions from the PE entities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $558 thousand received for the same prior year period.
We financed our operations primarily from revenues generated from services rendered and through equity and debt financings. Our cash balance and projected cash flows from operations are expected to meet fund our current obligations and planned operating activities for the next 12 months. During November 2021, we completed an $4.75 million equity financing. See Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements for a complete discussion.
Cash used in operating activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 was $13.4 million compared to $3.2 million for the same period in the preceding year. Cash was used to fund operations and to fund our growth strategy.
Cash provided by investing activities of $1 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related the PE distributions of $308, offset by payments related to the Sentry acquisition of $307. Cash used in investing activities of $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to payments against the Neuro-Pro acquisition partially offset by the distributions received from the PEs.
Cash provided by financing activities of $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to $10.4 million of net proceeds from the debenture, $1.7 million of proceeds from the Payroll Protection Program loan, and $5.1 million in proceeds from common stock issuances, offset by $4.1 million payments of bank debt. Cash provided by financing activities of $15.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to $9.6 million received from equity financings, $7.8 million of proceeds from our bank promissory note, line of credit, the term loan and issuance of convertible debentures, offset by $2.4 million of payments to the bank promissory note and line of credit.
Our near-term cash requirements relate primarily to payroll expenses, trade payables, debt payments, capital lease payments, and general corporate obligations.
We have receivables from equity investments in PEs and other entities that are due and payable upon those entities collecting on their own accounts receivable. To the extent that these entities are unable to collect on their accounts receivable or there is an impairment in the valuation of those accounts receivable, the Company will need to reduce its related party receivables and/or its equity investments in the PEs.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP. Application of GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes and within this MD&A. We consider our most important accounting policies that require significant estimates and management judgment to be those policies with respect to revenue, accounts receivable and income taxes, which are discussed below. Our other significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 2, “Basis of Presentation” and Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
We continually evaluate the accounting policies and estimates used to prepare the consolidated financial statements. In general, our estimates are based on historical experience, evaluation of current trends, information from third-party professionals and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the known facts and circumstances. Estimates can require a significant amount of judgment and a different set of assumptions could result in material changes to our reported results.
Revenue Recognition and Collection Cycle
The Company recognizes revenue primarily from fees for IONM services provided. Revenue is recognized at a point in time upon satisfaction of the Company’s performance obligation to a customer, which is at the time of service. Revenue is based on the Company’s best estimate of the transaction price the Company expects to receive in exchange for the services rendered. Our estimate of the transaction price includes estimates of price concessions for such items as contractual allowances from third-party payors, potential adjustments that may arise from payment, and uncollectible amounts.
The Company performs a collection analysis for out-of-network billings to private insurance companies and adjusts its estimated transaction price if the collection rate is different from the amount recorded in previous periods. Historically, this analysis is performed quarterly.
The cash collection cycles of the Company are protracted due to the majority of its revenue being billed to third-party commercial insurance payers on an out-of-network basis. The collection cycle for IONM to out-of-network payers may require an extended period to maximize reimbursement on claims, which results in accounts receivable growth tied to the Company’s overall growth in technical and professional service revenues. The collection cycle may consist of multiple payments from out-of-network private insurance payers, as the collection process entails multiple rounds of denials, underpayments, appeals and negotiations as part of the process to maximize the reimbursement yield on claims. Based on the Company’s historical experience, claims generally become uncollectible once they are aged greater than 24 months; as such, included in the Company’s allowance for implicit price concessions is an estimate of the likelihood that a portion of the Company’s accounts receivable may become uncollectible due to age. The Company continues collection efforts on claims aged over 24 months. Collections on claims are recorded as revenue in the period received as such collections represent a subsequent change to the initial estimation of the transaction price.
Technical and professional service revenue
Technical and professional service revenue is recognized at a point in time in which performance obligations are satisfied at the amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled. Performance obligations are satisfied when IONM services are rendered. The majority of the Company’s services are rendered on an out-of-network basis and billed to third party commercial insurers. Since allowable charges for services rendered out-of-network are not explicitly identified in the contract, the Company determines the transaction price based on standard charges for services provided, reduced by an estimate of contractual adjustments and implicit price concessions based on evaluating the payor mix, historical settlements and payment data for payor types and current economic conditions to calculate an appropriate net realizable value for revenue and accounts receivable. These estimates are subject to ongoing monitoring and adjustment based on actual experience with final settlements and collections and management revises its revenue estimates as necessary in subsequent periods.
For services rendered to patients that have insurance coverage and that the Company has an in-network contract with, the Company.
Other revenue
The Company recognizes revenue from managed service arrangements on a contractual basis. Revenue is recorded when the Company has completed its performance obligations, which is the time of service.
Income Taxes
The Company must make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments are used in the calculation of tax credits, tax benefits, tax deductions, and in the calculation of certain deferred taxes and tax liabilities. Significant changes to these estimates may result in an increase or decrease to the Company’s tax provision in a subsequent period.
The provision for income taxes was determined using the asset and liability method prescribed by GAAP. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes. If and when it is determined that a deferred tax asset will not be realized for its full amount, we will recognize and record a valuation allowance with a corresponding charge to earnings. The calculation of the current tax liability involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws and regulations and in determining the liability for tax positions, if any, taken on the Company’s tax returns in accordance with authoritative guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding new accounting pronouncements that were issued or became effective during the year ended December 31, 2021 that had, or are expected to have, a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or financial statement disclosures, see the “Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements” and “Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted” sections of Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report.
Subsequent Events
As of February 7, 2022, the Company voluntarily delisted from the TSX-V.
During January 2022, the Company received notice that its Paycheck Protection Plan loan in the amount of $1.7 million was forgiven.