ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto in Item 8, “Financial Statements,” in Part II of this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which are based on our assumptions about the future of our business. Our actual results will likely differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements. Please read “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” for additional information regarding forward-looking statements used in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are an operator of professional communities with a focus on diversity, employment, education and training. We use the term “diversity” (or “diverse”) to describe communities, or “affinities,” that are distinct based on a wide array of criteria, including ethnic, national, cultural, racial, religious or gender classification. We serve a variety of such communities, including Women, Hispanic-Americans, African-Americans, Asian-Americans, Disabled, Military Professionals, and Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBTQ+).
We currently operate in three business segments. PDN Network, our primary business segment, includes online professional job seeking communities with career resources tailored to the needs of various diverse cultural groups and employers looking to hire members of such groups. Our secondary business segment consists of the NAPW Network, a women-only professional networking organization. Our third business segment consists of RemoteMore, which connects companies with reliable, cost-efficient developers with less effort and friction, and empowers software developers to get meaningful jobs regardless of their location.
We believe that the combination of our solutions allows us to approach recruiting and professional networking in a unique way and thus create enhanced value for our members and customers by:
● Helping employers address their workforce diversity needs by connecting them with the right candidates from our diverse job seeking communities such as African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, Veterans, individuals with disabilities and members of the gay community (with the ability to roll out to our other affinities);
● Providing a robust online and in-person network for our women members to make professional and personal connections; and
● Connecting companies with reliable, cost-efficient developers to meet their software needs.
Sources of Revenue
We generate revenue from (i) paid membership subscriptions and related services, (ii) recruitment services, (iii) contracted software development, and (iv) consumer advertising and consumer marketing solutions. The following table sets forth our revenues from each significant product as a percentage of total revenue for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparison of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
Membership Fees and Related Services. We offer paid membership subscriptions through our NAPW Network, a women-only professional networking organization, operated by our wholly-owned subsidiary. Members gain access to networking opportunities through a members-only website at www.iawomen.com and “virtual” events which occur in a webcast setting as well as through in-person networking at approximately over a 100 local chapters nationwide, additional career and networking events such as the National Networking Summit Series, Power Networking Events and the PDN Network events. NAPW members also receive ancillary (non-networking) benefits such as educational discounts, shopping, and other membership perks. The basic package is the Initiator level, which provides online benefits only. Upgrades to an Innovator membership include the Initiator benefits as well as membership in local chapters, and access to live in-person events. The most comprehensive level, the Influencer, provides all the aforementioned benefits plus admission to exclusive “live” events and expanded opportunities for marketing and promotion, including the creation and distribution of a press release, which is prepared by professional writers and sent over major newswires. Additionally, all memberships offer educational programs with discounts or at no cost, based on the membership level. NAPW Membership is renewable and fees are payable on an annual or monthly basis, with the first fee payable at the commencement of the membership. We offer to new purchasers of our NAPW memberships the opportunity to purchase a commemorative wall plaque at the time of purchase. They may purchase up to two plaques at that time.
Recruitment Services. We provide recruitment services through PDN Network to medium and large employers seeking to diversify their employment ranks. Our recruitment services include recruitment advertising, job postings, contingent search and hiring, and career fairs. The majority of recruitment services revenue comes from job recruitment advertising. We also offer to businesses subject to the regulations and requirements of the Equal Employment Opportunity Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program (“OFCCP”) our OFCCP compliance product, which combines diversity recruitment advertising with job postings and compliance services.
Contracted software Development. RemoteMore generates revenue by providing contracted programmers to assist customers with their software solutions through customized software development.
Consumer Advertising and Marketing Solutions. We work with partner organizations to provide them with integrated job boards on their websites which offer their members or customers the ability to post recruitment advertising and job openings. We generate revenue from fees charged for those postings.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of costs of producing job fair and other events, revenue sharing with partner organizations, costs of web hosting and operating our websites for the PDN Network. Costs of hosting member conferences and local chapter meetings are also included in the cost of revenue for NAPW Network. Costs of paying outside developers are included in the cost of revenue for RemoteMore.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Total Revenues
The following tables set forth our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Total revenues increased approximately $1,642,000, or 36.8%, from $4,457,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $6,099,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in revenues was primarily attributable to an approximately $ 1,685,000, or 56.9%, increase in recruitment service revenues from the PDN Network and to a lesser extent, approximately $302,000 related to contract revenue from RemoteMore for which there was no comparable activity in the prior year, partially offset by approximately $366,000, or 27.1%, decline in membership fees and related services related to the NAPW Network.
Revenues by Segment
The following table sets forth each operating segment’s revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our PDN Network generated approximately $4,810,000 in revenues compared to $3,106,000 in revenues during the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of approximately$1,704,000 or 54.9%. The increase in revenues was primarily due to new sales collaborations, higher new client acquisitions and a significant increase in diversity recruitment initiatives by our clients resulting in approximately a $1,406,000 increase in corporate sales over the same period in the prior year. Also contributing to the increase was continued improvements in our e-commerce platform resulting in an approximate $239,000 increase over the same period in the prior year. Event and partner sales revenue combined for an increase of approximately $56,000 over the same period in the prior year.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, NAPW Network revenues were approximately $986,000, compared to revenues of $1,351,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of approximately $365,000 or 27.0%. The decrease in revenues was primarily due to an approximate $372,000 decrease in legacy membership and the continued effects of COVID-19 causing new membership enrollment to decline throughout 2021, as compared to the same period in the prior year. Retention rates for new members that have enrolled in 2021 has increased as compared to the same period in prior year. We believe that the membership services that we provide to our customers turned into a discretionary spending item during 2021 and the services that we provide were postponed by the consumer as a result of the financial and economic impact of COVID-19.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, RemoteMore revenue was approximately $302,000, for which there was no comparable revenue in the prior year.
Costs and Expenses
The following tables set forth our costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Total costs and expenses decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 to approximately $8,989,000 compared to $9,301,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The approximate $312,000, or 3.4%, decrease in costs and expenses was primarily attributable to the following:
● The increase in cost of revenues of approximately $737,000, as compared to the prior year, is predominately a result of an increase of approximately $272,000 of costs directly related to driving increased revenues, contractor costs of approximately, $287,000 related to RemoteMore, for which there were no comparable costs in the prior year, and approximately $177,000 related to payroll related costs.
● The increase in sales and marketing of approximately $542,000, as compared to the prior year, is a result of increases in marketing and advertising costs of approximately $200,000, payroll related costs of approximately $183,000, employee and member commissions of approximately $87,000 and agency commissions of approximately $48,000.
● The decrease in general and administrative expenses of approximately $1,806,000, as compared to the prior year, is predominately associated with decreased litigation settlement costs of approximately $1,821,000. Also contributing to the decrease were reductions of insurance costs of approximately $152,000, bad debt expense of approximately $44,000, and property rent costs of approximately $109,000. Partially offsetting the general and administrative expense decrease were increases of approximately $104,000 in miscellaneous state taxes, approximately $73,000 in payroll related costs, and approximately $114,000 in other related costs.
● The increase in depreciation and amortization of approximately $215,000, as compared to the prior year, is predominately due to $270,000 of amortization related to RemoteMore, for which there is no comparable activity in 2020. Partially offsetting the increase was a reduction in amortization related to capitalized technology of approximately $41,000.
Costs and Expenses by Segment
The following table sets forth each operating segment’s costs and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Costs and expenses related to our PDN Network increased approximately $833,000 or 28.6%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases of approximately $463,000 in payroll related costs, $253,000 related to sales and marketing expenses, $141,000 related to employee and agency commissions, $77,000 related to revenue sharing, $76,000 related to legal expenses and $61,000 related to the use of third-party software. Partially offsetting the period-to-period increase were reimbursed expenses from NAPW of approximately $113,000, and reductions of bad debt expense of approximately $49,000 and property rent expenses of $109,000.
Costs and expenses related to the NAPW Network decreased approximately $59,000, or 3.1%, in Other during the year ended December 31 2021, as compared to the prior year. The decrease was predominately related to a decrease in payroll related costs of approximately $251,000 due to restructuring of the sales force, and litigation and settlement costs of approximately $49,000. Partially offsetting the decrease were increases in sales related costs incurred to drive revenues of approximately $137,000 and reimbursed expenses to PDN of approximately $113,000.
Cost and expenses related to RemoteMore was approximately $655,000 in 2021 consisting of contractor costs of approximately $287,000, amortization of intangibles of approximately $270,000, and other operating costs of approximately $98,000. There were no comparable costs in the prior year.
Corporate overhead expenses decreased approximately $1,741,000 or 38.7% during the year December 31, 2021, as compared to the prior year, primarily as a result of a decrease of approximately $1,217,000 in litigation settlement reserves, $645,000 in reduced legal fees and approximately $170,000 in reduced insurance costs, which was partially offset by approximately $210,000 in increased administrative salaries and benefits expense and an increase of $104,000 in state taxes, as compared to the prior year.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $8,000, compared to other income of approximately $652,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in other income during the current year was primarily due to the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan forgiveness we received from the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) in the fourth quarter of 2020, of which we received total proceeds of $651,077 from the SBA. There was no comparable transaction in 2021.
Income Tax Benefit
During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, we recorded a benefit for income tax of $22,000 and $35,000. The decrease in income tax benefit during the current period was primarily due to a reduction in our deferred tax liabilities in the current year.
Discontinued Operations
In March 2020, our Board of Directors decided to suspend all operations in China. The results for operations of China are presented in the consolidated statements of operation and comprehensive loss as loss from discontinued operations.
The following table presents results from discontinued operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net loss from Continuing Operations
The following table sets forth each operating segment’s net income or loss for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparison is not necessarily indicative of future results.
Consolidated Net Loss from Continuing Operations. As the result of the factors discussed above, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of approximately $2,861,000 from continuing operations, a decrease of approximately $1,297,000 or 31.2% from a net loss of $4,158,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
Adjusted EBITDA
We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides a meaningful representation of our operating performance that provides useful information to investors regarding our financial condition and results of operations. Adjusted EBITDA is commonly used by financial analysts and others to measure operating performance. Furthermore, management believes that this non-GAAP financial measure may provide investors with additional meaningful comparisons between current results and results of prior periods as they are expected to be reflective of our core ongoing business. However, while we consider Adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure of operating performance, Adjusted EBITDA and other non-GAAP financial measures have limitations, and investors should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Further, Adjusted EBITDA, as we define it, may not be comparable to EBITDA, or similarly titled measures, as defined by other companies.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net loss from continuing operations to Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the most directly comparable GAAP measure as reported in the consolidated financial statements:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $3,403,000 compared to cash and cash equivalents of $2,118,000 at December 31, 2020. Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, including net proceeds from the issuances of common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had a working capital of approximately $418,000, compared to a working capital deficit of approximately $1,156,000 as of December 31, 2020. We had an accumulated deficit of approximately $95,780,000 at December 31, 2021. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated a net loss from continuing operations of approximately $2,861,000 and $4,158,000 and used cash from continuing operations of approximately $1,841,000 and $3,337,000.
During 2021, we continued our focus on cost cutting initiatives on improving our overall profitability and shareholder value through new sales and marking initiatives and through business collaborations. However, we have continued to generate negative cash flows from operations, and we expect to incur net losses for the short-term foreseeable future. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on our ability to further implement our business plan of increased sales and market share through the generation of organic growth in revenues from our existing operating segments, raise capital, and make strategic acquisitions. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
In January 2021, the Company issued 150,000 shares of the Company’s common stock to White Winston as a result of a settlement agreement.
On February 1, 2021, we entered into a private placement with Ms. Yiran Gu, in which the Company sold 500,000 shares of its common stock at a price per share of $2.00 for gross proceeds of $1,000,000.
On July 9, 2021, we closed a registered direct offering, pursuant to which certain institutional accredited investors purchased 1,470,588 shares of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share, at a per share price equal to $1.70 for gross proceeds of $2,499,999.60.
On September 22, 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement with Cosmic Forward Limited, in which the Company sold 948,767 shares of its common stock at a price per share of $1.05 for gross proceeds of approximately $1,000,000.
In March 2021, we entered into a stock purchase agreement (“Stock Purchase Agreement”) to purchase a significant equity stake in RemoteMore USA Inc. (“RemoteMore”), a Delaware corporation. On September 20, 2021, we acquired 45.62% of the outstanding shares of RemoteMore USA (“RemoteMore”) stock, as well as certain assets, including contracts in place, certain domain names and other intellectual property. Based on the significant influence that our management has over the operations and guidance of RemoteMore, we have consolidated RemoteMore’s account balances and operations in our condensed consolidated financial statements.
On January 31, 2022, the Company announced its Board of Directors had approved the repurchase of up to $2 million of its outstanding common stock from time to time on the open market or in privately negotiated transactions. The timing and amount of any shares repurchased will be determined by the Company’s management based on its evaluation of market conditions and other factors. Repurchases may also be made under a Rule 10b5-1 plan of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, which would permit shares to be repurchased when the Company might otherwise be precluded from doing so under insider trading laws. The repurchase program may be suspended or discontinued at any time in the Company’s sole discretion. Any repurchased shares will be available for use in connection with our stock plans and for other corporate purposes. Through March 28, 2022, the Company repurchased 127,326 shares at an average share price of $0.97 for total purchase price of $127,300.
While we believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $3,402,697, at December 31, 2021, and cash flow from operations may be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements for the next twelve months, beyond that time frame our available funds and cash flow from operations may not be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements without the need to increase revenues or raise capital by the issuance of common stock. There can be no assurances that our business plans and actions will be successful, that we will generate anticipated revenues, or that unforeseen circumstances similar to COVID-19 will not require additional funding sources in the future or effectuate plans to conserve liquidity. Future efforts to raise additional funds may not be successful or they may not be available on acceptable terms, if at all.
We collect membership fees generally at the commencement of the membership term or at renewal periods thereafter. The memberships we sell are for one year and we defer recognition of the revenue from membership sales and renewals and recognize it ratably over the twelve-month period. Starting January 2, 2018, we also offer a monthly membership for IAW USA for which we collect a fee on a monthly basis. Our PDN Network also sells recruitment services to employers, generally on a one-year contract basis. This revenue is also deferred and recognized over the life of the contract. Our payment terms for PDN Network customers range from 30 to 60 days. We consider the difference between the payment terms and payment receipts a result of transit time for invoice and payment processing and to date have not experienced any liquidity issues as a result of the payments extending past the specified terms. Cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of cash on deposit with banks and investments in money market funds.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers cash and cash equivalents to include all short-term, highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less.
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1,841,000. We had a net loss from continuing operations of $2,861,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, which included $175,000 in litigation settlement reserves, share-based compensation expense of $634,000 and depreciation and amortization expense of $385,000, predominately due to amortization of intangible assets related to the acquisition of RemoteMore, reduction of our merchant reserve of $380,000 and amortization of right-of-use assets of $66,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used approximately $599,000 of cash during the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting primarily of a $482,000 decrease in accounts payable, a $384,000 decrease in accounts receivable and a $96,000 decrease in prepaid expenses, which was partially offset by a $77,000 increase in accrued liabilities and a $249,000 increase in deferred revenues.
Net cash used in operating activities from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $3,337,000. We had a net loss of $4,158,000 in 2020, which included a non-cash PPP loan forgiveness of $651,077, $350,000 in litigation settlements to be paid during the first quarter of 2021, share-based compensation expense of $620,000 and depreciation and amortization expense of $170,000 and amortization of right-of-use assets of $116,000, which was partially offset by payments of lease obligations of $107,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $771,000 of cash during the year ended December 31, 2020, consisting primarily of a $834,000 decrease in accounts payable, a $285,000 decrease in accounts receivable and a $114,000 decrease in prepaid expenses, which was partially offset by a $264,000 increase in accrued liabilities and a $202,000 increase in deferred revenues.
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $1,288,000, which consisted primarily of our investment of RemoteMore of $863,000, $350,000 related to investment deposits, $50,000 in costs associated with internally developed technology and $25,000 associated with the purchases of computer equipment. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations was $65,000 and consisted of investment deposits.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $4,445,000, which reflected proceeds from the sale of common stock as described above.
Net cash provided by financing activities from continuing operations during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $4,928,000, consisting of $4,277,000 in gross proceeds from the sale of our common stock and $651,077 from a short-term PPP loan.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Since inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet activities as defined in Regulation S-K Item 303(a)(4).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to exercise considerable judgment with respect to establishing sound accounting policies and in making estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of our assets and liabilities, our recognition of revenues and expenses, and disclosure of commitments and contingencies at the date of the consolidated financial statements.
We base our estimates on our historical experience, knowledge of our business and industry, current and expected economic conditions, the attributes of our products, the regulatory environment, and in certain cases, the results of outside appraisals. We periodically re-evaluate our estimates and assumptions with respect to these judgments and modify our approach when circumstances indicate that modifications are necessary. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
While we believe that the factors we evaluate provide us with a meaningful basis for establishing and applying sound accounting policies, we cannot guarantee that the results will always be accurate. Since the determination of these estimates requires the exercise of judgment, actual results could differ from such estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included at the end of this Annual Report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid you in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and affect the more significant judgments and estimates that we use in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accounts Receivable
Our policy is to reserve for uncollectible accounts based on our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our existing accounts receivable. We periodically review our accounts receivable to determine whether an allowance for doubtful accounts is necessary based on an analysis of past due accounts and other factors that may indicate that the realization of an account may be in doubt. Account balances deemed to be uncollectible are charged to the allowance after all means of collection have been exhausted and the potential for recovery is considered remote.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
The Company accounts for goodwill and intangible assets in accordance with ASC 350, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”). ASC 350 requires that goodwill and other intangibles with indefinite lives should be tested for impairment annually or on an interim basis if events or circumstances indicate that the fair value of an asset has decreased below its carrying value.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis (December 31 for the Company) and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. The Company considers its market capitalization and the carrying value of its assets and liabilities, including goodwill, when performing its goodwill impairment test.
When conducting its annual goodwill impairment assessment, the Company initially performs a qualitative evaluation of whether it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired. If it is determined by a qualitative evaluation that it is more likely than not that goodwill is impaired, the Company then compares the fair value of the Company’s reporting unit to its carrying or book value. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is not impaired and the Company is not required to perform further testing. If the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the Company will measure any goodwill impairment losses as the amount by which the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Capitalized Technology Costs
We account for capitalized technology costs in accordance with ASC 350-40, Internal-Use Software (“ASC 350-40”). In accordance with ASC 350-40, we capitalize certain external and internal computer software costs incurred during the application development stage. The application development stage generally includes software design and configuration, coding, testing and installation activities. Training and maintenance costs are expensed as incurred, while upgrades and enhancements are capitalized if it is probable that such expenditures will result in additional functionality. Capitalized software costs are amortized over the estimated useful lives of the software assets on a straight-line basis, generally not exceeding three years.
Business Combinations
ASC 805, Business Combinations (“ASC 805”), applies the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations to all acquisitions where the acquirer gains a controlling interest, regardless of whether consideration was exchanged. ASC 805 establishes principles and requirements for how the acquirer : a) recognizes and measures in its financial statements the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree; b) recognizes and measures the goodwill acquired in the business combination or a gain from a bargain purchase; and c) determines what information to disclose to enable users of the financial statements to evaluate the nature and financial effects of the business combination. Accounting for acquisitions requires the Company to recognize, separately from goodwill, the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their acquisition-date fair values. Goodwill as of the acquisition date is measured as the excess of consideration transferred and the net of the acquisition-date fair values of the assets acquired and the liabilities assumed. While the Company uses its best estimates and assumptions to accurately value assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date, the estimates are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, the Company may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the values of assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Revenue Recognition
Our principal sources of revenue are recruitment revenue, consumer marketing and consumer advertising revenue, membership subscription fees, and product sales. Recruitment revenue includes revenue recognized from direct sales to customers for recruitment services and events, as well as revenue from our direct ecommerce sales. Revenues from recruitment services are recognized when the services are performed, evidence of an arrangement exists, the fee is fixed or determinable and collectability is probable. Our recruitment revenue is derived from agreements through single and multiple job postings, recruitment media, talent recruitment communities, basic and premier corporate memberships, hiring campaign marketing and advertising, e-newsletter marketing and research and outreach services.
Consumer marketing and consumer advertising revenue is recognized either based upon a fixed fee for revenue sharing agreements in which payment is required at the time of posting or billed based upon the number of impressions (the number of times an advertisement is displayed) recorded on the websites as specified in the customer agreement.
Revenue generated from NAPW Network membership subscriptions is recognized ratably over the 12-month membership period, although members pay their annual fees at the commencement of the membership period. We also offer a monthly membership for which we collect fees on a monthly basis and we recognize revenue in the same month as the fees are collected. Revenue from related membership services is derived from fees for development and set-up of a member’s personal on-line profile and/or press release announcements. Fees related to these services are recognized as revenue at the time the on-line profile is complete and press release is distributed.
Revenues generated from RemoteMore consist of contracts entered into to provide customers with software solutions and are recognized in the month work is performed.
Revenue Concentration
We, in alliance with another company, partners to sell two recruitment services products. This alliance member builds, hosts, and manages our job boards and website. This alliance member also bills customers, collects fees, and provides customer services. We derive 25% of our recruitment services revenue from this alliance relationship.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K, including Part I, Item 1. “Business” and Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements concern expectations, beliefs, projections, plans and strategies, anticipated events or trends and similar expressions concerning matters that are not historical facts. Specifically, this Annual Report contains forward-looking statements regarding:
● our beliefs regarding our ability to capture and capitalize on market trends;
● our expectations on the future growth and financial health of the online diversity recruitment industry and the industry participants, and the drivers of such growth;
● our expectations regarding continued membership growth;
● our beliefs regarding the increased value derived from the synergies among our segments; and
● our beliefs regarding our liquidity requirements, the availability of cash and capital resources to fund our business in the future and intended use of liquidity.
These forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties and assumptions. We wish to caution readers that certain important factors may have affected and could in the future affect our actual results and could cause actual results to differ significantly from those expressed in any forward-looking statement. The most important factors that could prevent us from achieving our goals, and cause the assumptions underlying forward-looking statements and the actual results to differ materially from those expressed in or implied by those forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the following:
● our ability to raise funds in the future to support operations failure to realize synergies and other financial benefits from mergers and acquisitions within expected time frames, including increases in expected costs or difficulties related to integration of merger and acquisition partners;
● inability to identify and successfully negotiate and complete additional combinations with potential merger or acquisition partners or to successfully integrate such businesses;
● our history of operating losses;
● our limited operating history in a new and unproven market;
● increasing competition in the market for online professional networks;
● our ability to comply with increasing governmental regulation and other legal obligations related to privacy;
● our ability to adapt to changing technologies and social trends and preferences;
● our ability to attract and retain a sales and marketing team, management and other key personnel and the ability of that team to execute on the Company’s business strategies and plans;
● our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection for our intellectual property;
● any future litigation regarding our business, including intellectual property claims;
● general and economic business conditions; and
● legal and regulatory developments.
Additional factors, risks and uncertainties that may affect our results, are discussed in Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report beginning on page 13, and in our subsequent filings with the SEC. You should consider these factors, risks and uncertainties when evaluating any forward-looking statements and you should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statement. Forward-looking statements represent our views as of the date of this Annual Report, and we undertake no obligation to update any forward-looking statement to reflect the impact of circumstances or events that arise after the date of this Annual Report.