ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our future results of operations or financial condition, business strategy and plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” herein for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are an innovative biotechnology company developing transformative allogeneic cell therapies to create products for the treatment of both solid tumor and hematological malignancies with significant unmet medical need. We have created a comprehensive allogeneic cell therapy platform that includes industry-leading induced pluripotent stem cells, or iPSCs, differentiation know-how to generate immune effector cells from iPSCs, or iPSC- derived cells, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, or CRISPR, mediated precision gene editing that allows us to incorporate multiple transgenes and remove target genes intended to optimize cell product performance, sophisticated protein engineering capabilities to develop proprietary next generation chimeric antigen receptors, or CARs, our proprietary Allo-EvasionTM technology intended to prevent rejection of our cell products by the host immune system, and cutting edge manufacturing capabilities intended to minimize product development and supply risk. We believe that these vertically integrated capabilities will allow us to further expand our existing pipeline and develop therapeutics from iPSC-derived natural killer cells, or iNK cells, or iNK, and iPSC-derived T cells, or iT cells, or iT, that may provide enhanced clinical outcomes compared to available therapeutic options. Our vision is to become a premier fully integrated biotechnology company by developing and ultimately commercializing off-the-shelf allogeneic cell therapies that dramatically and positively transform the lives of patients suffering from life-threatening cancers. To achieve our vision, we have assembled a world-class team whose members collectively have decades of experience in cell therapy and drug development, manufacturing, and commercialization.
We were formed in 2018 as Century Therapeutics, Inc., or Prior Century. In 2019, in connection with our investment from Bayer Healthcare LLC, or Bayer, Prior Century contributed substantially all of its operating assets and cash to a newly formed entity, Century Therapeutics, LLC, or the LLC Entity. We refer to this transaction as the 2019 Reorganization. The 2019 Reorganization was accounted for as an asset acquisition under US Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, and as a result we recorded a one-time non-cash charge in the amount of $225.9 million which represented the fair value of the contributed in-process research and development, or IPR&D, of Prior Century. The IPR&D asset acquired was Prior Century’s comprehensive allogeneic cell therapy platform.
Until February 2021, our business was operated through the LLC Entity. In February 2021, in connection with the sale of 24,721,999 shares of our Series C preferred stock, or the Series C Financing, the LLC Entity converted from a Delaware limited liability company to a Delaware C corporation. Upon completion of this conversion, Prior Century, whose only significant asset was its equity investment in LLC, merged with the C corporation, and in connection therewith the C corporation changed its name to “Century Therapeutics, Inc.” We refer to these transactions as the 2021 Reorganization.
Our operations to date have been limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, conducting discovery and research activities, filing patent applications, identifying potential product candidates and preparing to initiate and conduct clinical trials, undertaking preclinical studies and in-licensing intellectual property. All of our programs are currently in the development stage, and we do not have any products approved for sale. Since our inception, we have incurred net losses each year. We had an accumulated deficit of $388.2 million as of December 31, 2021. Substantially all of our losses have resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our research and development programs, the acquisition of in-process research and development and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. Included in our accumulated deficit, as noted above, is a non-cash expense of $225.9 million related to the fair value of the in-process research and development of Prior Century.
In June 2021, we completed our initial public offering, or IPO, in which we issued and sold 12,132,500 shares of our common stock, at a public offering price of $20.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $221.4 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering costs of $21.2 million in the aggregate. To date, we have funded our operations from the issuance and sale of our equity securities and the receipt of payments from Bristol-Myers Squibb, in connection with our collaboration as described below, and have not generated any revenues. Since our inception, we have raised approximately $564 million in net proceeds from sales of our equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $56.4 million and investments of $302.3 million. Based on our current business plans, we believe, our cash, cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2021, together with the proceeds received from the discovery collaboration with Bristol-Myers Squibb (which was received during the first quarter of 2022), will be sufficient for us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditures requirements into 2025. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. We anticipate that our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially over the foreseeable future. The expected increase in expenses will be driven in large part by our ongoing activities, if and as we:
● continue to advance our iPSC cell therapy platforms;
● continue preclinical development of, and initiate clinical development of CNTY-101 and our other product candidates;
● seek to discover and develop additional product candidates;
● establish and validate our own clinical-scale current good manufacturing practices, or cGMP, facilities;
● seek regulatory approvals for any of our other product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● maintain, expand, protect, and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
● acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
● incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, which will require us to add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our drug development and any future commercialization efforts; and
● increase our employee headcount and related expenses to support these activities.
We are also investing early in building our capabilities in key areas of manufacturing sciences and operations, including development of our iPSC cell therapy platforms, product characterization, and process analytics from the time product candidates are in early research phases. Our investments also include scaled research solutions, scaled infrastructure, and novel technologies intended to improve efficiency, characterization, and scalability of manufacturing.
We anticipate that we will need to raise additional financing in the future to fund our operations, including funding for preclinical studies, clinical trials and the commercialization of any approved product candidates. We intend to use the proceeds from such financings to, among other uses, fund research and development of our product candidates and development programs, including our pre-clinical and clinical development of CNTY-101, CNTY-103, and CNTY-102, and as well as CNTY-104 and CNTY-106 in collaboration with Bristol-Myers Squibb. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate significant product revenue, we expect to finance our operations with our existing cash and cash equivalents, investments, any future equity or debt financings, and upfront and milestone and royalties payments, if any, received under future licenses or collaborations. We may not be able to raise additional capital on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve rapidly, and we will continue to monitor it closely. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, and clinical development timelines and plans remains uncertain and will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, including as a result of the emergence of new variants of COVID-19, such as the delta and omicron variants, and its impact on our clinical trial enrollment, trial sites, CROs, contract manufacturing organizations, and other third parties with whom we do business, as well as its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel. We have experienced modest delays in our discovery and development activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, primarily due to temporary and partial shutdowns at certain of our CROs and academic institutions that have since resumed operations, and due to governmental responses to the pandemic. The ongoing pandemic has led to the implementation of various responses, including travel restrictions, mask mandates, social distancing requirements and other public health safety measures. In response, and in compliance with rapidly changing local and state regulations, we have implemented a mandatory vaccination policy for all employees and have taken other precautionary measures, including testing of any employees displaying symptoms of COVID-19. While the vaccines have proven effective in reducing the severity and mortality of COVID-19 including the variants that have evolved to date, the overall vaccination rate in the United States may have not reached the level required for herd immunity. Certain variants of COVID-19, such as the delta and omicron variants, are proving to be more easily spread than earlier variants. The emergence of new variants, which could prove resistant to existing vaccines, could again result in major disruptions to businesses and markets worldwide. We will continue to actively monitor the situation related to COVID-19 and may take further actions that alter our operations, including those that may be required by federal, state, or local authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees and other third parties with whom we do business. The extent to which the ongoing pandemic may affect our preclinical studies, clinical trials, business, financial condition, and results of operations will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time.
License and collaboration agreements
Fujifilm Cellular Dynamics, Inc. (FCDI)
On September 18, 2018, we entered into a license agreement, or the Differentiation License, with FCDI. The Differentiation License, as amended, provides us with an exclusive license under certain patents and know-how related to human iPSC consisting of cells that are or are modifications of NK cells, T cells, dendritic cells and macrophages derived from human iPSC. In consideration for the Differentiation License, Prior Century issued 2,980,803 shares of common stock to FCDI, which were exchanged for 2,980,803 shares of common stock in connection with the Reorganization.
Also on September 18, 2018, we entered into the non-exclusive license, or the Reprogramming License, with FCDI. The Reprogramming License, as amended, provides us with a non-exclusive license under certain patents and know- how related to the reprogramming of human somatic cells to iPSCs and provide us access
to iPSC lines for clinical use. Under the Reprogramming License, we are required to make certain developmental and regulatory milestone payments as well as royalty payments upon commercialization in the low single digits. The potential development and regulatory milestone payments to be paid by us to FCDI are approximately $6 million per licensed product. In connection with the Reprogramming License, we entered into a collaboration agreement, or the FCDI Collaboration Agreement, with FCDI pursuant to which we agreed to fund research and development work at FCDI pursuant to a research plan.
On October 21, 2019, we entered into the FCDI Collaboration Agreement with FCDI, whereby FCDI provides certain services to us to develop and manufacture iPSCs and immune cells derived therefrom. Under the terms of the FCDI Collaboration Agreement, as amended, FCDI will provide services in accordance with the approved research plan and related research budget. The research plan covers the period from the date of execution of the FCDI Collaboration Agreement through March 31, 2022, with the related research budget of approximately $31.4 million.
On January 7, 2022, we and FCDI entered into a letter agreement, or the Letter Agreement, which amends each of the FCDI agreements as further discussed in Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements. Pursuant to the Letter Agreement, and in consideration for amending the FCDI Agreements, we agreed to pay to FCDI (i) an upfront payment of $10 million, (ii) a percentage of any milestone payments received by us under the Research, Collaboration and License Agreement, with Bristol-Myers Squibb, or the Collaboration Agreement, in respect of achievement of development or regulatory milestones specific to Japan, and (iii) a percentage of all royalties received by us under the Collaboration Agreement in respect of sales of products in Japan.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we made payments of $16,220 and $5,311 and incurred research and development expenses of $16,669 and $9,002, and legal fees of $83 and $52, respectively, related to the FCDI agreements, recorded within general and administrative expenses in its consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was $2,375 and $1,844 in accounts payable related to the FCDI agreements on the consolidated balance sheets.
As of December 31, 2021, we incurred $31.0 million of the $38.0 million budget under the FCDI Collaboration Agreement.
Bristol-Myers Squibb
On January 7, 2022, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb to collaborate on the research, development and commercialization of iNK and iT cell programs for hematologic malignancies and solid tumors (each a “Collaboration Program,” and each product candidate developed within such Collaboration Program, a “Development Candidate”).
Pursuant to the Collaboration Agreement, we and Bristol-Myers Squibb will initially collaborate on two Collaboration Programs and Bristol-Myers Squibb has the option to add up to two additional Collaboration Programs, for an additional fee. The initial two Collaboration Programs are focused on AML and multiple myeloma, respectively. The two additional Collaboration Programs that Bristol-Myers Squibb may elect to add to the collaboration will focus on targets chosen from a set of reserved targets or other targets selected by Bristol-Myers Squibb, which can be nominated subject to certain conditions agreed with us and outlined in the Collaboration Agreement.
Under the Collaboration Agreement, we will be responsible for generating Development Candidates for each Collaboration Program with a goal of producing Development Candidates that meet pre-specified criteria. Bristol-Myers Squibb has the option, exercisable for a specified period of time after the Development Candidate for each Collaboration Program is deemed to meet the applicable criteria, to elect to exclusively license from the Development Candidates created in each Collaboration Program for pre-clinical development, clinical development and commercialization on a worldwide basis (each a “License Option”).
Following Bristol-Myers Squibb’s exercise of the License Option with respect to a Collaboration Program, we will be responsible for performing IND-enabling studies, supporting Bristol-Myers Squibb’s preparation and submission of an IND and manufacturing of clinical supplies until completion of a proof of concept clinical trial for the relevant Development Candidates, in each case at pre-agreed rates. Bristol-Myers Squibb will be responsible for all regulatory, clinical, manufacturing (after the proof of concept clinical trial) and commercialization activities for such Development Candidates worldwide.
We have the option to co-promote with Bristol-Myers Squibb Development Candidates generated from the initial AML Collaboration Program and, if Bristol-Myers Squibb elects to expand to a fourth Collaboration Program, Development Candidates generated from the fourth Collaboration Program.
Under the terms of the Collaboration Agreement, Bristol-Myers Squibb made a non-refundable, upfront cash payment of $100 million and will pay an exercise fee upon the exercise of the License Option with respect to a Collaboration Program (each such Collaboration Program, a “Licensed Program” and product candidates developed under a Licensed Program, “Licensed Products”). With respect to each Licensed Program, Bristol-Myers Squibb will pay up to $235 million in milestone payments upon the first achievement of certain development and regulatory milestones within such Licensed Program. In addition, Bristol-Myers Squibb will pay the up to $500 million per Licensed Product in net sales-based milestone payments.
Bristol-Myers Squibb will also pay the Company tiered royalties per Licensed Product as a percentage of net sales in the high-single digits to low-teens, subject to reduction for biosimilar competition, compulsory licensing and certain third party licenses costs. If we exercise our co-promote option, such royalty percentage will be increased to low-teens to high-teens in respect of the sales of the co-promoted Licensed Products in the United States. The royalty term shall terminate on a Licensed Product-by-Licensed Product and country-by-country basis on the latest of (i) the twelve (12) year anniversary of the first commercial sale of such Licensed Product in such country, (ii) the expiration of any regulatory exclusivity period that covers such Licensed Product in such country, and (iii) the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent owned by us or a jointly owned patent that covers such the Licensed Product in such country. After expiration of the applicable royalty term for a Licensed Product in a country, all licenses granted by us to Bristol-Myers Squibb for such Licensed Product in such country will be fully paid-up, royalty-free, perpetual and irrevocable.
In connection with the Collaboration Agreement, Bristol-Myers Squibb purchased 2,160,760 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $23.14, for an aggregate purchase price of $50 million.
iCELL and Distributed Bio
We also have entered into a sublicense agreement with iCELL Inc. and a master services agreement with Distributed Bio, Inc. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements.
Empirica acquisition
On June 9, 2020, we acquired certain assets of Empirica Therapeutics, or Empirica, a privately-held early-stage biotechnology company focused on the development of adoptive immunotherapies against the most aggressive and treatment-resistant forms of cancers, including glioblastoma and brain metastasis for a total purchase price of $4.7 million.
The transaction was accounted for as an asset acquisition of IPR&D. Total consideration in the acquisition was $4.7 million, consisting of cash consideration of $4.5 million and transaction expenses of $0.2 million. In addition to the purchase price, $1.5 million was deposited in escrow, or the Escrow Deposit, whereby release of the Escrow Deposit is subject to the terms of a promissory note, which provides for the funds to be released in equal installments over a three-year period related to continuing services by former Empirica shareholders who are employed by us. In July 2021, the first annual installment of $523 was released from escrow. The Escrow Deposit is recognized as an asset and the promissory note is post- acquisition compensation expense, which will be accrued over the term of the promissory note. We recorded $0.3 million compensation in research and development expense for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. For further details regarding this acquisition, see Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.
Components of operating results
Operating expenses
Research and development
To date, research and development expenses have related primarily to discovery and development of our iPSC cell therapy platform technology and product candidates and acquired in-process research and development. Research and development expenses are recognized as incurred and payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are recorded as prepaid expenses until the goods or services are received.
Research and development expenses consist of personnel-related costs, including salaries, and benefits, stock compensation expense, external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, laboratory supplies, costs to acquire and license technologies facility and other allocated expenses, including rent, depreciation, and allocated overhead costs, and other research and development expenses.
We deploy our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs for developing our iPSC cell therapy platforms, identifying and developing product candidates, and establishing manufacturing capabilities. Due to the number of ongoing projects and our ability to use resources across several projects, the vast majority of our research and development costs are not recorded on a program-specific basis. These include costs for personnel, laboratory, and other indirect facility and operating costs.
Research and development activities account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase for the foreseeable future as we expand our research and development efforts including expanding the capabilities of our iPSC cell therapy platforms, identifying product candidates, completing preclinical studies and commencing clinical trials, seeking regulatory approval of our product candidates, and incurring costs to acquire and license technologies aligned with our goal of translating iPSCs to therapies. A change in the outcome of any of these variables could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related costs, including salaries, benefits, and non-cash stock-based compensation, for our employees in executive, legal, finance, human resources, information technology, and other administrative functions, legal fees, consulting fees, recruiting costs, and facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses. Legal fees include those related to corporate and patent matters.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase over the foreseeable future to support our continued research and development activities, operations generally, future business
development opportunities, consulting fees, as well as due to the increased costs of operating as a public company.
Write-off of in-process research and development
Acquired in-process research and development assets are charged to expense at the acquisition date. In-process research and development charges for the year ended December 31, 2020 relate to the acquisition of Prior Century’s and Empirica’s assets.
Interest expense
Interest expense relates to interest incurred on the Loan Agreement we entered into with Hercules Capital, Inc., or Hercules, in December 2020, as well as amortization of the related deferred financing cost. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements.
Other income, net
Interest income, net consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investment balances.
Income taxes
Until February 25, 2021, we were organized as a limited liability company, which is considered a passthrough entity for federal and state income tax purposes. As such, any taxable income or loss realized by us for the year ended December 31, 2020 was allocated to the members in accordance with their respective membership interest and reported on their individual tax returns. Subsequent to the conversion of the LLC Entity to a C-Corp on February 25, 2021, we have incurred losses and recorded a full valuation allowance on all of our net deferred tax assets. As of December 31, 2021, the Company recorded $43 thousand in provisions for income taxes related to its subsidiary Century Therapeutics Canada ULC in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. There were no provisions or benefit for income taxes in 2020.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes the components of our research and development expenses for the periods presented:
Research and development expenses
The following table summarizes the components of our research and development expenses for the periods presented:
Research and development expenses were $75.7 million and $39.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $36.0 million was primarily due to:
● an increase in personnel-related expenses of $9.8 million, including an increase of stock-based compensation of $1.6 million, which was primarily attributable to an increase in headcount to expand our research and development capabilities;
● an increase of $5.5 million of facility and other allocated costs, including rent and allocated overhead costs as a result of an expansion of our geographic footprint for office and lab space;
● an increase of $10.2 million in research and laboratory costs, including laboratory supplies, preclinical studies, and other external research expenses;
● an increase of $7.7 million for collaborative arrangements with FCDI;
● an increase of $2.1 million of consulting costs primarily for temporary personnel to assist in the expansion of our research and development capabilities; and
● an increase of $0.8 million of other expenses.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $19.2 million and $9.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase of $9.7 million was primarily due to increased personnel and related costs of $4.8 million, including an increase of stock-based compensation of $2.2 million, primarily attributable to an increase in headcount to build our infrastructure, increased directors’ and officers’ insurance expense of $1.7 million and increased professional fees of $2.3 million relating to accounting, audit and legal services as well as costs associated with ongoing business activities and operating as a public company, and increased information technology and facility costs, including rent, of $0.9 million.
Write-off of in-process research and development
The write off of in-process research and development of $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to the acquisition of the assets of Empirica.
Interest expense
Interest expense was $1.3 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which related to our Loan Agreement with Hercules.
Other income, net
Interest income was $0.4 million and $0.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which included interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents, and investment balances. The decrease in our interest income was due to lower interest rates earned on average balances of cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Liquidity, capital resources, and capital requirements
Sources of liquidity
To date, we have funded our operations from the issuance and sale of our equity securities and debt financing and have not generated any revenues. Since our inception, we have raised approximately $564 million in net proceeds from the sales of our equity securities. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, and cash equivalents of $56.4 million and investments of $302.3 million. Based on our research and development plans, we believe our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments, including the $150 million received in the first quarter of 2022 from Bristol-Myers Squibb, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditures requirements into 2025. Since our inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales or any other sources, and we have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any products and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for a number of years, if ever. We had an accumulated deficit of $388.2 million as of December 31, 2021. As further described in Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements, we obtained a cash capital commitment from Bayer totaling $215 million, from which net proceeds of $74.8 million were received in June 2019, $38.1 million were received in November 2020 and $31.9 million were received in January 2021. The commitment agreement terminated in connection with the Series C Financing, and Bayer has no continuing obligation to invest any additional amounts thereunder. As further described in Note 9 of our consolidated financial statements, we entered into a Loan Agreement with Hercules, pursuant to which net proceeds of $9.6 million were received by us in September 2020. As further described in Note 10 of our consolidated financial statements, in February 2021, we sold 24,721,999 shares of our Series C preferred stock to certain institutional investors for net proceeds of approximately $159.6 million. Upon the closing of our IPO, the Series C preferred stock automatically converted into 9,825,513 shares of common stock. On June 22, 2021, we closed our IPO in which we issued and sold 12,132,500 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $20.00 per share. We received net proceeds of $221.2 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other expenses. As described in Note 18, in January 2022 we entered into a Collaboration Agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb resulting in an upfront payment of $100 million. In connection with the Collaboration Agreement, Bristol-Myers Squibb also purchased 2,160,760 shares of the our common stock at a price per share of $23.14, for an aggregate purchase price of $50 million.
Future funding requirements
We expect to incur additional losses in the foreseeable future as we conduct and expand our research and development efforts, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, developing new product candidates, establishing internal and external manufacturing capabilities, and funding our operations generally. Based on our current business plans, we believe that the net proceeds received from the IPO, together with our existing cash, cash equivalents, and investments, will be sufficient for us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months after this filing. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect. However, we anticipate that we will need to raise additional financing in the future to fund our operations, including the commercialization of any approved product candidates. We are subject to the risks typically related to the development of new products, and we may
encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays, and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the scope, timing, progress, costs, and results of discovery, preclinical development, and clinical trials for our current and future product candidates;
● the number of clinical trials required for regulatory approval of our current and future product candidates;
● the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of any of our current and future product candidates;
● the cost of manufacturing clinical and commercial supplies of our current and future product candidates;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including manufacturing, marketing, sales, and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● the costs and timing of preparing, filing, and prosecuting patent applications, obtaining, maintaining, protecting, and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending any intellectual property-related claims, including any claims by third parties that we are infringing upon, misappropriating, or violating their intellectual property rights;
● our ability to maintain existing, and establish new, strategic collaborations, licensing, or other arrangements and the financial terms of any such agreements, including the timing and amount of any future milestone, royalty, or other payments due under any such agreement;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● expenses to attract, hire and retain, skilled personnel;
● the costs of operating as a public company;
● our ability to establish a commercially viable pricing structure and obtain approval for coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party and government payors;
● addressing any potential interruptions or delays resulting from factors related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of new variants of COVID-19, such as the delta and omicron variants;
● the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
● the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products, and technologies.
Until and unless we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through the proceeds from a combination of equity offerings and debt financings, and potentially through additional license and development agreements or strategic partnerships or collaborations with third parties. Financing may not be available in sufficient amounts or on reasonable terms. In addition, market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, political unrest and hostilities or other factors could adversely impact our ability to access capital as and when needed. We have no commitments for any additional financing and will likely be
required to raise such financing through the sale of additional securities, which, in the case of equity securities, may occur at prices lower than the offering price of our common stock. If we sell equity or equity-linked securities, our current stockholders, may be diluted, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that are senior to or otherwise adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. Moreover, if we issue debt, we may need to dedicate a substantial portion of our operating cash flow to paying principal and interest on such debt and we may need to comply with operating restrictions, such as limitations on incurring additional debt, which could impair our ability to acquire, sell or license intellectual property rights which could impede our ability to conduct our business.
Cash flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $89.0 million, and $41.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of our net loss of $95.8 million and net cash outflows from decreases in our accounts payable of $1.8 million, increases in our prepaid expenses and other assets of $3.2 million, partially offset by increases in accrued expenses and other liabilities of $1.5 million, and non-cash charges of $9.6 million. The non-cash charges of $9.6 million consisted primarily of $3.7 million for depreciation expense, non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $4.7 million, and non-cash operating lease expense of $0.8 million.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of our net loss of $53.6 million and funding of an escrow deposit of $1.5 million partially offset by increases in our accounts payable of $2.1 million, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $2.3 million, operating lease liability of $2.2 million, and non-cash charges of $7.4 million. The non-cash charges of $7.4 million consisted primarily of $1.4 million for depreciation expense, non-cash stock-based compensation expense of $0.9 million, non-cash operating lease expense of $0.4 million, and write off of in-process research and development asset of $4.7 million from an asset acquisition.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities was $298.3 million and $22.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of net purchases of investments of $330.0 million, and purchases of property and equipment of $45.0 million partially offset by net sales of fixed maturity securities of $76.7 million.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of net cash used for an asset acquisition of $4.7 million, payments for purchase of fixed maturity securities of $49.9 million, and purchases of property and equipment of $9.8 million, partially offset by net sales of fixed maturity securities of $41.7 million.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities was $417.8 million and $47.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of net proceeds from our initial public offering of $221.4 million, net proceeds from collection of subscription receivable of $31.9 million and net proceeds from sale of our Series C preferred shares of $159.6 million which upon initial public offering were converted to common stock, and cash of $2.3 million resulting from Prior Century merging with and into us.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds from collection of subscription receivable of $38.1 million, net proceeds of $9.7 million from the Loan Agreement with Hercules offset by payments of $0.1 million of deferred financing costs.
As described in Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements, in January 2022 we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Bristol-Myers Squibb resulting in an upfront payment of $100 million. In connection with the Collaboration Agreement, we and Bristol-Myers Squibb entered into the Purchase Agreement whereby we issued and sold and Bristol-Myers Squibb purchased 2,160,760 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $23.14, for an aggregate purchase price of $50 million.
Contractual obligations and commitments
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations and commitments as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Reflects minimum interest payable under the Loan Agreement. Payment herein subject to variable rate debt have been estimated.
Other than as disclosed in the table above, the payment obligations under our license, collaboration, and acquisition agreements as of December 31, 2021 are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of pre- specified development, regulatory, and commercial milestones, or royalties on net product sales. As of December 31, 2021, the timing and likelihood of achieving the milestones and success payments and generating future product sales are uncertain and therefore, any related payments are not included in the table above. We have commitments under operating leases for certain facilities used in our operations. Our leases have initial lease terms ranging from 5 to 16 years. We entered into one lease that had not commenced at December 31, 2021. As a result, future lease payments of approximately $0.4 million in 1 year, $3.2 million in 1 to 3 years, $3.2 million in 3 to 5 years and $10.7 million in more than 5 years are not included within the table above.
We also enter into agreements in the normal course of business for sponsored research, preclinical studies, contract manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes, which are generally cancelable upon written notice. These obligations and commitments are not included in the table above. See Note 11 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
We have entered into a $10.0 million Term Loan Agreement with Hercules. Amounts borrowed under the Loan Agreement have an interest-only period of up to 24 months and a maturity date of April 1, 2024. See Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
Since our inception, we have not engaged in any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined under the rules and regulations of the SEC.
JOBS Act accounting election
As a company with less than $1.07 billion in revenue during our last fiscal year, we qualify as an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. An emerging growth company may take advantage of specified reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise generally applicable to public companies. As such, we may take advantage of reduced disclosure and other requirements otherwise generally applicable to public companies, including:
● not being required to have our registered independent public accounting firm attest to management’s assessment of our internal control over financial reporting;
● presenting reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements;
● an exemption from compliance with any requirement that the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board may adopt regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements;
● not being required to hold non-binding advisory votes on executive compensation or golden parachute arrangements; and
● extended transition periods for complying with new or revised accounting standards.
The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use the extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will adopt new or revised accounting standards at the time private companies adopt the new or revised accounting standard and will do so until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an emerging growth company.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2026, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates exceeded $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company,” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million and our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250.0 million or (ii) our annual revenue is less than $100.0 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700.0 million as of the last business day of the second fiscal quarter of such year. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years
of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
Our audited consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the audited consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this prospectus, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Research and development expenses
We record research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. We accrue for research and development costs based on the estimated services performed, but not yet invoiced, pursuant to contracts with research institutions or other service providers that conduct and manage preclinical studies and other research services on our behalf and record these costs in accrued and other current liabilities. We make judgments and estimates in determining the accrued liabilities balance at each reporting period. Payments made prior to the receipt of goods or services to be used in research and development are recorded as prepaid expenses until the goods or services are received.
To date, we have not experienced any material differences between accrued costs and actual costs incurred. However, the status and timing of actual services performed may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to expenses in future periods. Changes in these estimates that result in material changes to our accruals could materially affect our results of operations.
Stock-based compensation
We recognize compensation costs related to restricted stock awards, restricted stock shares, and stock options granted to employees and nonemployees based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, and we recognize forfeitures as they occur. For restricted stock awards the fair value of our common stock is used to determine the resulting stock-based compensation expense. For stock options we estimate the grant date fair value, and the resulting stock-based compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The fair value of the stock-based awards is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the use of highly subjective assumptions to determine the fair value of stock-based awards. These assumptions include:
● Fair Value of Common Stock-After our IPO in June 2021, the fair value of stock-based awards was determined on the grant date using the closing price of the our common stock. As there was no public market for our common stock before the IPO, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock, and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of
the grant. Third-party valuations of our common stock were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
● Expected Term-The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method to determine the expected term, which is based on the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options.
● Expected Volatility-Due to lack of trading history for our common stock, the expected volatility is estimated based on the average historical volatilities of common stock of comparable publicly traded entities over a time period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies are chosen based on their size, stage in the product development cycle, and area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until sufficient historical information regarding the volatility of our own stock price becomes available.
● Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield in effect at the time of grant for zero-coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the awards.
● Expected Dividend- We have never paid dividends on our common stock and have no plans to pay dividends on our common stock. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Recently adopted and recent accounting pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, included in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of our critical accounting policies.