ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere herein. The Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Any statements that are not statements of historical fact are forward-looking statements. When used, the words “believe,” “plan,” “intend,” “anticipate,” “target,” “estimate,” “expect,” and the like, and/or future-tense or conditional constructions (“will,” “may,” “could,” “should,” etc.), or similar expressions, identify certain of these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those expressed or implied by the forward-looking statements in this form. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors.
Historical results may not indicate future performance. Our forward-looking statements reflect our current views about future events, are based on assumptions and are subject to known and unknown risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contemplated by these statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, including any changes that might result from any facts, events, or circumstances after the date hereof that may bear upon forward-looking statements. Furthermore, we cannot guarantee future results, events, levels of activity, performance, or achievements.
Overview
iPower Inc. is an online hydroponic equipment supplier based in the United States. Through the operations of our e-commerce platform, www.Zenhydro.com, our 99,000 square foot fulfillment center in Rancho Cucamonga, California, and our combined 121,000 square foot fulfillment centers in Los Angeles, California, we believe we are one of the leading marketers, distributors and retailers of grow-light systems, ventilation systems, activated carbon filters, nutrients, growing media, hydroponic water-resistant grow tents, trimming machines, pumps and accessories for hydroponic gardening, based on management’s estimates. We have a diverse customer base that includes commercial users and individuals. Our core strategy continues to focus on expanding our geographic reach across the United States through organic growth, both in terms of expanding customer base as well as brand and product development.
We are actively developing and acquiring our in-house branded products, which to date include the iPower and Simple Deluxe brands, and consist of more than 4,000 SKUs of products such as grow-light systems, ventilation systems, activated carbon filters, nutrients, growing media, hydroponic water-resistant grow tents, trimming machines, pumps and many more hydroponic-related items; some of which have been designated as Amazon best seller product leaders, among others. For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, our top five product categories accounted for 70% of our total sales. While we will continue focusing on our top products, we are working to expand its product line to include nutrients.
Recent Acquisitions and Joint Ventures
On February 15, 2022, in exchange for total consideration with a fair value of $10.6 million, we acquired 100% of the ordinary shares of Anivia Limited (the “Target Company”), a corporation organized under the laws of the British Virgin Islands (“BVI”), in accordance with the terms of a share transfer framework agreement (the “Transfer Agreement”), dated February 15, 2022, by and between the Company, White Cherry Limited, a BVI company (“White Cherry”), White Cherry’s equity holders, Li Zanyu and Xie Jing (together with White Cherry, the “Sellers”), the Target Company, Fly Elephant Limited, a Hong Kong company, Dayourenzai (Shenzhen) Technology Co., Ltd., and Daheshou (Shenzhen) Information Technology Co., Ltd. The Target Company owns 100% of the equity of Fly Elephant Limited, which in turn owns 100% of the equity of Dayourenzai (Shenzhen) Technology Co., Ltd., a corporation located in the People’s Republic of China (“PRC”) and which is a wholly foreign-owned enterprise (“WFOE”) of Fly Elephant Limited. The WFOE controls, through a series of contractual arrangements summarized below, the business, revenues and profits of Daheshou (Shenzhen) Information Technology Co., Ltd., a company organized under the Laws of the PRC (the “Operating Company”) and located in Shenzhen, China. The Operating Company is principally engaged in selling of a wide range of products and providing logistic services in the PRC.
On February 10, 2022, we entered into a joint venture agreement with Bro Angel, LLC, Ji Shin and Bing Luo (the “GSM Joint Venture Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the GSM Joint Venture Agreement, the parties formed a Nevada limited liability company, Global Social Media, LLC (“GSM”), for the principal purpose of providing a social media platform, contents and services to assist businesses, including the Company and other businesses, in the marketing of their products. Following entry into the GSM Joint Venture Agreement, GSM issued 10,000 certificated units of membership interest (the “GSM Equity Units”), of which the Company was issued 6,000 GSM Equity Units and Bro Angel was issued 4,000 GSM Equity Units. Messrs. Shin and Luo are the owners of 100% of the equity of Bro Angel.
Under the terms of the GSM limited liability operating agreement (the “GSM LLC Agreement”), the Company will contribute $100,000 to the capital of GSM and Bro Angel granted GSM, pursuant to the terms of an intellectual property licensing agreement, dated February 10, 2022 (the “IP License Agreement”), an exclusive worldwide paid up right and license to use all intellectual property of Bro Angel and its members for the purpose of furthering the proposed business of GSM. The LLC Agreement prohibits the issuance of additional GSM Equity Units and certain other actions unless approved in advance by the Company.
Pursuant to the GSM Joint Venture Agreement, the Company and GSM also intend to enter into an occupancy management agreement pursuant to which the Company will grant to GSM the right to have access to and use of up to approximately 4,000 square feet of office space along with internet access at the Company’s facility located at 2399 Bateman Avenue, Irwindale, CA 91010. It is contemplated that only approximately 300-400 square feet will be initially used by GSM.
On January 13, 2020 we entered into a joint venture agreement with Titanium Plus Autoparts, Inc. (“TPA”), Tony Chiu, and Bin Xiao (the “TPA Joint Venture Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the TPA Joint Venture Agreement, the parties formed a Nevada limited liability company, Box Harmony, LLC (“Box Harmony”), for the principal purpose of providing logistic services primarily for foreign-based manufacturers or distributors who desire to sell their products online in the United States with such logistic services to include, without limitation, receiving, storing, and transporting such products. Following entry into the TPA Joint Venture Agreement, Box Harmony issued a total of 6,000 certificated units of membership interest, designated as Class A voting units (“Equity Units”), as follows: (i) we agreed to contribute $50,000 in cash and agreed to provide Box Harmony with the use and access to certain warehouse facilities leased by the Company in exchange for 2,400 Equity Units in Box Harmony, and (ii) TPA received 1,200 Equity Units in exchange for (a) $1,200 and contributing the TPA IP License referred to below, (b) its existing and future customer contracts, and (c) granting Box Harmony the use of shipping accounts (FedEx and UPS) and all other TPA carrier contracts, and (iii) Bin Xiao received 2,400 Equity Units in exchange for $2,400 and his agreement to manage the day to day operations of Box Harmony. We also entered into services agreement with Box Harmony pursuant to which we provide a portion of our fulfillment center infrastructure to Box Harmony in exchange for their payment.
Under the terms of the Box Harmony limited liability operating agreement, TPA and Bin Xiao each granted to us an unconditional and irrevocable right and option to purchase from Bin Xiao and TPA at any time within the first 18 months following January 13, 2022, up to 1,200 Class A voting units, at an exercise price of up to $550 per Class A voting unit, for a total exercise price of up to $660,000. If such option is fully exercised, we would own 3,600 Equity Units or 60% of the total outstanding Equity Units. The Box Harmony LLC Agreement prohibits the issuance of additional Equity Units and certain other actions unless approved in advance by us.
Trends and Expectations
Product and Brand Development
We plan to increase investments in product and brand development. We actively evaluate potential acquisition opportunities of companies and product brand names that can complement our product catalog and improve on existing products and supply chain efficiencies.
Global Economic Disruption
While at present the majority of our products are sourced either in the United States or China, the military conflict between Russia and Ukraine may nonetheless increase the likelihood of supply chain interruptions and hinder our ability to find the materials we need to make our products. Thus far, as a result of the general global economic disruption, we have experienced a decrease in the speed with which we are able to purchase new inventory, as well as an increase in costs due to delays in shipping, resulting increase in time with which products remain in our warehouse facilities, thus resulting in reduced profits. In addition, supply chain disruptions may make it harder for us to find favorable pricing and reliable sources for the materials we need, putting upward pressure on our costs and increasing the risk that we may be unable to acquire the materials and services we need to continue to make certain products.
Ongoing COVID-19 Outbreak and Related Disruptions
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak on our business, results of operations and financial results. The situation surrounding the COVID-19 outbreak remains fluid and the full extent of the positive or negative impact of the COVID-19 outbreak on our business will depend on certain developments including the length of time that the outbreak continues, the impact on consumer activity and behaviors and the effect on our customers, employees, suppliers, and stockholders, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Our focus remains on promoting the health, safety and financial security of our employees and serving our customers. As a result, we have taken a number of precautionary measures, including implementing social distancing and enhanced cleaning measures in our facilities, suspending all non-essential travel, transitioning certain of our employees to working-from-home arrangements, reimbursing certain employee technology purchases, providing emergency paid time off and targeted hourly pay increases and developing no contact delivery methods.
In an effort to contain or slow the COVID-19 outbreak, authorities across the world have implemented various measures, some of which have been subsequently rescinded or modified, including travel bans, stay-at-home orders and shutdowns of certain businesses. We anticipate that these actions and the global health crisis caused by the COVID-19 outbreak, including any resurgences, will continue to negatively impact global economic activity. While the COVID-19 outbreak has not had a material adverse impact on our operations to date and we believe the long-term opportunity that we see for shopping online remains unchanged, it is difficult to predict all of the positive or negative impacts the COVID-19 outbreak will have on our business.
In the short term, we have continued to see increased sales and order activity in the market since the COVID-19 outbreak. In order to keep up with the increased orders, we have hired and are continuing to hire additional personnel. However, much is unknown and, accordingly, the situation remains dynamic and subject to rapid and possibly material change. We will continue to actively monitor the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, local or foreign authorities, or that we determine are in the best interests of our customers, employees, suppliers, stockholders and communities.
Regulatory Environment
We sell hydroponic gardening products to end users that may use such products in new and emerging industries or segments, including the growing of cannabis. The demand for hydroponic gardening products depends on the uncertain growth of these industries or segments due to varying, inconsistent, and rapidly changing laws, regulations, administrative practices, enforcement approaches, judicial interpretations and consumer perceptions. For example, certain countries and a total of 44 U.S. states plus the District of Columbia have adopted frameworks that authorize, regulate and tax the cultivation, processing, sale and use of cannabis for medicinal and/or non-medicinal use, including legalization of hemp and CBD, while the U.S. Controlled Substances Act and the laws of U.S. states prohibit growing cannabis. Demand for our products could be impacted by changes in the regulatory environment with respect to such industries and segments.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the years ended June, 2022 and 2021
The following table presents certain consolidated statement of operations information and presentation of that data as a percentage of change from period to period.
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased 46.9% to $79,418,473 as compared to $54,075,922 for the year ended June 30, 2021. While pricing remained stable, the increased revenue mainly resulted from an increase in sales volume and expansion of sales to other regions, such as Canada, Europe and Asia. In addition to our organic growth, which we achieved as a result of improved products and more effective online marketing and merchandising efforts, the increase in sales was positively impacted by people continuing to shop online and pursuing gardening and growing projects during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, while the revenues for the current year improved over last year, we cannot assure that this trend will continue, and our business may be adversely affected by poor overall economic conditions and shipping delays caused by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Costs of Goods Sold
Costs of goods sold for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased 47.9% to $46,218,580 as compared to $31,257,358 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was due to an increase in sales as discussed above. In addition, we experienced a slight increase of cost of goods sold as a percentage of revenue resulting from a combination of an increase of import duty and freight charges and selling more products under in-house brands as opposed to third party brands. See discussions on gross profit below.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $33,199,893 for the year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to $22,818,564 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The gross profit ratio was slightly decreased to 41.80% for the year ended June 30, 2022 from 42.20% for the year ended June 30, 2021. The slight decrease was mainly due to an increase of import duty and freight charges, which was partially offset by an increase in sales, as discussed above, and selling more products under in-house brands as opposed to third party brands. The gross margin for in-house branded products is, on average, 20% higher than our gross margin for third party brands.
Selling, Fulfillment, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, fulfillment, general and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 increased 55.5% to $30,887,856 as compared to $19,858,000 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The increase was mainly due to an increase in selling and fulfillment expenses of $5.7 million and general and administrative expenses of $5.3 million, which included payroll expenses, warehouse and storage fees, stock-based compensation expense, legal and professional fees in connection with the acquisition and joint ventures, insurance expenses, and other operating expenses including expenses associated with being a publicly traded company. We have recorded a net loss for the three months ended June 30, 2022 comparing to last quarter due to the increase in the operating expenses.
Other (Expense)
Other (expenses) consist of interest expense, financing fees and other non-operating income (expenses). Other expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 were $(248,419) as compared to $(2,969,551) for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in other expenses was mainly due to a decrease of amortization of debt discount of $1.5 million, and change in fair value of conversion feature and warrant liabilities of $1.4 million resulted from the issuance of our Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, convertible notes and warrants during the year ended June 30, 2021.
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to iPower Inc.
Net income (loss) attributable to iPower Inc. for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $1,517,875 as compared to net loss of $775,749 for the year ended June 30, 2021, representing an increase of $2,293,624. The increase in net income as percentage of revenues for the year ended June 30, 2022 was primarily due to the changes in operating and non-operating income and expenses discussed above and the slight decrease in income tax resulting from decrease in taxable income from operations, the deferred taxes and revision of income tax provision based on actual income taxes paid for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Comprehensive Income (loss) Attributable to iPower Inc.
Comprehensive income (loss) attributable to iPower Inc. for the year ended June 30, 2022 was $1,523,553 as compared to comprehensive loss of ($775,749) for the year ended June 30, 2021, representing an increase of $2,299,302. The increase was due to the reasons discussed above and the other comprehensive income of $5,678, which was the foreign currency translation adjustments resulting from the translation of RMB, the functional currency of our VIE in PRC, to USD, the reporting currency of the Company.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity
During year ended June 30, 2022 we primarily funded our operations with cash and cash equivalents generated from operations, as well as through completion of two private placements in 2020 and 2021, completion of our initial public offering in May of 2021, and borrowing under our credit facility and loans from the Small Business Administration and JPMorgan Chase Bank. We had cash and cash equivalents of $1,821,947 as of June 30, 2022, representing a $4,829,758 decrease from $6,651,705 in cash as of June 30, 2021. The cash decrease was primarily the result of the increase in net cash used in operating activities, including increased investment in inventory to support our increasing sales, payment of income taxes, and the increase in accounts receivable from Amazon resulting from increased sales.
Based on our current operating plan, and despite the current uncertainty resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to finance our operations during the next 12 months.
Our cash requirements consist primarily of day-to-day operating expenses and obligations with respect to warehouse leases. We lease all our office and warehouse facilities. We expect to make future payments on existing leases from cash generated from operations. We have credit terms in place with our major suppliers, however as we bring on new suppliers, we are often required to prepay our inventory purchases from them. This is consistent with our historical operating model which allowed us to operate using only cash generated by the business. Beyond the next 12 months we believe that our cash flow from operations should improve as supply chains begin to return to normal and new suppliers we are bringing online transition to credit terms more favorable to us. In addition, we plan to increase the size of our in-house product catalog, which will have a net beneficial impact to our margin profile and ability to generate cash. In addition, we have approximately $12.0 million unused credit under the revolving line with JPM. Given our current working capital position an available funding from our revolving credit line, we believe we will be able to manage through the current challenges by managing payment terms with customers and vendors.
Working Capital
As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, our working capital was $32,300,646 and $23,281,891, respectively. The historical seasonality in our business during the year can cause cash and cash equivalents, inventory, and accounts payable to fluctuate, resulting in changes in our working capital. We anticipate that past historical trends to remain in place through the balance of the fiscal year with working capital remaining near this level for the foreseeable future.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021 was $16,603,005 and $12,756,949, respectively. The increase in use of cash in operating activities resulted from an increased purchase of products in order to maintain the higher inventory levels required to meet our increasing sales volumes, payment of income taxes, and the increase in accounts receivable resulted from increased sales.
Investing Activities
For the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $139,386 and $61,498, respectively, The increase in use of cash in investing activities was mainly related to the purchase of office equipment and investment in joint venture, which was partially offset by cash acquired from acquisition of Anivia in February 2022.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $11,911,916 and $18,492,517, respectively, for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. The main reason the Company experienced a decrease in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to receiving $12.4 million in proceeds from the draw-down of a $25 million asset-based revolving loan facility with JPMorgan Chase Bank comparing to net proceeds of $16.6 million from our IPO, our revolving facility with WFC and the closing of our private placements of an aggregate of $345,000 in Series A convertible preferred stock and $3,000,000 in convertible notes in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements (as that term is defined in Item 303 of Regulation S-K) that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, revenue or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Securities Exchange Commission (“SEC”). The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Actual results could differ from those estimates. In some cases, changes in the accounting estimates are reasonably likely to occur from period to period. Accordingly, actual results could differ materially from our estimates. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition and results of operations will be affected. We base our estimates on experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies, which we discuss further below. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our audited consolidated financial statements.
Revenue recognition
The Company has adopted Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606 since its inception on April 11, 2018 and recognizes revenue from product sales revenues, net of promotional discounts and return allowances, when the following revenue recognition criteria are met: a contract has been identified, separate performance obligations are identified, the transaction price is determined, the transaction price is allocated to separate performance obligations and revenue is recognized upon satisfying each performance obligation. The Company transfers the risk of loss or damage upon shipment, therefore, revenue from product sales is recognized when it is shipped to the customer. Return allowances, which reduce product revenue by the Company’s best estimate of expected product returns, are estimated using historical experience.
The Company evaluates the criteria of ASC 606 - Revenue Recognition Principal Agent Considerations in determining whether it is appropriate to record the gross amount of product sales and related costs or the net amount earned as commissions. Generally, when the Company is primarily responsible for fulfilling the promise to provide a specified good or service, the Company is subject to inventory risk before the good or service has been transferred to a customer and the Company has discretion in establishing the price, revenue is recorded at gross.
Payments received prior to the delivery of goods to customers are recorded as customer deposits.
The Company periodically provides incentive offers to its customers to encourage purchases. Such offers include current discount offers, such as percentage discounts off current purchases and other similar offers. Current discount offers, when accepted by the Company’s customers, are treated as a reduction to the purchase price of the related transaction.
Sales discounts are recorded in the period in which the related sale is recognized. Sales return allowances are estimated based on historical amounts and are recorded upon recognizing the related sales. Shipping and handling costs are recorded as selling expenses.
Inventory, net
Inventory consists of finished goods ready for sale and is stated at the lower of cost or market. The Company value its inventory using the weighted average costing method. The Company’s policy is to include as a part of cost of goods sold any freight incurred to ship the product from its vendors to warehouses. Outbound freight costs related to shipping costs to customers are considered period costs and reflected in selling and fulfillment expenses. The Company regularly review inventory and consider forecasts of future demand, market conditions and product obsolescence.
If the estimated realizable value of the inventory is less than cost, the Company makes provisions in order to reduce its carrying value to its estimated market value. The Company also reviews inventory for slow moving and obsolescence and records allowance for obsolescence.
Equity method investment
The Company accounts for its ownership interest in Box Harmony, a 40% owned joint venture, following the equity method of accounting, in accordance with ASC 323, Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures. Under this method, the carrying cost is initially recorded at cost and then increased or decreased by recording its percentage of gain or loss in its statement of operations and a corresponding charge or credit to the carrying value of the asset.
Business Combination
On February 15, 2022, the Company acquired 100% of the ordinary shares of Anivia Limited (“Anivia”) and its subsidiaries, including the VIE. The Company applies the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations. Under the acquisition method, the acquiring entity in a business combination recognizes 100% of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their acquisition date fair values. Management utilizes valuation techniques appropriate for the asset or liability being measured in determining these fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over amounts allocated to assets acquired, including identifiable intangible assets, and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Where amounts allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed is greater than the purchase price, a bargain purchase gain is recognized. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred. See Note 4 for details on acquisition.
Variable interest entities
On February 15, 2022, the Company acquired 100% of the ordinary shares of Anivia Limited (“Anivia”) and its subsidiaries, including Daheshou (Shenzhen) Information Technology Co., Ltd., a company organized under the Laws of the PRC (“DHS”). Pursuant to the terms of the Agreements, the Company does not have direct ownership in DHS but is actively involved in DHS’s operations as the sole manager to direct the activities and significantly impact DHS’s economic performance. DHS’s operational funding is provided by the Company after February 15, 2022. During the term of the agreements, the Company bears all the risk of loss and has the right to receive all of the benefits from DHS. As such, based on the determination that the Company is the primary beneficiary of DHS, in accordance with ASC 810-10-25-38A through 25-38J, DHS is considered a variable interest entity (“VIE”) of the Company and the financial statements of DHS have been consolidated from the date such control existed, February 15, 2022. See Note 4 and Note 5 for details on acquisition.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. The Company accounts for goodwill under ASC Topic 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other.
Goodwill is not amortized but is reviewed for potential impairment on an annual basis, or if events or circumstances indicate a potential impairment, at the reporting unit level. The Company’s review for impairment includes an assessment of qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, including goodwill. If it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, including goodwill, a quantitative goodwill impairment test is performed, which compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amounts, including goodwill. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill of the reporting unit is considered not impaired. However, if the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, additional procedures must be performed. That additional procedure compares the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount of that goodwill. An impairment loss is recorded to the extent that the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds its implied fair value.
Intangible Assets, net
Finite life intangible assets at June 30, 2022 include covenant not to compete, supplier relationship, and software recognized as part of the acquisition of Anivia Limited. Intangible assets are recorded at the estimated fair value of these items at the date of acquisition, February 15, 2022. Intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful life as followings:
The Company reviews the recoverability of long-lived assets, including the intangible assets, when events or changes in circumstances occur that indicate the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. The assessment of possible impairment is based on the ability to recover the carrying value of the asset from the expected future pretax cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) of the related operations. If these cash flows are less than the carrying value of such asset, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between estimated fair value and carrying value. The measurement of impairment requires management to make estimates of these cash flows related to long-lived assets, as well as other fair value determinations. As of June 30, 2022, there were no indicators of impairment.
Stock-based Compensation
The Company applies ASC No. 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation,” which requires that share-based payment transactions with employees and nonemployees upon adoption of ASU 2018-07, be measured based on the grant date fair value of the equity instrument and recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period, with a corresponding addition to equity. Under this method, compensation cost related to employee share options or similar equity instruments is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized over the period during which an employee is required to provide service in exchange for the award, which generally is the vesting period. In addition to the requisite service period, the Company also evaluates the performance condition and market condition under ASC 718-10-20. For an award that contains both a performance and a market condition, and where both conditions must be satisfied in order for the award to vest, the market condition is incorporated into the fair value of the award, and that fair value is recognized over the employee’s requisite service period or nonemployee’s vesting period if it is probable that the performance condition will be met. If the performance condition is ultimately not met, compensation cost related to the award should not be recognized (or should be reversed) because the vesting condition in the award has not been satisfied.
The Company will recognize forfeitures of such equity-based compensation as they occur.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In June 2022, FASB issued ASU 2022-03, Fair Value Measurement (Topic 82): Fair Value Measurement of Equity Securities Subject to Contractual Sale Restrictions. The amendments in this ASU clarify the guidance in ASC 820 on the fair value measurement of an equity security that is subject to a contractual sale restriction and require specific disclosures related to such an equity security. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2024. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805), Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers. This ASU clarifies that an acquirer of a business should recognize and measure contract assets and contract liabilities in a business combination in accordance with ASU 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) as if the entity had originated the contracts. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, with early application permitted. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40).” This ASU reduces the number of accounting models for convertible debt instruments and convertible preferred stock, as well as amend the guidance for the derivatives scope exception for contracts in an entity’s own equity to reduce form-over-substance-based accounting conclusions. In addition, this ASU improves and amends the related EPS guidance. This standard is effective for the Company on July 1, 2024, including interim periods within those fiscal years. Adoption is either a modified retrospective method or a fully retrospective method of transition. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In January 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-01, “Investments - Equity Securities (Topic 321), Investments - Equity Method and Joint Ventures (Topic 323), and Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) - Clarifying the Interactions between Topic 321, Topic 323, and Topic 815.” This ASU among other things clarifies that a company should consider observable transactions that require a company to either apply or discontinue the equity method of accounting under Topic 323, Investments-Equity Method and Joint Ventures, for the purposes of applying the measurement alternative in accordance with Topic 321 immediately before applying or upon discontinuing the equity method. The new ASU clarifies that, when determining the accounting for certain forward contracts and purchased options a company should not consider, whether upon settlement or exercise, if the underlying securities would be accounted for under the equity method or fair value option. ASU 2020-01 is effective. For public business entities for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2021. An entity should apply ASU 2020-01 prospectively at the beginning of the interim period that includes the adoption date. The adoption of ASU 2020-01 is not expected to have material impact on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740) - Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes. The update is intended to simplify the current rules regarding the accounting for income taxes and addresses several technical topics including accounting for franchise taxes, allocating income taxes between a loss in continuing operations and in other categories such as discontinued operations, reporting income taxes for legal entities that are not subject to income taxes, and interim accounting for enacted changes in tax laws. The new standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021; however, early adoption is permitted. The Company does not expect the adoption of this standard have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements.
In January 2017, the FASB issued ASU 2017-04, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (Topic 350): Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment,” which eliminates step two from the goodwill impairment test. Under ASU 2017-04, an entity should recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value up to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. All other entities, including not-for-profit entities, that are adopting the amendments in this Update should do so for their annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2017-04 is not expected to have material impact on the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company does not believe other recently issued but not yet effective accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the consolidated financial position, statements of operations and cash flows.
Recent Financings
Asset-based revolving loan
On November 12, 2021, the Company entered to a Credit Agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as administrative agent, issuing bank and swingline lender, for an asset-based revolving loan (“ABL”) of up to $25 million with key terms listed as follows:
· Borrowing base equal to the sum of
Ø Up to 90% of eligible credit card receivables
Ø Up to 85% of eligible trade accounts receivable
Ø Up to the lesser of (i) 65% of cost of eligible inventory or (ii) 85% of net orderly liquidation value of eligible inventory
· Interest rates of between LIBOR plus 2% and LIBOR plus 2.25% depending on utilization
· Undrawn fee of between 0.25% and 0.375% depending on utilization
· Maturity Date of November 12, 2024
In addition, the ABL includes an accordion feature that allows the Company to borrow up to an additional $25 million. To secure complete payment and performance of the secured obligations, the Company granted a security interest in all of its right, title and interest in, to and under all of the Company’s assets as collateral to the ABL. Upon closing of the ABL, the Company paid $796,035 financing fees including 2% of $25.0 million or $500,000 paid to its financial advisor. The financing fees are recorded as debt discount and to be amortized over three years as financing expenses, the term of the ABL. For the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company recorded in interest expense - $176,812 of amortization of debt discount and $182,543 of interest expense and credit utilization fees. As of June 30, 2022, the outstanding amount of the long-term revolving loan payable, net of debt discount, was $12,314,627, including interest payable of $182,543.
Promissory note payable and Investment Payable
On February 15, 2022, as part of the consideration for acquisition of Anivia Limited, the Company issued a two-year unsecured 6% subordinated promissory note, payable in equal semi-annual installments commencing August 15, 2022 (the “Purchase Note”). The principal amount of the Purchase Note was $3.5 million with a fair value of $3.6 million as of February 15, 2022. For the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company recorded accrued interest of $78,750 and amortization of note premium of $18,609. As of June 30, 2022, the outstanding balance of the Purchase Note was $3,660,770, including $78,750 of accrued interest and $82,020 of unamortized premium.
In addition, $1,500,000 in cash was to be paid after closing. However, as of the date of this report, the $1.5 million cash portion of the consideration, which was presented as an investment payable, had not yet been paid as the seller’s bank account was still not opened due to delays in accessing the bank resulting from COVID-19 conditions and restrictions in place in Hong Kong and China.
Initial Public Offering
On May 11, 2021, the Company entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with D.A. Davidson & Co., a Delaware limited liability company (“D.A. Davidson”), pursuant to which D.A. Davidson agreed to act as the lead underwriter in our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of up to 3,864,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, at an initial public offering price of $5.00 per share (the “IPO Purchase Price”). The IPO closed on May 14, 2021, with the sale of 3,360,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock for gross proceeds of $16.80 million, and on May 21, 2021, the Company closed on a $2.52 million overallotment option through the sale of an additional 504,000 shares at the IPO Purchase Price.
Private Placement of Convertible Notes and Warrants
On January 27, 2021, the Company completed a private placement offering pursuant to which we sold to two accredited investors an aggregate of $3,000,000 of our 6% convertible notes due six months from the date of issuance, subject to extension as provided below (the “Convertible Notes”), and warrants (the “Warrants”) pursuant to an exemption from registration under Rule 506(b) of Regulation D of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. Boustead Securities, LLC acted as placement agent in the Convertible Note and Warrant offering and received commissions and non-accountable reimbursements of 8% of the gross proceeds received, of which one-half of such fees and expenses were payable upon the conversion of the Convertible Notes. In connection with the Convertible Note and Warrant offering, we issued placement agent warrants to purchase 7% of the shares of Common Stock underlying the Convertible Notes exercisable at the conversion price of the Convertible Note (the “Conversion Price”), of which Boustead Securities, LLC received 80% of the placement agent warrants, which were cashlessly exercised for a total of 21,378 shares of Common Stock on May 14, 2021.
Upon completion of our IPO, the Convertible Notes automatically converted into 857,144 shares of common stock in accordance with the terms of the Convertible Notes. In addition to the Convertible Notes, the purchasers of the Convertible Notes received three-year warrants entitling the holders to purchase a total of 685,714 shares of Common Stock which equals 80% of the number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of the Convertible Notes. In the event the Convertible Notes are repaid in cash by the Company, the warrants will expire and have no further value.
This description of Convertible Notes and Warrants is intended to be a useful overview of the material provisions of the Convertible Notes and Warrants. However, you should read the Form of Convertible Note and Warrant for a complete description of the obligations of the Company.
Private Placement of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
On December 30, 2020, the Company sold in a private placement to approximately three accredited investors under Rule 506(b) promulgated under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, an aggregate of 34,500 shares of the Company’s Series A convertible preferred stock (the “Series A Preferred Stock”) and received gross proceeds of $345,000. Boustead Securities, LLC acted as placement agent in such private placement and received commissions of $24,150 or 7% of the gross proceeds received, a non-accountable expense allowance of 1% of such gross proceeds and warrants to purchase 2,415 shares of Series A Preferred Stock at an exercise price equal to $10 per share, the offering price of the Series A Preferred Stock, which warrants were cashlessly exercised for a total of 3,073 shares of common stock on May 14, 2021. Upon completion of our IPO, the Series A Preferred Stock automatically converted into a total of 98,572 shares of our common stock.
Terms of the Series A Convertible Preferred Stock
Pursuant to the certificate of designations of rights, privileges and limitations, the Series A Preferred Stock, prior to conversion:
· pays a dividend of nine percent (9%) per annum (the “Dividend”), which Dividend shall be cumulative and payable in cash only in the event of Redemption of the Series A Preferred Stock. In the event that the Series A Preferred Stock is converted into shares of Common Stock, no Dividend shall accrue or be payable;
· has one vote per share; however, shall have no right to vote as a separate class on any matter submitted to vote by the stockholders of the Corporation, excluding any proposed amendment that would adversely alter or change any preference or any relative or other right given to the Series A Preferred Stock, in which event the Series A Preferred Stock may vote as a separate class with respect to such amendment;
· on a sale or liquidation of the Company the Series A Preferred Stock has a $10.00 per share preference over the Company Common Stock;
· by its terms, upon consummation of this offering, all of the issued and outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock will automatically convert into shares of the Common Stock (the “Conversion Shares”) at a conversion price equal to 70% of the initial price per share of the Common Stock upon closing of the IPO);
· if the IPO has not been completed by December 31, 2021, the Company shall redeem and repurchase for cash all of the outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock for a purchase price equal to (a) the product of multiplying the $10.00 Stated Value of each outstanding share of Series A Preferred Stock by the total number of outstanding shares of Series A Preferred Stock, plus (b) all accrued and unpaid Dividends owed thereon.
Emerging Growth Company
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Accordingly, certain specified reporting and other regulatory requirements for public companies are reduced for businesses that meet the qualifications for emerging growth companies.
These provisions include:
(1) an exemption from the auditor attestation requirement in the assessment of our internal controls over financial reporting required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002;
(2) an exemption from the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards until they would apply to private companies;
(3) an exemption from compliance with any new requirements adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, or the PCAOB, requiring mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report in which the auditor would be required to provide additional information about our audit and our financial statements; and
(4) reduced disclosure about our executive compensation arrangements.