Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to “we”, “us”, “our” or the “Company” are to Intelligent Medicine Acquisition Corp., except where the context requires otherwise. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
Certain statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K may constitute “forward-looking statements.” Our forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our or our management team’s expectations, hopes, beliefs, intentions or strategies regarding the future. In addition, any statements that refer to projections, forecasts or other characterizations of future events or circumstances, including any underlying assumptions, are forward-looking statements. The words “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” and similar expressions may identify forward-looking statements, but the absence of these words does not mean that a statement is not forward-looking. The forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are based on our current expectations and beliefs concerning future developments and their potential effects on us. There can be no assurance that future developments affecting us will be those that we have anticipated. These forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties (some of which are beyond our control) or other assumptions that may cause actual results or performance to be materially different from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These risks and uncertainties include, but are not limited to, those factors described under the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors.” Should one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or should any of our assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary in material respects from those projected in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as may be required under applicable securities laws.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on February 25, 2021. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Our Sponsor is a Delaware limited liability company. On November 9, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,700,000 units (including 2,700,000 units pursuant to the underwriter’s exercise of the over-allotment option), generating gross proceeds of $207,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of an aggregate of 10,280,000 Private Placement Warrants (including 1,080,000 warrants in connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option), allocating 9,245,000 warrants to the Sponsor and 1,035,000 warrants to the underwriter at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to the Company in the amount of $10,280,000. As of November 9, 2021, transaction costs amounted to $15,588,901 consisting of $4,140,000 of underwriting fees, $10,350,000 of deferred underwriting fees payable (which are held in the Trust Account) and $1,098,901 of other costs related to the Initial Public Offering. The payment of $10,350,000 deferred underwriting fees are contingent upon the consummation of the Business Combination by February 9, 2023.
Following the closing of the Initial Public Offering on November 9, 2021, an amount of $211,140,000 ($10.20 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement was placed in the Trust Account which may be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less or in any open-ended investment company that holds itself out as a money market fund selected by the Company meeting the conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of a Business Combination or (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account, as described below.
We will only have 15 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or February 9, 2023, (the “Combination Period”) and our stockholders have not amended the Certificate of Incorporation to extend such Combination Period, we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter subject to lawfully available funds therefor, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities since inception, were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities that we hold following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. We expect that we will incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the period from inception through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $12.4 million. Our net income for the period from inception through December 31, 2021, consisted of formation and administrative costs of $0.3 million and net other income of $12.7 million. Other income consisted of interest income on the funds in Trust of $3,228 and a decrease in the fair value of the warrant liabilities of $17.8 million, which were offset by warrant related costs of $1.1 million and a charge for the fair value of warrant liabilities in excess of proceeds. There were no operations of the Company during the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.6 million in cash and working capital of $0.5 million. Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of founder shares by our Sponsor and a loan from an affiliate of our Sponsor, which was repaid in full on November 15, 2021.
On November 9, 2021, the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,700,000 units (including 2,700,000 units pursuant to the underwriter’s exercise of the over-allotment option), generating gross proceeds of $207,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the private sale of an aggregate of 10,280,000 Private Placement Warrants (including 1,080,000 Private Placement Warrants in connection with the exercise of the over-allotment option) at a purchase price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds to the Company in the amount of $10,280,000.
Transaction costs amounted to $15,588,901 consisting of $4,140,000 for the underwriting fees, $10,350,000 of deferred underwriting fees payable, and $1,098,901 of other offering costs.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $211,140,000 ($10.20 per unit) was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”), and as of December 31, 2021, we had $589,275 of cash held outside of the Trust Account available for working capital purposes.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic (the “COVID-19 pandemic”), based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, our ability to complete an initial Business Combination, including the Proposed Business Combination, may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 pandemic or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an initial Business Combination in a timely manner. Our ability to consummate an initial Business Combination may also be dependent on the ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting market downturn.
Going Concern and Management’s Plan
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $211,143,228, principally invested in U.S. government securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes, and to pay up to $100,000 of any dissolution expenses. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a working capital of approximately $510,000, current liabilities of approximately $236,873 and cash of approximately $589,275.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that if the Company is unsuccessful in consummating an Initial Business Combination, the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Management has determined that the Company has funds that are sufficient to fund the working capital needs of the Company until a potential business combination or up to the mandatory liquidation as stipulated in the Company’s amended and restated memorandum of association. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. In addition, we currently have less than 12 months from the date of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K to complete a Business Combination. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations, we determined that we do not currently have adequate liquidity to sustain operations, which consist solely of pursuing a Business Combination (as described below).
While we believe we have sufficient access to additional sources of capital if necessary, there is no current commitment on the part of any financing source to provide additional capital and no assurances can be provided that such additional capital will ultimately be available. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. There is no assurance that our plans to raise additional capital (to the extent ultimately necessary) or to consummate a Business Combination will be successful or successful within the Combination Period.
As is customary for a special purpose acquisition company, if we are not able to consummate a Business Combination during the Combination Period, we will cease all operations and redeem the Public Shares. Management plans to continue its efforts to consummate a Business Combination during the Combination Period.
Business Combination
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, which interest shall be net of taxes payable and excluding deferred underwriting fees payable, to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our initial stockholders or an affiliate of our initial stockholders or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds on a non-interest-bearing basis as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that the initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our initial stockholders or an affiliate of our initial stockholders as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in the Trust Account.
However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with US GAAP management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the income and expenses during the periods presented. Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company evaluates its financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging.” The Company’s derivative instruments are recorded at fair value as of the closing date of the Initial Public Offering (November 9, 2021) and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. The Company has determined the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are a derivative instrument. As the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants meet the definition of a derivative, the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Warrants Instruments
The Company accounts for the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement in accordance with the guidance contained in FASB ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” whereby under that provision, the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrant instrument as a liability at fair value and adjust the instrument to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the Public Warrants and the Private Placement Warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of the private warrants was estimated using a Modified Black-Scholes Model. The fair value of the public warrants was initially measured using the Monte Carlo simulation model, and then subsequently measured at the public trading price (see Note 10 to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K). The Company’s valuation model utilizes inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in ASC 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity”. Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. The shares of the Company’s Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered by the Company to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable shares of Class A Common Stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized a measurement adjustment from initial book value to redemption amount value.
Net income per share
Net income per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The calculation of diluted income per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Public Offering and (ii) Private Placement, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the two-class method. As a result, diluted earnings per share of common stock is the same as basic earnings per common stock for the periods presented. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 10,350,000 shares of Class A common stock in the aggregate.
Fair Value Measurements
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received for sale of an asset or paid to transfer of a liability, in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. GAAP establishes a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). These tiers include:
● Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices (unadjusted) for identical instruments in active markets;
● Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable such as quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets or quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active; and
● Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions, such as valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt -Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging --Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity ("ASU 2020-06")”, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current US GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on February 25, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Upon the completion of a Business Combination, $10,350,000 of deferred underwriting fees payable will be released from our trust account to the underwriter from our initial public offering.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements, Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.