ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The information contained in this section has been derived from our consolidated financial statements and should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the "Exchange Act"), and are subject to the "safe harbor" created by those sections. In particular, statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K that are not historical facts, including, but not limited to statements concerning new product sales, product development and offerings, ability to address consumer needs, the expansion of our addressable market, factors for differentiation of our products, product integration plans, our consumer robots, our competition, our strategy, our market position, market acceptance of our products, seasonal factors, revenue recognition, our profits, growth of our revenues, composition of our revenues, our cost of revenues, units shipped, average selling prices, the impact of promotional activity and tariffs, operating expenses, selling and marketing expenses, general and administrative expenses, research and development expenses, and compensation costs, our projected income tax rate, our credit and letter of credit facilities, our valuations of investments, valuation and composition of our stock-based awards, efforts to mitigate supply chain challenges, availability of semiconductor chips, and liquidity, constitute forward-looking statements and are made under these safe harbor provisions. Some of the forward-looking statements can be identified by the use of forward-looking terms such as "believes," "expects," "may," "will," "should," "could," "seek," "intends," "plans," "estimates," "anticipates," or other comparable terms. Forward-looking statements involve inherent risks and uncertainties, which could cause actual results to differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements. We urge you to consider the risks and uncertainties discussed in greater detail under the heading "Risk Factors" in evaluating our forward-looking statements. We have no plans to update our forward-looking statements to reflect events or circumstances after the date of this report. We caution readers not to place undue reliance upon any such forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date made.
Overview
iRobot is a leading global consumer robot company that designs and builds robots that empower people to do more. With over 30 years of artificial intelligence ("AI") and advanced robotics experience, we are focused on building thoughtful robots and developing intelligent home innovations that help make life better for millions of people around the world. iRobot's portfolio of home robots and smart home devices features proprietary technologies for the connected home and advanced concepts in cleaning, mapping and navigation, human-robot interaction and physical solutions. Leveraging this portfolio, we plan to add new capabilities and expand our offerings to help consumers make their homes easier to maintain, more efficient, more secure and healthier places to live.
Since our founding in 1990, we have developed the expertise necessary to design, build, sell and support durable, high-performance and cost-effective robots through the close integration of software, electronics and hardware. Our core technologies serve as reusable building blocks that we adapt and expand to create next-generation robotic platforms. We believe that this approach accelerates the time to market, while also reducing the costs, time and other risks associated with product development. These capabilities are amplified by our Genius platform, which leverages our considerable expertise and ongoing investment in AI, home understanding and machine vision technologies to provide consumers with greater control over our products, simple integration with other smart home devices, recommendations that further enhance the cleaning experience and the ability to share and transfer home knowledge across multiple iRobot robots. We believe that the capabilities within Genius will support our ability to build out a larger ecosystem that encompasses a broader range of adjacent robotic and smart home categories. We believe that our significant expertise in robot design, engineering, and smart home technologies and targeted focus on understanding and addressing consumer needs, positions us well to expand our total addressable market and capitalize on the anticipated growth in a wider range of robotic and smart home categories.
Our total revenue for 2021 was $1,565.0 million, which represents a 9.4% increase from revenue of $1,430.4 million for 2020. Domestic revenue grew $9.5 million, or 1.3%, and international revenue increased by $125.1 million, or 18.2%.
Since the introduction of the Roomba robotic vacuum cleaner ("RVC") in 2002, we have sold more than 35 million consumer robots worldwide to become a global, market-leading consumer robotics innovator with a strong presence in a number of major geographic regions worldwide. In 2021, iRobot generated annual revenue of $1,565.0 million while navigating very challenging market conditions as the COVID-19 pandemic continued to impact all aspects of our business. Most notably, we have faced supply chain challenges that have limited our ability to increase production to fulfill demand for our products, increased our costs to produce and ship our products and expanded the delivery timeframes required to fulfill orders.
Our commitment to innovation and funding critical research and development projects continued to yield tangible results through new product launches, and new and enhanced product features and functionality:
•We launched two major upgrades of our Genius platform that delivered a wider range of features and functionality to provide users with greater control for where, when and how our Roomba and Braava robots clean. These enhancements also enabled tighter integration between our products and other smart home devices, and the ability for consumers to seamlessly transfer maps to new iRobot robots added into the home.
•We launched the Roomba j7 Series, our first Roomba designed specifically to leverage our Genius platform and our first Roomba with the ability to identify objects. Powered by Genius and featuring PrecisionVision Navigation technology, the Roomba j7 can detect, identify and avoid an expanding range of objects. We also launched the Roomba i1 Series, a lower-cost RVC that was initially sold at select retailers.
•We introduced the iRobot H1 handheld vacuum, a premium portable vacuum for cleaning hard-to-reach areas.
In November 2021, we acquired Aeris, a fast-growing provider of premium air purifiers. The addition of Aeris helps expand iRobot’s total addressable market with a portfolio of air purifiers that we believe are differentiated by their sophisticated design, quality craftmanship, HEPA filtration, state-of-the-art engineering and software intelligence. Other 2021 highlights included our efforts to mitigate semiconductor chip shortages that constrained production of our floor cleaning robots and address a range of supply chain challenges that resulted in higher-than-expected costs for components, raw materials and transportation. We also continued our process expanding production in Malaysia. To support the growth of our direct-to-consumer sales channel, we continued to invest in improving the online buying experience on our digital properties and enhancing our marketing systems and tools to improve our efficiency and effectiveness in targeting our connected customers. We also continued to test, refine and expand robot-related subscription services for consumers in the United States, Japan and Europe.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus ("COVID-19") to be a global pandemic. Since then, COVID-19 has caused significant economic disruption directly and indirectly. In an effort to slow the spread of COVID-19 and improve the health and well-being of its citizens, governments around the world have implemented and continue to implement various measures, including travel restrictions, closure of non-essential businesses, border closures, vaccination-related mandates and social distancing. These actions have altered macroeconomic conditions, created recession-like environments and contributed to rising inflation, which has impacted retailers and consumers around the world. While consumer demand for our Roomba and Braava robots remained robust during 2021, COVID-19 has compounded a myriad of supply chain challenges, ranging from limited availability of certain semiconductor chips and rising component, raw materials and transportation costs. These challenges impacted revenue and profitability during 2021 and are expected to continue at least through the first half of 2022.
Among the many actions taken to support our employees during the pandemic, we have continued to adjust our global travel policies, maintain flexible work from home policies, and implement a wide range of sanitization and cleaning protocols to keep our offices safer. During 2022, we plan to continue to evolve our workplace policies in order to help safeguard the health and maximize the productivity of our workforce.
Fiscal Periods
We operate and report using a 52-53 week fiscal year ending on the Saturday closest to December 31. Accordingly, our fiscal quarters will end on the Saturday that falls closest to the last day of the third month of each quarter. As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, "fiscal 2021" refers to the 52-week fiscal year ending January 1, 2022, "fiscal 2020" refers to the 53-week fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, and "fiscal 2019" refers to the 52-week fiscal year ended December 28, 2019.
Key Financial Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America ("GAAP"), we use the following key metrics, including non-GAAP financial measures, to evaluate and analyze our core operating performance and trends, and to develop short-term and long-term operational plans. The most directly comparable financial measures calculated under U.S. GAAP are Gross Profit and Operating (Loss) Income. In the fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had Gross Profit of $550,299, $670,229 and $543,927, respectively, and Operating (Loss) Income of ($1,100), $146,322, and $86,618, respectively. A summary of key metrics and certain non-GAAP financial measures for the fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019, is as follows:
Our non-GAAP financial measures reflect adjustments based on the following items. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP, and the financial results calculated in accordance with GAAP and reconciliations from these results should be carefully evaluated.
Amortization of acquired intangible assets: Amortization of acquired intangible assets consists of amortization of intangible assets including completed technology, customer relationships, and reacquired distribution rights acquired in connection with business combinations.
Tariff Refunds: iRobot was granted a Section 301 List 3 Tariff Exclusion in April 2020, which temporarily eliminated tariffs on our products imported from China until December 31, 2020 and entitled us to a refund of all related tariffs previously paid since September 2018. We excluded the refunds for tariffs paid in fiscal 2018 and 2019 from our fiscal 2020 non-GAAP measures because those tariff refunds associated with tariff costs incurred in the past had no impact to our fiscal 2020 earnings.
Net Merger, Acquisition and Divestiture (Income) Expense: Net merger, acquisition and divestiture (income) expense primarily consists of transaction fees, professional fees, and transition and integration costs directly associated with mergers, acquisitions and divestitures. It also includes business combination adjustments after the measurement period has ended.
Stock-Based Compensation: Stock-based compensation is a non-cash charge relating to stock-based awards.
IP Litigation Expense, Net: IP litigation expense, net relates to legal costs incurred to litigate patent, trademark, copyright and false advertising infringements, or to oppose or defend against interparty actions related to intellectual property. Any settlement payment or proceeds resulting from these infringements are included or netted against the costs.
Gain/Loss on Strategic Investments: Gain/loss on strategic investments includes fair value adjustments, realized gains and losses on the sales of these investments and losses on the impairment of these investments.
Restructuring and Other: Restructuring charges are related to one-time actions associated with workforce reductions, including severance costs, certain professional fees and other costs directly associated with resource realignments tied to strategic initiatives or changes in business conditions.
Income tax adjustments: Income tax adjustments include the tax effect of the non-GAAP adjustments, calculated using the appropriate statutory tax rate for each adjustment. We reassess the need for any valuation allowance recorded based on the non-GAAP profitability and have eliminated the effect of the valuation allowance recorded in the U.S. jurisdiction. We also exclude certain tax items, including impact from stock-based compensation windfalls/shortfalls, that are not reflective of income tax expense incurred as a result of current period earnings.
We exclude these items from our non-GAAP measures to facilitate an evaluation of our current operating performance and comparisons to our past operating performance. These items may vary significantly in magnitude or timing and do not necessarily reflect anticipated future operating activities. In addition, we believe that providing these non-GAAP measures affords investors a view of our operating results that may be more easily compared with our peer companies.
The following table reconciles gross profit, operating (loss) income, net income and net income per share on a GAAP and non-GAAP basis for the fiscal years ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, expenses and related disclosures. Our estimates and assumptions are based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from our estimates.
The accounting policies, methods and estimates used to prepare our financial statements are described in Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this Annual Report. We consider the following accounting policies to be those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and that require a higher degree of judgment:
•revenue recognition and
•accounting for income taxes.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Revenue is allocated to distinct performance obligations and is recognized net of allowances for returns and other credits and incentives. Revenue is recognized only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of revenue will not occur and when collection is considered probable.
Frequently, our contracts with customers contain multiple promised goods or services. Such contracts may include any of the following, the consumer robot, downloadable app, cloud services, potential future unspecified software upgrades, premium customer care and extended warranties. For these contracts, we account for the promises separately as individual performance obligations if they are distinct. Performance obligations are considered distinct if they are both capable of being distinct and distinct within the context of the contract. In determining whether performance obligations meet the criteria for being distinct, we consider a number of factors, such as the degree of interrelation and interdependence between obligations, and whether or not the good or service significantly modifies or transforms another good or service in the contract. Our consumer robots are highly dependent on, and interrelated with, the embedded software and cannot function without the software. As such, the consumer robots are accounted for as a single performance obligation. We have determined that the app, cloud services and potential future unspecified software upgrades represent one performance obligation to the customer to enhance the functionality and interaction with the robot (referred to collectively as "Cloud Services"). Other services and support are considered distinct and therefore are treated as separate performance obligations.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with customers may contain multiple promises to transfer products and services as described above. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct may require significant judgment.
Determining the standalone selling price ("SSP") for each distinct performance obligation requires judgment. We allocate revenue to all distinct performance obligations based on their relative SSPs. When available, we use observable prices to determine SSPs. When observable prices are not available, SSPs are established that reflect our best estimates of what the selling prices of the performance obligations would be if they were sold regularly on a stand-alone basis. Our process for estimating SSPs without observable prices considers multiple factors that may vary depending upon the facts and circumstances related to each performance obligation including, market data or the estimated cost of providing the products or services.
Determining the revenue recognition period for services requires judgment. The transaction price allocated to the Cloud Services is deferred and recognized on a straight-line basis over the estimated term of the Cloud Services. Other services and support are recognized over their service periods.
Estimating variable consideration such as product returns and sales incentives requires judgment. We provide limited rights of returns for direct-to-consumer sales generated through its online stores and certain resellers and distributors. We record an allowance for product returns based on specific terms and conditions included in the customer agreements or based on historical experience and our expectation of future returns. In addition, we may provide other credits or incentives which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. Where appropriate, these estimates take into consideration relevant factors such as our historical experience, current contractual requirements, specific known market events and forecasted inventory level in the channels. Returns and credits are estimated at the time of sale and updated at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available. We regularly evaluate the adequacy of our estimates for product returns and other credits and incentives. Future market conditions and product transitions may require us to take action to change such programs and related estimates. When the variables used to estimate these reserves change, or if actual results differ significantly from the estimates, we would be required to increase or reduce revenue to reflect the impact.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and other foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled in each jurisdiction. A valuation allowance is provided if, based upon the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not
that the related benefits will not be realized. We regularly review the deferred tax assets for recoverability considering historical profitability, projected future taxable income, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, as well as feasible tax planning strategies in each jurisdiction.
We report a liability for unrecognized tax benefits resulting from uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We evaluate uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis and consider factors that include, but are not limited to, changes in tax law, measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, information obtained during in process audit activities and changes in facts or circumstanced related to a tax provision.
Overview of Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods shown (in thousands):
The following table sets forth our results of operations as a percentage of revenue for the periods shown:
Comparison of Years Ended January 1, 2022, January 2, 2021 and December 28, 2019
Revenue
We primarily derive our revenue from product sales through distributor and retail sales channels, as well as the online store on our website and through our Home app. We recognize revenue upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services.
The following table shows revenue for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Revenue increased 9.4% to $1,565.0 million in fiscal 2021 from $1,430.4 million in fiscal 2020. Despite ongoing semiconductor chip constraints and shipping delays that impacted our ability to fulfill orders in fiscal 2021 during the holiday season, revenue increased $134.6 million, which was primarily attributable to a 4.4% increase in average gross selling price and a 2.0% increase in units shipped in fiscal 2021, as compared to fiscal 2020. The increase in average gross selling price was primarily driven by a 15.4% growth in sales of our mid and premium tier floor cleaning robots. In fiscal 2021, international revenue increased $125.1 million, or 18.2% due primarily to 21.9% growth in EMEA and a 15.2% increase in Japan, while domestic revenue increased $9.5 million, or 1.3%. Our direct-to-consumer revenue growth of 24.2% to $187.4 million, or 12.0% of total revenue, reflected continued expansion of this channel as we invested in enhancing the online buying experience and upgrading our digital marketing capabilities.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Revenue increased 17.8% to $1,430.4 million in fiscal 2020 from $1,214.0 million in fiscal 2019. Although the initial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our sales and manufacturing supply chain activities during the first quarter of 2020 resulted in a revenue decline, demand for our robots increased substantially during the remainder of fiscal 2020 as maintaining a clean home took on greater prominence during the pandemic. We saw significant growth in our direct-to-consumer sales generating 11% of total fiscal 2020 revenue, up from approximately 6% in 2019. The increase in revenue was primarily driven by strong demand with a 10.1% increase in total units shipped in fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019. Units shipped increased to approximately 5.5 million units compared to approximately 5.0 million units in fiscal 2019. In fiscal 2020, domestic revenue increased $141.0 million, or 23.4%, while international revenue increased $75.4 million, or 12.3%, as compared to fiscal 2019. The international revenue growth was driven by increases in revenue from Japan and EMEA of 20% and 8%, respectively, compared to 2019.
Cost of Product Revenue
Cost of product revenue primarily consists of product cost, including costs of our contract manufacturers for production and component product costs, inbound and outbound freight, import duties, tariffs, logistics and fulfillment costs, manufacturing and tooling equipment depreciation, hosting costs and warranty cost. In addition, we include other expenses associated with supply chain logistics including personnel-related expenses of salaries and related costs. We outsource the manufacture of our products to contract manufacturers in southern China and began to diversify our supply chain by adding manufacturing capacity in Malaysia starting November 2019. During 2021, we continued to scale production in Malaysia by qualifying additional contract manufacturers. While labor costs in these regions traditionally have been favorable compared to labor costs elsewhere in the world, including the United States, they have been increasing for the last few years, especially with supply chain challenges driven by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, because our purchase contract with our contract manufacturers in China and Malaysia are typically denominated in U.S. dollars, changes in currency exchange rates may impact our suppliers and increase our prices.
The following table shows cost of product revenue for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Cost of product revenue increased $255.2 million, or 33.7%, to $1,013.5 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $758.2 million in fiscal 2020. The cost of product revenue in fiscal 2021 included $48.3 million in tariff costs, whereas in fiscal 2020, we recognized a benefit of $36.5 million from tariff refunds. The increase in cost of product revenue is also attributable to the 9.4% increase in revenue, as well as higher costs associated with the global supply chain challenges including increased oceanic transport and air freight expenses and higher raw materials and component costs associated with limited semiconductor chip availability. We anticipate these challenges and higher costs to continue at least through the first half of fiscal 2022.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Cost of product revenue increased $99.9 million, or 15.2%, to $758.2 million in fiscal 2020, compared to $658.4 million in fiscal 2019. The increase is primarily due to the 17.8% increase in revenue, as well as increases in warranty and rework costs, offset by the recognition of the tariff refunds of approximately $36.5 million for tariffs paid in 2018 and 2019. On April 24, 2020, we were granted a temporary exclusion, as extended in August 2020, from Section 301 List 3 tariffs by the United States Trade Representative, which temporarily eliminated the 25% tariff on Roomba products imported from China until December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit
Our gross profit as a percentage of revenue, referred to as our gross margin, varies according to the mix of products sold, the channel mix through which we sell our products, the level of promotional activities and tariff and duty costs imposed by governmental authorities.
The following table shows gross profit for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Gross profit decreased $119.9 million, or 17.9%, to $550.3 million (35.1% of revenue) in fiscal 2021 from $670.2 million (46.9% of revenue) in fiscal 2020. The decrease in gross margin was primarily driven by Section 301 List 3 tariff costs of $48.3 million included in fiscal 2021, while we recognized a benefit of $36.5 million from tariff refunds in fiscal 2020. The remainder of the decrease in gross margin was driven by supply chain headwinds with increases in air and oceanic transportation, higher material costs and pricing and promotional activity.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Gross profit increased $126.3 million, or 23.2%, to $670.2 million (46.9% of revenue) in fiscal 2020 from $543.9 million (44.8% of revenue) in fiscal 2019. The increase in gross margin was primarily related to the recognition of the tariff refunds of $36.5 million for tariffs paid in 2018 and 2019 as a benefit to cost of product revenue, partially offset by impact of price reductions and promotional activity during fiscal 2020 compared to fiscal 2019.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related costs for our engineers;
•contractors and consulting expenses;
•costs of components and test equipment used for product, tooling and prototype development; and
•occupancy and other overhead costs.
Our research and development team develops new software and hardware products as well as improves and enhances our existing software and hardware products to address customer demands and emerging trends. We have significantly expanded our research and development in software intelligence, resulting in recent upgrades to the Genius Home Intelligence platform, along with ongoing investment in AI, home understanding and machine vision technologies. We are committed to consistently maintaining our high level of innovative design and development of new products as we strive to enhance our ability to serve our existing consumer markets as well as new markets for robots. We anticipate that in fiscal 2022, research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars but remain relatively consistent as a percentage of revenue.
The following table shows research and development costs for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Research and development expenses increased $4.7 million, or 3.0%, to $161.3 million (10.3% of revenue) in fiscal 2021 from $156.7 million (11.0% of revenue) in fiscal 2020. This increase is primarily due to an $8.0 million increase in people-related costs associated with additional headcount and higher program-related costs of $4.6 million during fiscal 2021, offset by lower short-term incentive compensation of $8.0 million resulting from changes in assessments mainly driven by supply chain challenges as further discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Research and development expenses increased $15.1 million, or 10.6%, to $156.7 million (11.0% of revenue) in fiscal 2020 from $141.6 million (11.7% of revenue) in fiscal 2019. This increase is primarily due to an $8.7 million increase in people-related costs, mostly attributable to higher short-term incentive compensation costs, as well as higher program-related costs of $4.3 million during fiscal 2020.
Selling and Marketing
Our selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related costs for sales and marketing personnel;
•advertising, marketing and other brand-building costs;
•product display expenses;
•customer service costs; and
•technology subscription and cloud expenses.
We anticipate that in fiscal 2022, selling and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue due to incremental investment to enhance the consumer's buying experience on our digital properties, support continued growth of our direct-to-consumer channel, build strong, enduring relationships with customers, as well as continue to build awareness of our products.
The following table shows selling and marketing costs for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Selling and marketing expenses increased by $24.4 million, or 9.2%, to $289.8 million (18.5% of revenue) in fiscal 2021 from $265.5 million (18.6% of revenue) in fiscal 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to higher people-related costs of $12.4 million associated with additional headcount, higher marketing spend of $7.8 million associated with increased used of working media to drive sales growth and new launches, as well as $6.5 million higher technology related cost including cloud service and maintenance and support fees as we continue to invest in our digital marketing and e-commerce capabilities. These increases were offset by lower short-term incentive compensation of $3.3 million resulting from changes in assessments driven by supply chain challenges as further discussed elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Selling and marketing expenses increased by $33.9 million, or 14.7%, to $265.5 million (18.6% of revenue) in fiscal 2020 from $231.5 million (19.1% of revenue) in fiscal 2019. This increase is primarily attributable to an increase in marketing investments of $30.7 million primarily related to advertising campaigns in all regions during the holiday season and marketing activities to build our direct-to-consumer sales channel, as well as higher people-related costs of $2.9 million mainly driven by short-term incentive compensation.
General and Administrative
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of:
•salaries and related costs for executives and administrative personnel;
•professional services costs;
•information systems and infrastructure costs;
•travel and related costs; and
•occupancy and other overhead costs.
The following table shows general and administrative costs for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
General and administrative expenses decreased by $1.6 million, or 1.6%, to $99.2 million (6.3% of revenue) in fiscal 2021 from $100.8 million (7.0% of revenue) in fiscal 2020. This decrease is primarily attributable to lower vesting expectations related to our performance-based stock-based compensation and lower short-term incentive compensation of $14.9 million and a $4.6 million decrease in the allowance for credit losses associated with the uncertainty of collection from certain customer accounts resulting from the pandemic. The decrease is offset by an increase of $8.8 million in legal fees driven by higher intellectual property litigation costs and a $4.6 million increase associated with people related cost resulting from additional headcount.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
General and administrative expenses increased by $17.7 million, or 21.3%, to $100.8 million (7.0% of revenue) in fiscal 2020 from $83.1 million (6.8% of revenue) in fiscal 2019. This increase is primarily attributable to higher short-term incentive compensation and performance-based stock-based compensation of $11.6 million, an increase of $4.8 million in legal fees driven by higher intellectual property litigation costs, and a $2.6 million increase in the allowance for credit losses associated with the uncertainty of collection from certain customer accounts resulting from the pandemic.
Amortization of Acquired Intangible Assets
Amortization of acquired technology and reacquired distribution rights are recorded within cost of revenue whereas the amortization of acquired customer relationships, non-compete agreements and tradenames are recorded within operating expenses. Reacquired distribution rights are amortized on an accelerated basis, while all other intangible assets are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives on a straight-line basis, consistent with the pattern in which the economic benefits are being utilized.
The following table shows total amortization expense for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
The decreases in amortization of acquired intangible assets during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020, was primarily related to one of the acquired technology intangible assets that was fully amortized in the second quarter of 2020. The decrease in amortization of acquired intangible assets during fiscal 2020 as compared to fiscal 2019, was primarily related to the reacquired distribution rights intangible assets that were fully amortized in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Other income, net
Other income, net includes interest income, interest expense, foreign currency gains (losses) as well as gains (losses) from strategic investments. The following table shows other income, net for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Other income, net amounted to $29.4 million, $41.6 million and $12.2 million for fiscal 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During fiscal 2021, other income, net, includes the gains of $30.2 million associated with our Matterport, Inc. ("Matterport") investment when Matterport completed a merger and we received shares in Matterport, and marking the shares to fair value. During fiscal 2020, other income, net, included the gains of $38.6 million associated with our InTouch Health investment when Teladoc Health, Inc. ("Teladoc") acquired InTouch Health and exchanged our shares of InTouch Health for shares of Teladoc during the third quarter of 2020. During fiscal 2019, other income, net, included an $8.4 million gain on sale of an equity investment.
Income Tax (Benefit) Provision
The following table shows income tax (benefit) provision for fiscal years 2021, 2020 and 2019 (dollars in thousands):
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
We recorded an income tax benefit of $2.1 million and income tax provision of $40.8 million for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. The $2.1 million benefit for fiscal 2021 resulted in an effective income tax rate of (7.4)%. The $40.8 million provision for fiscal 2020 resulted in an effective income tax rate of 21.7%.
Our effective income tax rate of (7.4)% for fiscal 2021 differed from the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to the impact of tax benefits related to research and development tax credits, the deduction for Foreign Derived Intangible Income and a discrete tax benefit associated with stock-based compensation. The decrease in the effective income tax rate of (7.4)% for fiscal 2021 as compared to 21.7% for fiscal 2020 is primarily driven by lower income in 2021 and the impact of tax benefits during the period.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
We recorded an income tax provision of $40.8 million and $13.5 million for fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. The $40.8 million provision for fiscal 2020 resulted in an effective income tax rate of 21.7%. The $13.5 million provision for fiscal 2019 resulted in an effective income tax rate of 13.7%.
Our effective income tax rate of 21.7% for fiscal 2020 differed from the federal statutory tax rate of 21% primarily due to the recognition of state income taxes and valuation allowances offset by tax benefits related to research and development tax credits and the deduction for Foreign Derived Intangible Income. The increase in the effective income tax rate of 21.7% for fiscal 2020 as compared to 13.7% for fiscal 2019 is primarily due to a discrete tax benefit associated with stock based compensation in 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At January 1, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $201.5 million and short-term investments of $33.0 million. Our working capital, which represents our total current assets less total current liabilities, was $393.9 million as of January 1, 2022, compared to $573.7 million as of January 2, 2021. Cash and cash equivalents held by our foreign subsidiaries totaled $42.7 million as of January 1, 2022. We expect the cash held overseas to be permanently reinvested outside of the United States, and our U.S. operation to be funded through its own operating cash flows, cash, and if necessary, through borrowing under our working capital credit facility.
We manufacture and distribute our products through contract manufacturers and third-party logistics providers. We believe this approach gives us the advantages of relatively low capital investment and significant flexibility in scheduling
production and managing inventory levels. By leasing our office facilities, we also minimize the cash needed for expansion, and only invest periodically in leasehold improvements a portion of which is often reimbursed by the landlords of these facilities. Accordingly, our capital spending is generally limited to machinery and tooling, leasehold improvements, business applications software and computer and equipment. In the fiscal years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, we spent $29.9 million and $31.6 million, respectively, on capital expenditures.
Our strategy for delivering consumer products to our distributors and retail customers gives us the flexibility to provide container shipments directly from our contract manufacturers in Southern China and Malaysia to our customers and, alternatively, allows our distributors and certain retail customers to take possession of product on a domestic basis. Accordingly, our inventory consists of goods shipped to our third-party logistics providers for the fulfillment of distributor, retail and direct-to-consumer sales. Our contract manufacturers are also responsible for purchasing and stocking components required for the production of our products, and they typically invoice us when the finished goods are shipped.
Cash (used in) provided by operating activities
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Net cash used in our operations for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 was $32.0 million, of which the principal components were the cash outflow of $86.3 million from change in working capital, partially offset by our net income of $30.4 million and non-cash charges of $23.9 million. The cash outflow from changes in working capital is mainly driven by cash used in inventory of $151.2 million offset by cash inflow from the increase in accounts payable of $82.3 million.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Net cash provided by our operations for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was $232.0 million, of which the principal components were our net income of $147.1 million and non-cash charges of $41.2 million, and changes in working capital of $43.8 million. The changes in working capital include increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $106.0 million, partially offset by increases in inventory of $24.5 million, accounts receivable of $21.9 million and other assets of $15.8 million.
Cash used in investing activities
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 was $48.1 million. During the year ended January 1, 2022, we acquired Aeris for $71.4 million, net of cash acquired, and invested $29.9 million in the purchase of property and equipment, including machinery and tooling for new products. In addition, we made strategic investments of $10.8 million while proceeds from the sales and maturities of marketable securities amounted to $64.0 million.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Net cash used in investing activities for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was $22.2 million. During the year ended January 2, 2021, we invested $31.6 million in the purchase of property and equipment, including machinery and tooling for new products as well as expansion in Malaysia. In addition, we made strategic investments of $4.2 million while proceeds from the sales and maturities of marketable securities amounted to $13.5 million.
Cash used in financing activities
Year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended January 2, 2021
Net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 was $148.4 million, which primarily
reflects the repurchase of 1,198,218 shares of our common stock for $100.0 million under an accelerated share repurchase agreement during the third quarter of 2021, and the repurchase of 446,954 shares of our common stock for $50.0 million under a stock repurchase program during the second quarter of 2021.
Year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019
Net cash used in financing activities for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was $21.3 million, which primarily reflects the repurchase of 663,602 shares of our common stock for $25.0 million under a stock repurchase program in March
2020.
Working Capital Facility
Credit Facility
In June 2018, we entered into a new agreement with Bank of America, N.A., increasing the amount of our unsecured revolving line of credit from $75.0 million to $150.0 million and extending the term of the credit facility to June 2023. As of January 1, 2022, we had no outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility. The revolving line of credit is available
to fund working capital and other corporate purposes. The interest on loans under our credit facility accrues, at our election, at either (1) LIBOR plus a margin, currently equal to 1.0%, based on our ratio of indebtedness to Adjusted EBITDA (the "Eurodollar Rate"), or (2) the lender’s base rate. The lender’s base rate is equal to the highest of (1) the federal funds rate plus 0.5%, (2) the lender’s prime rate and (3) the Eurodollar Rate plus 1.0%. In the event USD LIBOR is discontinued as expected in June 2023, we expect the interest rates for our debt following such event will be based on either alternate base rates or agreed upon replacement rates. While we do not expect a LIBOR discontinuation would affect our ability to borrow or maintain already outstanding borrowings, it could result in higher interest rates.
The credit facility contains customary terms and conditions for credit facilities of this type, including restrictions on our ability to incur or guarantee additional indebtedness, create liens, enter into transactions with affiliates, make loans or investments, sell assets, pay dividends or make distributions on, or repurchase, our stock, and consolidate or merge with other entities. In addition, we are required to meet certain financial covenants customary with this type of agreement, including maintaining a maximum ratio of indebtedness to Adjusted EBITDA and a minimum specified interest coverage ratio.
The credit facility contains customary events of default, including for payment defaults, breaches of representations, breaches of affirmative or negative covenants, cross defaults to other material indebtedness, bankruptcy and failure to discharge certain judgments. If a default occurs and is not cured within any applicable cure period or is not waived, our obligations under the credit facility may be accelerated.
As of January 1, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants under the revolving credit facility.
Lines of Credit
We have an unsecured letter of credit facility with Bank of America, N.A., available to fund letters of credit up to an aggregate outstanding amount of $5.0 million. As of January 1, 2022, we had letters of credit outstanding of $0.7 million under our letter of credit facility and other lines of credit with Bank of America, N.A.
We have an unsecured guarantee line of credit with Mizuho, Bank Ltd., available to fund import tax payments up to an aggregate outstanding amount of 250.0 million Japanese Yen. As of January 1, 2022, we had no outstanding balance under the guarantee line of credit.
Working Capital and Capital Expenditure Needs
We currently have no material cash commitments, except for normal recurring trade payables, expense accruals, capital expenditures and operating leases, all of which we anticipate funding through working capital and funds provided by operating activities. We believe our outsourced approach to manufacturing provides us with flexibility in both managing inventory levels and financing our inventory. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, and funds available through our credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over at least the next twelve months. In the event our revenue plan does not meet our expectations, we may eliminate or curtail expenditures to mitigate the impact on our working capital. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of revenue growth or decline, the expansion or contraction of our marketing and sales activities, the timing and extent of spending to support product development efforts, the timing of introductions of new products and enhancements to existing products, the acquisition of new capabilities or technologies, the continuing market acceptance of our products and services, and the impact of COVID-19 on our business. Moreover, to the extent existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term investments, cash from operations, and cash from short-term borrowing are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may need to raise additional funds through public or private equity or debt financing. As part of our business strategy, we may consider additional acquisitions of companies, technologies and products, which could also require us to seek additional equity or debt financing. Additional funds may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all.
Contractual Obligations
We generally do not enter into binding purchase commitments. Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our credit facility, leases for office space, inventory related purchase obligations, and minimum contractual obligations. Other obligations consist primarily of subscription services. The following table describes our commitments to settle contractual obligations in cash as of January 1, 2022 (in thousands):
(1) Includes impact of an amendment entered after end of fiscal 2021.
(2) Includes estimated obligations under purchase orders related to inventory. Excludes purchase orders that can be cancelled without penalty.
At January 1, 2022, we had outstanding purchase orders aggregating approximately $363.9 million. The purchase orders, the majority of which are with our contract manufacturers for the purchase of inventory in the normal course of business, are for manufacturing and non-manufacturing related goods and services, and are cancellable without penalty.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of recently adopted accounting standards.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for a description of certain recently issued accounting standards which may impact our financial statements in future reporting periods.