Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Annual Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on January 22, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Annual Report as our “initial business combination”. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the "Initial Public Offering") and the private placement of the Private Placement Shares (as defined below), the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,012,145, which resulted from operating and formation costs of $894,112 and franchise tax expense of $187,945, offset in part by interest income on the Trust Account of $7,812 and the change in fair value of the over-allotment option of $62,100.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 11, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 15,000,000 shares of Class A common stock (the "Public Shares") at $10.00 per Public Share, generating gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 1,090,000 shares of Class A common stock at a price of $10.00 per share (the "Private Placement Shares"), generating gross proceeds of $10,900,000.
On June 16, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option and purchased an additional 1,680,000 shares (the "Over-Allotment Shares"), and the sale of an additional 100,800 shares (the "Over-Allotment Private Placement Shares") at $10.00 per share, generating total gross proceeds of $1,008,000.
For the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,088,818, which was due to our net loss of $1,012,145, change in fair value of the over-allotment option of $62,100, interest income on the Trust
Account of $7,812, and changes in working capital of $185,462, offset in part by the amortization of prepaid expenses and other assets of $171,582 and formation and operating costs of $7,119.
For the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities of $173,472,000 was the result of the amount of net proceeds from the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Shares being deposited to the Trust Account.
For the period from January 22, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $175,055,511, which was comprised of the net proceeds from the initial public offering, net of underwriter’s discount paid of $163,464,000, proceeds from the sale of private placement shares of $11,908,000, and proceeds from the sale of common stock to the Sponsor of $25,000, offset in part by payment of offering costs of $341,489.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $494,693 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s directors and officers may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”).
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the Initial Public Offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement shares and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
Due to Related Party
An affiliate of the Sponsor has paid $163,715 to cover certain operating costs and offering costs on behalf of the Company. The outstanding balance is due on-demand.
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares and Private Placement Shares that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional shares of Class A common stock to cover over-allotments at the Initial Public Offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On June 16, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised the over-allotment option and purchased an additional 1,680,000 Over-Allotment Shares for an aggregate purchase price of $16,800,000. The remaining 570,000 shares were not exercised by the underwriter and expired on July 26, 2021.
The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting fee of $0.20 per share, or $3,336,000 in the aggregate, upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per share, or $5,838,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common stock subject to possible redemption
All of the 16,680,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of the Units in the Initial Public Offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require common stock subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all Class A common stock has been classified outside of permanent equity.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding shares of common stock subject to forfeiture. As the Public Shares are considered to be redeemable at fair value, and a redemption at fair value does not amount to a distribution different than other stockholders, Class A and Class B common stock are presented as one class of stock in calculating net loss per share. As a result, the calculated net loss per share is the same for Class A and Class B shares of common stock. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares of common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented.