ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion contains forward-looking statements, such as our plans, expectations and intentions (including those related to clinical trials and business and expense trends), that are based upon current expectations and that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ significantly from management’s expectations. The factors that could affect these forward-looking statements are in Item 1A of Part I of this report. This discussion should not be construed to imply that the results discussed herein will necessarily continue into the future, or that any expectations expressed herein will necessarily be indicative of actual operating results in the future. Such discussion represents only the best present assessment by our management.
Business Overview
We have generated aggregate product revenues from our two commercial businesses of $7.2 million and $7.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We currently have no revenue generated from our principal operations in therapeutic and clinical product development.
Our products are based on multi-decade experience with human cell culture and a proprietary type of pluripotent stem cells, human parthenogenetic stem cells (“hpSCs”). Our hpSCs are comparable to human embryonic stem cells (“hESCs”) in that they have the potential to be differentiated into many different cells in the human body. However, the derivation of hpSCs does not require the use of fertilized eggs or the destruction of viable human embryos and also offers the potential for the creation of immune-matched cells and tissues that are less likely to be rejected following transplantation. Our collection of hpSCs, known as UniStemCell™, currently consists of 15 stem cell lines. We have facilities and manufacturing protocols that comply with the requirements of Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards as promulgated by the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations and enforced by the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).
COVID-19 Pandemic
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has been and will likely continue to be extensive in many aspects of society, which has resulted in and will likely continue to result in significant disruptions to the global economy, as well as businesses and capital markets around the world. Impacts to our business have included a reduction in sales volume primarily from media sales in our biomedical market segment and professional channel sales in our anti-aging market segment, temporary or reduced occupancy of portions of our manufacturing facilities, and disruptions or restrictions on our employee's ability to travel to such manufacturing facilities which caused minor delays in manufacturing. Our manufacturing facilities continue to operate as they are deemed essential suppliers in accordance with laws applicable to California and Maryland. We have taken precautionary measures to better ensure the health and safety of our workers, including staggering employees’ shifts and isolating at-risk employees.
The scope and duration of these delays and disruptions, and the ultimate impacts of COVID-19 on our operations, are currently unknown. We are continuing to actively monitor the situation and may take further precautionary and preemptive actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of public health and safety. We cannot predict the effects that such actions, or the impact of COVID-19 on global business operations and economic conditions, may continue to have on our business, strategy, collaborations, or financial and operating results.
Market Opportunity and Growth Strategy
Therapeutic Market - Clinical Applications of hpSCs for Disease Treatments
With respect to therapeutic research and product candidates, we focus on applications where cell and tissue therapy is already proven but where there is an insufficient supply of safe and functional cells or tissue. We believe that the most promising potential clinical applications of our technology are: 1) Parkinson’s disease (“PD”); and 2) traumatic brain injury (“TBI”). Using our proprietary technologies and know-how, we are creating neural stem cells from hpSCs as a potential treatment of PD, TBI and stroke.
Our most advanced project is the neural stem cell program for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. In 2013 we published in Nature Scientific Reports the basis for our patent on a new method of manufacturing neural stem cells which is used to produce the clinical-grade cells necessary for future clinical studies and commercialization. In 2014 we completed the majority of the preclinical research establishing the safety profile of NSC in various animal species including non-human primates. In June 2016 we published the results of a 12-month pre-clinical non-human primate study, which demonstrated the safety, efficacy and mechanism of action of the ISC- hpNSC®. In 2017 we dosed four patients in our Phase I trial of ISC-hpNSC®, human parthenogenetic stem cell-derived neural stem
cells for the treatment of Parkinson’s disease. We reported 12-month results from the first cohort and 6-month interim results of the second cohort at the Society for Neuroscience annual meeting (Neuroscience 2018) in November 2018. In April 2019, we announced the completion of subject enrollment, with the 12th subject receiving a transplantation of the highest dose of cells. There have been no safety signals or serious adverse effects seen to date as related to the transplanted ISC-hpNSC® cells.
In August 2014 we announced the launch of a stroke program, evaluating the use of ISC-hpNSC® transplantation for the treatment of ischemic stroke using a rodent model of the disease. The Company has a considerable amount of safety data on ISC-hpNSC® from the Parkinson’s disease program and, as there is evidence that transplantation of ISC-hpNSC® may improve patient outcomes as an adjunctive therapeutic strategy in stroke, having a second program that can use this safety dataset is therefore a logical extension. In 2015 the Company together with Tulane University demonstrated that NSC can significantly reduce neurological dysfunction after a stroke in animal models.
In October 2016 we announced the results of the pre-clinical rodent study, evaluating the use of ISC-hpNSC® transplantation for the treatment of TBI. The study was conducted at the University of South Florida Morsani College of Medicine. We demonstrated that animals receiving injections of ISC-hpNSC® displayed the highest levels of improvements in cognitive performance and motor coordination compared to vehicle control treated animals. In February 2019, we published the results of the pre-clinical study in Theranostics, a prestigious peer-reviewed medical journal. The publication titled, "Human parthenogenetic neural stem cell grafts promote multiple regenerative processes in a traumatic brain injury model,” demonstrated that the clinical-grade neural stem cells used in our Parkinson’s disease clinical trial, ISC-hpNSC®, significantly improved TBI-associated motor, neurological, and cognitive deficits without any safety issues.
Anti-Aging Cosmetic Market - Skin Care Products
Our wholly-owned subsidiary LSC develops, manufactures and offers for sale anti-aging skin care products based on two core technologies: encapsulated extract derived from hpSC and specially selected targeted small molecules. LSC’s products include:
•
ProPlus Advanced Defense Complex
•
ProPlus Advanced Recovery Complex
•
ProPlus Eye Firming Complex
•
ProPlus Neck Firming Complex
•
ProPlus Advanced Aquoues Treatment
•
ProPlus Collagen Booster (Advanced Molecular Serum)
•
ProPlus Elastin Booster
•
ProPlus Brightening Toner
LSC’s products are regulated as cosmetics. LSC’s products are sold domestically through a branded website, Amazon, ecommerce partners and through the professional channel (including dermatologists, plastic surgeons, medical, day and resort spas).
Biomedical Market - Primary Human Cell Research Products
Our wholly-owned subsidiary LCT develops, manufactures and commercializes approximately 200 human cell culture products, including frozen human “primary” cells and the reagents (called “media”) needed to grow, maintain and differentiate the cells. LCT’s scientists have used a standardized, methodical, scientific approach to basal medium optimization to systematically produce optimized products designed to culture specific human cell types and to elicit specific cellular behaviors. These techniques can also be used to produce products that do not contain non-human animal proteins, a feature desirable to the research and therapeutic markets. Each LCT cell product is quality tested for the expression of specific markers (to assure the cells are the correct type), proliferation rate, viability, morphology and absence of pathogens. Each cell system also contains associated donor information and all informed consent requirements are strictly followed. LCT’s research products are marketed and sold by its internal sales force, OEM partners and LCT brand distributors in Europe and Asia.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar and percent change in those items (in thousands):
Product Sales
Product sales revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.2 million, compared to $7.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to a $342 thousand increase in sales in our biomedical market segment, largely offset by a $294 thousand decrease in sales in our anti-aging market during 2021 compared to 2020.
Our biomedical product sales continue to recover from the impacts of COVID-19 as purchasing activity from our largest original equipment manufacturer customers increases.
Our professional skin care products, which are largely marketed to medical professionals and spas that offer walk-up retail, experienced a significant decline in customer demand due to COVID-19 and the related restrictions as these businesses have continued with limited or reduced operations during the year ended December 31, 2021. The impact of these restrictions was mitigated in-part by expanding our offering of professional skin care products through our ecommerce channel. Anti-aging product sales through our ecommerce channel remained consistent year-over-year.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.9 million, compared to $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in costs as a result of an increase in product sales. Profit margins have deteriorated for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020, largely as a result of rising raw materials and labor related costs, and a scarcity of certain materials, principally plastics. In response, we have increased our supply of raw materials on hand and have, where possible, sourced materials from alternative vendors.
Cost of sales consists primarily of salaries and benefits associated with employee efforts expended directly on the production of the Company’s products, as well as related direct materials, general laboratory supplies and an allocation of overhead. We aim to continue refining our manufacturing processes and supply chain management to improve the cost of sales as a percentage of revenue for both LCT and LSC.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $4.1 million, compared to $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a decrease in personnel-related costs and stock-based compensation of $522 thousand, a $87 thousand decrease in consulting and servicing fees, and a $26 thousand decrease in investor relations fees, partially offset by an increase in impairment of intangible assets of $184 thousand, a $57 thousand increase in director and officer liability insurance premiums, a $24 thousand increase in human resource related expenses, a $16 thousand gain on foreign currency exchange rate conversion, and a $15 thousand increase in filing fees.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.4 million, compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $178 thousand decrease in personnel-related costs, sales commissions and stock-based compensation, primarily as a result of headcount reductions and grants from 2018 which were issued and fully vested in 2021, and a $211 thousand decrease in marketing, advertising, and building related expenses, partially offset by a $17 thousand increase in consulting and creative service fees. The reduction in marketing, advertising, and building related expenses was largely attributable to travel restrictions as a result of COVID-19.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.7 million, compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to a $247 thousand decrease in personnel-related costs and stock-based compensation primarily as a result of headcount reductions and grants from 2018 which were issued and fully vested in 2021, a $89 thousand decrease in materials and supplies related to clinical trial expenses, a $46 thousand decrease in consulting services, partially offset by a $45 thousand increase in building and utilities related expenses and a $44 thousand decrease in our research and development tax credit related to qualifiable expenditures from our research and development activities of our Australia subsidiary, Cyto Therapeutics, which reduced research and development expenses for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Our research and development efforts are primarily focused on the development of treatments for Parkinson’s disease, traumatic brain injury, liver diseases, stroke, and the creation of new GMP grade human parthenogenetic stem cell lines. These projects are long-term investments that involve developing both new stem cell lines and new differentiation techniques that can provide higher purity populations of functional cells. Research and development expenses are expensed as incurred and are accounted for on a project-by-project basis. However, much of our research has potential applicability to each of our projects. As we completed Phase 1 of our clinical in June 2021, we do not anticipate significant investment in research and development efforts related to therapeutic and clinical product development efforts for the foreseeable future, or until such time that we initiate a Phase 2 clinical trial.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.0 million, compared to other income, net, of $94 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to forgiveness of our First Draw Loan and Second Draw Loan from the PPP, collectively totaling $1.1 million, partially offset by a decrease of $207 thousand for the change in the fair value of the warrant liability during the prior year period. The warrants expired unexercised in March 2021 and, as such, no further change in the fair value of the warrant liability will be recognized.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $110 million and have, on an annual basis, incurred net losses and negative operating cash flows since inception. Substantially all of our operating losses have resulted from the funding of our research and development programs and general and administrative expenses associated with our operations. We incurred net losses of $0.9 million and $2.7 million for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $171 thousand, compared to $689 thousand as of December 31, 2020.
In May 2020, we received a first draw loan of $654 thousand from the PPP (“First Draw Loan”) which provided additional liquidity to support our current operations. In March 2021, we received a second draw loan of $474 thousand from the PPP (“Second Draw Loan”). In June 2021, we applied for and received forgiveness of unpaid principal and accrued interest from our First Draw Loan in the amount of $661 thousand. In August 2021, we applied for and received forgiveness of unpaid principal and accrued interest from our Second Draw Loan in the amount of $476 thousand. As of December 31, 2021, we are not eligible to receive any additional funding, or have any further obligations, related to the PPP.
Cash Flows
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Operating Cash Flows
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1.3 million, resulting primarily from our net loss of $899 thousand and net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $823 thousand, consisting primarily of an increase in accounts receivable of $441 thousand, inventory, net, of $268 thousand, and decrease in operating lease liabilities of $342 thousand, partially offset by net non-cash adjustments of $425 thousand. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $341 thousand, resulting primarily from our net loss of $2.7 million and change in fair value of warrant liability of $207 thousand, offset by non-cash adjustments of stock-based compensation expense of $1.3 million, operating lease expense of $265 thousand and depreciation and amortization of $253 thousand, coupled with net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $623 thousand.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $45 thousand, compared to $108 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was attributable to a decrease in payments for patent licenses of $58 thousand and purchases of property and equipment of $5 thousand year-over-year.
Financing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.8 million, compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $474 thousand in proceeds from our second draw loan under the Paycheck Protection Program, coupled with proceeds from a note payable from a related party of $350 thousand. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of $654 thousand in proceeds from our first draw loan under the Paycheck Protection Program.
Liquidity and Going Concern
Management continues to evaluate various financing sources and options to raise working capital to help fund our current research and development programs and operations. We will need to obtain significant additional capital from sources including exercise of outstanding warrants, equity and/or debt financings, license arrangements, grants and/or collaborative research arrangements to sustain our operations and develop products. Unless we obtain additional financing, we do not have sufficient cash on hand to sustain our operations at least through one year after the issuance date. The timing and degree of any future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the accuracy of the assumptions underlying the estimates for capital needs in 2022 and beyond;
•
the extent that revenues from sales of LSC and LCT products cover the related costs and provide capital;
•
scientific progress in our research and development programs;
•
the magnitude and scope of our research and development programs and our ability to establish, enforce and maintain strategic arrangements for research, development, clinical testing, manufacturing and marketing;
•
our progress with pre-clinical development and clinical trials;
•
the extent to which third party interest in Company’s research and commercial products can be realized through effective partnerships;
•
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approvals;
•
the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims;
•
the number and type of product candidates that we pursue; and
•
the development of major public health concerns, including the novel coronavirus outbreak or other pandemics arising globally, and the current and future impact of it and COVID-19 on our business operations and funding requirements.
Our failure to raise capital or enter into applicable arrangements when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition. Additional debt financing may be expensive and require us to pledge all or a substantial portion of its assets. Further, if additional funds are obtained through arrangements with collaborative partners, these arrangements may require us to relinquish rights to some of its technologies, product candidates or products that we would otherwise seek to develop and commercialize on its own. If sufficient capital is not available, we may be required to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more of its product initiatives.
We currently have no revenue generated from our principal operations in therapeutic and clinical product development through research and development efforts. In addition, as we completed Phase 1 of our clinical in June 2021, we do not anticipate significant investment in research and development efforts related to therapeutic and clinical product development efforts for the foreseeable future, or until such time that we initiate a Phase 2 clinical trial. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in maintaining our normal operating cash flow and obtaining additional funds and that the timing of our capital raising or future financing will result in cash flow sufficient to sustain our operations at least through one year after the issuance date.
Based on the factors above, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements were prepared assuming that we will continue to operate as a going concern. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are focused on managing our cash flow, the proper timing of our capital expenditures, and raising additional capital or financing in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions and we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our most critical accounting estimates include current and non-current inventory, intangible assets, and stock-based compensation. We review our estimates and assumptions periodically and reflect the effects of revisions in the period in which they are deemed to be necessary. We believe that the following accounting policies are critical to the judgments and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets consist of acquired patent licenses and capitalized legal fees related to the acquisition, filing, maintenance, and defense of patents and trademarks. Amortization begins once the patent is issued by the appropriate authoritative bodies. In the period in which a patent application is rejected or efforts to pursue the patent are abandoned, all the related accumulated costs are expensed. Our patents and other intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the useful life of the underlying patent, which is generally 15 years, or when the intangible asset is rejected or abandoned. All amortization expense and impairment charges related to intangible assets are included in general and administrative expense in our consolidated statements of operations.
Allowance for Excess and Obsolete Inventory
Our inventory, particularly within our biomedical market, consists of certain products that have a long or, when frozen, indefinite shelf life. In addition, future demand for our products is uncertain. Accordingly, at each reporting period, we estimate a reserve for allowance for excess and obsolete inventory. This estimate is computed using historical sales data and inventory turnover rates, which are subjective in nature and fluctuate between periods. The establishment of a reserve for excess and obsolete inventory establishes a
new cost basis in the inventory with a corresponding adjustment to cost of sales. If we are unable to sell such inventory, any related reserves are reduced in the period of sale.
Stock-Based Compensation
We are required to measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based payment awards made to employees and consultants based on estimated fair value. We estimate the fair value of stock options granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The determination of fair value of stock-based awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the use of certain estimates and subjective assumptions that affect the amount of stock-based compensation expense recognized in our consolidated statements of operations. These include estimates of the expected volatility of our stock price, expected option life, expected dividends and the risk-free interest rate. Estimated volatility is a measure of the amount by which our stock price is expected to fluctuate each year during the expected life of the award. The expected option life is calculated using the mid-point method as prescribed by accounting guidance for stock-based compensation. We determined expected dividend yield to be 0% given that we have never declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock, and we currently do not anticipate paying such cash dividends. The risk-free interest rate is based upon United States Treasury securities with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the share-based awards. If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes model change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ materially from what we have recorded in the current period.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.