ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Except for the historical information contained herein, the matters discussed in this Form 10-K include certain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, which are intended to be covered by safe harbors. Those statements include, but are not limited to, all statements regarding our and management’s intent, belief and expectations, such as statements concerning our future and our operating and growth strategy. We generally use words such as “believe,” “may,” “could,” “will,” “intend,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements for many reasons including our ability to implement our business plan, our ability to raise additional funds and manage consumer acceptance of our products, our ability to broaden our customer base, our ability to maintain a satisfactory relationship with our suppliers and other risks described in our reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including Item 1A of this Report on Form 10-K. Although we believe the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, they relate only to events as of the date on which the statements are made, and our future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements may not meet these expectations. Investors are cautioned that all forward-looking statements involve risks and uncertainties including, without limitation, the factors set forth under the Risk Factors section of this report. In light of the significant uncertainties inherent in the forward-looking statements included herein, the inclusion of such information should not be regarded as a representation by us or any other person that our objectives and plans will be achieved. All forward-looking statements made in this Form 10-K are based on information presently available to our management. We do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this document to conform these statements to actual results or to changes in our expectations, except as required by law.
Results of Operations
Comparison of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in 000’s):
Revenues
Total revenue increased by $3,357,000, or 18%, to $21,883,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $18,526,000 in 2020. The increase is attributable to increased revenue in both our Communications and Compliance revenue streams.
Communications revenue increased $2,188,000, or 18%, to $14,058,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11,870,000 during 2020. The increase in revenue is primarily attributable to an increase in revenue from our ACCESSWIRE newswire brand, because of both an increase in average price per release and an increase in volume. During the year, ACCESSWIRE revenue increased over 35% compared to the prior year. We also generated increased revenue from licenses of our investor relations websites and data feeds. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in events and webcasting revenue due to lower demand for events, virtual annual meetings, and virtual conferences. While revenue from this business decreased compared to the prior year, a year in which we experienced higher demand as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is still above the pre-pandemic levels of 2019. Communications revenue remained 64% of total revenue during the year.
Compliance revenue increased $1,169,000, or 18%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020. The increase in revenue is primarily related to an increase in revenue from print and proxy fulfilment services due to increased projects associated with annual meetings and special transactions. Revenue from our transfer agent services also increased during the year due to an increase in corporate transactions and directives. Revenue from these two services tends to fluctuate from period to period depending on corporate transactions and market activity.
2021 Revenue Backlog
As of December 31, 2021, our deferred revenue balance was $3,086,000, a majority of which we expect to recognize over the next twelve months, compared to $2,212,000 at December 31, 2020, an increase of 40%. Deferred revenue primarily consists of advance billings for subscriptions of our cloud-based products and pre-paid packages of our news distribution product, as well as advance billings for annual service contracts.
Cost of Revenues
Communications cost of revenues consists primarily of direct labor costs, newswire distribution costs, teleconferencing costs and third-party licensing costs. Compliance cost of revenue consists primarily of direct labor costs, warehousing, logistics, print production materials, postage, and amortization of capitalized software costs related to our disclosure software. Cost of revenues increased by $333,000, or 6%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the same period of 2020. Overall gross margin increased $3,024,000, or 23%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. As a result, overall gross margin percentage increased to 74% during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 71% during the prior year. The increase in cost of revenues is due partially to an increase in labor costs associated with delivering our newswire revenue, an increase in distribution costs as we continue to expand our distribution capabilities and an increase in print, postage and fulfillment costs associated with delivering revenue from our print and proxy fulfillment services. These increases were offset by decreases in amortization of capitalized software as well as decreases in teleconferencing and other costs associated with our events and webcasting business.
Gross margin percentage associated with our Communications revenue was 76% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 73% for 2020. The increase in gross margin percentage is primarily attributable to the addition of revenue associated with our ACCESSWIRE business.
Gross margin percentage associated with our Compliance revenue was 70% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 66% for 2020. The increase in gross margin percentage associated with our Compliance revenue was due to an increase in revenue from our transfer agent services as well as a decrease in amortization of capitalized software associated with our disclosure software.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, insurance, fees for professional services, general corporate expenses and facility and equipment expenses. General and administrative expenses were $5,491,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $462,000 or 9%, as compared to the prior year. This increase is primarily due to an increase in employee-related costs as well as professional fees associated with corporate initiatives, including merger and acquisition related expenses, and insurance expense. General and administrative expenses in 2020 included a one-time expense related to an accrual of $350,000 for sales and use tax compliance.
As a percentage of revenue, General and Administrative expenses were 25% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 27% for 2020.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, sales commissions, advertising expenses and other marketing expenses. Sales and marketing expenses were $5,079,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1,267,000, or 33%, as compared to the prior year. This increase is directly related to our investment in our sales and marketing initiatives with an increase in headcount, commissions, and digital marketing.
As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses were 23% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 21% for 2020.
Product Development
Product development expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation, bonuses and licenses to develop new products and technology to complement and/or enhance Platform id. Product development expenses increased $394,000, or 48%, to $1,219,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020. The increase is due to an increase in headcount within the development team and use of more specialized consultants. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we capitalized $215,000 of costs related to the development of our newsroom product, which launched during the third quarter of 2021. No costs were capitalized during the year ended December 31, 2020.
As a percentage of revenue, Product Development expenses were 6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 4% for 2020.
Depreciation and Amortization
During the year ended December 31, 2021, depreciation and amortization expenses decreased by $148,000, or 20%, to $603,000, as compared to $751,000 during 2020. The decrease is primarily related to intangible assets associated with the acquisition of PIR that became fully amortized during the prior year.
Other income, net
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Other income, net, primarily represents a benefit of $366,000 related to the employee retention credit enacted under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). For the year ended December 31, 2020, Other income, net relates to an $80,000 gain on extinguishment of debt associated with the final anniversary payment related to our 2017 acquisition of Interwest Transfer Company (“Interwest”) in 2017 as well as interest income on deposit and money market accounts. These items are partially offset by the non-cash interest associated with the present value of the anniversary payments of the Interwest acquisition.
Income Taxes
We recorded income tax expense of $821,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $724,000 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax expense is attributable to higher pre-tax income for the year ended December 31, 2021. The difference in our effective tax rate of 20% and the statutory rate of 21% was due to the effect of an equity-based compensation benefit, return to provision adjustment arising from a Sec. 986 loss from previously taxed earnings and profits resulting from the liquidation of Issuer Direct Ltd., Foreign Derived Intangible Income deductions and foreign tax differentials, partially offset by state income taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the difference between our effective tax rate of 26% and the federal statutory rate of 21% is primarily due to state income taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $23,852,000 in cash and cash equivalents and $3,291,000 in net accounts receivable. Current liabilities as of December 31, 2021, totaled $5,802,000 including our accounts payable, deferred revenue, accrued payroll liabilities, income taxes payable, current portion of lease liabilities and other accrued expenses. At December 31, 2021, our current assets exceeded our current liabilities by $22,091,000.
Effective October 3, 2021, we renewed our unsecured Line of Credit, which changed the interest rate from LIBOR plus 1.75% to SOFR (Secured Overnight Financing Rate) plus 1.75%. The amount of funds available for borrowing remained $3,000,000 and the term remained two years. As of December 31, 2021, the interest rate was 1.80% and we did not owe any amounts on the Line of Credit.
Disclosure about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any transactions, agreements or other contractual arrangements that constitute off-balance sheet arrangements.
Outlook
The following statements and certain statements made elsewhere in this document are based upon current expectations. These statements are forward looking and are subject to factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those suggested here, including, without limitation, demand for and acceptance of our services, new developments, competition and general economic or market conditions, particularly in the domestic and international capital markets. Refer also to the Cautionary Statement Concerning Forward Looking Statements included in this report.
While it is unknown how long current conditions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic will last, including whether a worldwide resurgence will occur, variants of the virus will become more impactful or vaccines will be completely effective, we could experience a material disruption of our employees and operations, a decline in revenue, a decline in value of our assets, deterioration of our customer base and the inability of our customers to pay for subscriptions or services provided. To date, we have seen both positive and negative impacts to our business. Physical, in-person conferences have been delayed and in the prior year there was a delay in transactions processed by the Depository Trust Company and banks and brokers in our transfer agent business. However, our ability to pivot and enhance our product offering with our virtual products generated increased revenue over the past 21 months. Despite the short-term increase in revenue, the concentrations of our customer base within middle, small and micro-cap customers make it reasonably possible that we are vulnerable to the risk of a near-term negative impact related to the COVID-19 pandemic if a substantial portion of these customers are forced to scale back or cease operations. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business and are unable at this time to predict the continued impact that COVID-19 will have on our business, financial position, and operating results in future periods due to numerous uncertainties.
Overall, the demand for our platforms and services continues to be stable in a majority of the segments we serve. Although we experienced a decline in our webcasting and event business since 2020, we are seeing increased demand compared to the pre-pandemic period for virtual events using both our conference software and webcasting products, as customers are opting to hold virtual meetings. During the first and second quarter of 2020, we were able to pivot portions of our platform to specifically address COVID-19 business limitations. This resulted in a new Virtual Annual Meeting product, which combines our webcasting and proxy voting technology together. Additionally, we also upgraded technology of our conference software product to allow conferences to go entirely virtual and hold one-on-one meetings with audio, video and sharing features.
We believe these developments will assist us in not only delivering attractive solutions to the market, but also lead us into new opportunities during this changing and challenging environment. The extent to how long these shifts in demands will occur is uncertain at this time and could be longer than just 2020 and 2021. However, we cannot make any assurances at this time that our product upgrades will be accepted by customers and revenue will be significant enough to offset losses in other aspects of our business in the long-term.
The transition to a platform subscription model has been and will continue to be key for our long-term sustainable growth. We will also continue to focus on the following key strategic initiatives during 2022:
·
Expanding our Communications products and adapting to this changing industry,
·
Evaluating and completing acquisitions in areas of strategic focus,
·
Expanding our Communications sales and marketing teams and digital marketing strategy,
·
Expanding customer base,
·
Expanding our newswire distribution,
·
Investing in technology advancements and upgrades,
·
Generating profitable sustainable growth
·
Generating cash flows from operations.
We believe there is significant demand for our products around the world, led by our ACCESSWIRE newswire brand, as companies seek to find better platforms and tools to disseminate and communicate their messages in a more efficient and collaborative way.
We have invested and will continue to invest in our product sets, platforms and intellectual property development via internal development and acquisitions. Acquisitions remain a core part of our strategy and we believe acquisitions are key to enhancing our overall offerings in the market and necessary to keep our competitive advantages and facilitate the next round of growth that management believes it can achieve. If we are successful in this effort, we believe we can further increase our market share and revenues per user as we move forward.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and our wholly owned subsidiaries. Significant intercompany accounts and transactions are eliminated in consolidation.
Revenue Recognition
Substantially all our revenue comes from contracts with customers for subscriptions to our cloud-based products or contracts for Communications and Compliance products and services. Customers consist of public corporate issuers and professional firms, such as investor and public relations firms. In the case of news distribution and webcasting offerings, customers also include private companies. We account for a contract with a customer when there is an enforceable contract between us and the customer, the rights of the parties are identified, the contract has economic substance, and collectability of the contract consideration is probable. Our revenues are measured based on consideration specified in the contract with each customer.
Our contracts include either a subscription to our entire platform or certain modules within the platform, or an agreement to perform services, or any combination thereof, and often contain multiple subscriptions and services. For these bundled contracts, we account for individual subscriptions and services as separate performance obligations if they are distinct, which is when a product or service is separately identifiable from other items in the bundled package, and a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. We separate revenue from our contracts into two revenue streams: i) Communications and ii) Compliance. Performance obligations of Communications contracts include providing subscriptions to certain modules or the entire Platform id. Communications module, distributing press releases on a per release basis or conducting webcasts, virtual annual meetings or other events on a per event basis. Performance obligations of Compliance contracts include providing subscriptions to our cloud-based Platform id. Compliance module, Whistleblower module or other stand-ready obligations to deliver services and annual report printing and distribution. Additionally, services are provided on a per project basis. Set up fees for disclosure services are considered a separate performance obligation and are satisfied upfront. Set up fees for the transfer agent module and investor relations content management module are immaterial. Our subscription and service contracts are generally for one year, with automatic renewal clauses included in the contract until the contract is cancelled. The contracts do not contain any rights of returns, guarantees or warranties. Since contracts are generally for one year, all the revenue is expected to be recognized within one year from the contract start date. As such, we have elected the optional exemption that allows us not to disclose the transaction price allocated to performance obligations that are unsatisfied or partially satisfied at the end of each reporting period.
We recognize revenue for subscriptions evenly over the contract period, upon distribution for per release contracts and upon event completion for webcasting and virtual annual meeting events. For service contracts that include stand ready obligations, revenue is recognized evenly over the contract period. For all other services delivered on a per project or event basis, the revenue is recognized at the completion of the event. We believe recognizing revenue for subscriptions and stand ready obligations using a time-based measure of progress, best reflects our performance in satisfying the obligations.
For bundled contracts, revenue is allocated to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. Standalone selling prices are based on observable prices at which we separately sell the subscription or service. If a standalone selling price is not directly observable, we use the residual method to allocate any remaining price to that subscription or service. We review standalone selling prices, at least annually, and update these estimates if necessary.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We monitor outstanding receivables based on factors surrounding the credit risk of specific customers, historical trends, and other information. Credit is granted on an unsecured basis. The allowance for doubtful accounts is estimated based on an assessment of our ability to collect on customer accounts receivable. There is judgment involved with estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts and if the financial condition of our customers were to deteriorate, resulting in their inability to make the required payments, we may be required to record additional allowances or charges against revenues. Given the current environment of the COVID-19 pandemic additional attention has been paid to the financial viability of our customers. We generally write-off accounts receivable against the allowance when we determine a balance is uncollectible and no longer actively pursue its collection.
Income Taxes
Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are computed for differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities that will result in future taxable or deductible amounts based on enacted tax laws and rates applicable to the periods in which the differences are expected to affect taxable income. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. For any uncertain tax positions, we recognize the impact of a tax position, only if it is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination, based on the technical merits of the position. Our policy regarding the classification of interest and penalties is to classify them as income tax expense in the financial statements, if applicable.
Capitalized Software
Costs incurred to develop our cloud-based platform products are capitalized when the preliminary project phase is complete, management commits to fund the project and it is probable the project will be completed and used for its intended purposes. Once the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use, the software is amortized over its estimated useful life, which is typically four years. Costs related to design or maintenance of the software are expensed as incurred.
Impairment of Long-lived Assets
In accordance with the authoritative guidance for accounting for long-lived assets, assets such as property and equipment, trademarks, and intangible assets subject to amortization, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable. Recoverability of asset groups to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset group. If the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds fair value of the asset group.
Lease Accounting
We determine if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating lease agreements are primarily for office space and are included within lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet.
ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent the obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. ROU assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Variable lease payments consist of non-lease services related to the lease and payments under operating leases classified as short-term. Variable lease payments are excluded from the ROU assets and lease liabilities and are recognized in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. As most of the leases do not provide an implicit rate, we use its incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of lease payments. ROU assets include any lease payments due and exclude lease incentives. Rental expense for lease payments related to operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.