Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is meant to provide material information relevant to an assessment of the financial condition and results of operations of our company, including an evaluation of the amounts and certainty of cash flows from operations and from outside sources, so as to allow investors to better view our company from management’s perspective. This discussion and analysis should be read together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and should be read together with the "Risk Factors" section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a science-driven biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery and development of novel treatments for retinal diseases with significant unmet medical needs. We are committed to having a positive impact on patients’ lives by delivering high-quality, safe and effective treatments designed to address debilitating retinal diseases, including earlier stages of age-related macular degeneration, or AMD.
Our lead asset is our clinical stage product candidate Zimura® (avacincaptad pegol), a complement C5 inhibitor. We are currently targeting the following diseases with Zimura:
•Geographic Atrophy, or GA, which is the advanced stage of AMD and is characterized by marked thinning or atrophy of retinal tissue, leading to irreversible loss of vision;
•intermediate AMD, which is an earlier stage of AMD that precedes GA; and
•autosomal recessive Stargardt disease, or STGD1, which is an orphan inherited condition characterized by progressive damage to the central portion of the retina, or the macula, and other retinal tissue, leading to loss of vision.
In July 2021, we completed patient enrollment for GATHER2, our Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of Zimura for the treatment of GA secondary to AMD. We also received a written agreement from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or the FDA, under a Special Protocol Assessment, or SPA, for the overall design of GATHER2. We expect topline data from the GATHER2 trial to become available during the second half of 2022, approximately one year after the enrollment of the last patient plus the time needed for database lock and analysis. We also plan to initiate a Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating Zimura for patients with intermediate AMD during the second half of 2022.
In addition to Zimura, we are developing our preclinical product candidate IC-500, a High temperature requirement A serine peptidase 1 protein, or HtrA1, inhibitor, for GA and potentially other age-related retinal diseases. Based on current timelines, we expect to submit an investigational new drug application, or IND, to the FDA for IC-500 in mid-2023.
Our portfolio also includes two preclinical stage gene therapy product candidates (IC-100 and IC-200) and several ongoing gene therapy research programs, each of which uses adeno-associated virus, or AAV, for gene delivery. These AAV mediated gene therapy programs are targeting the following orphan inherited retinal diseases, or IRDs:
•rhodopsin-mediated autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa, or RHO-adRP, which is characterized by progressive and severe bilateral loss of vision leading to blindness;
•IRDs associated with mutations in the BEST1 gene, including Best vitelliform macular dystrophy, or Best disease;
•Leber Congenital Amaurosis type 10, or LCA10, which is characterized by severe bilateral loss of vision at or soon after birth;
•STGD1; and
•IRDs associated with mutations in the USH2A gene, which include Usher syndrome type 2A, or Usher 2A, and USH2A-associated non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa.
As we focus our efforts on and prioritize the development and potential commercialization of Zimura, we have been considering our development options for IC-100 and IC-200, which we have been developing for RHO-adRP and BEST1-related IRDs, respectively. We currently plan to seek a collaborator for the future development and potential commercialization of these product candidates.
Research and Development Pipeline
We have summarized the current status of our ongoing research and development programs in the table below.
*We have an option to exclusively in-license intellectual property resulting from these programs.
Therapeutic Development Programs
Zimura
Zimura, our complement C5 inhibitor, is a chemically-synthesized, pegylated RNA aptamer. Aptamers are short molecules made up of a single stranded nucleic acid sequence or amino acid sequence that binds molecular targets with high selectivity and specificity. The following are brief descriptions of our ongoing and planned clinical trials for Zimura, and our manufacturing activities for Zimura.
GATHER2 (GA secondary to AMD - Ongoing)
Trial Design
GATHER2 is an international, randomized, double-masked, sham controlled, multi-center Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of Zimura for the treatment of GA secondary to AMD. In this trial, we enrolled 448 patients who were randomized to receive either monthly administration of Zimura 2 mg or sham during the first 12 months of the trial, at which time we plan to analyze the primary efficacy endpoint of the mean rate of growth (slope) estimated based on GA area, as measured by fundus autofluorescence, or FAF, based on readings at three time points: baseline, month 6 and month 12. At month 12, patients in the Zimura 2 mg arm are re-randomized to receive either monthly or every other month administration of Zimura 2 mg and patients receiving monthly administrations of sham will continue to receive monthly administrations of sham. The final evaluation for patients will take place at month 24.
Trial Progress
In July 2021, we completed patient enrollment in GATHER2, four months ahead of our original schedule. We expect 12-month top-line data from this trial to become available during the second half of 2022, approximately one year after the enrollment of the last patient plus the time needed for database lock and analysis. If the 12-month results are positive, we plan to file applications with the FDA and the EMA for marketing approval of Zimura for GA.
We are focusing on patient retention and continue to closely monitor the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential effect on the trial. We are targeting and remain on track for patient retention for the trial, as measured by the injection fidelity rate through month 12, of greater than 90%. The 12-month injection fidelity rate for our previously completed GATHER1 trial was 87%. The injection fidelity rate is calculated by dividing the total number of actual injections for all patients by the total number of expected injections based on the total number of patients enrolled in the trial. In addition, more than 84% of the scheduled first-year visits in the GATHER2 trial, which consists of all study visits up to and including the timepoint for assessing the primary efficacy endpoint, have been completed or elapsed.
Special Protocol Assessment
In July 2021, we received a written agreement from the FDA under a SPA for the overall design of GATHER2. The SPA is a procedure by which the FDA provides a clinical trial sponsor with an official evaluation and written guidance on the design of a proposed protocol intended to form the basis for an NDA. In connection with our SPA, the FDA recommended, and we accepted, modifying the primary efficacy endpoint for the GATHER2 trial from the mean rate of change in GA area over 12 months measured by FAF at three timepoints: baseline, month 6 and month 12, to the mean rate of growth (slope) estimated based on GA area measured by FAF in at least three timepoints: baseline, month 6 and month 12.
Planned Development of Zimura for Intermediate AMD
Previous Post-Hoc Analyses on GATHER1 Data
We conducted post-hoc analyses on the GATHER1 data, in which we evaluated the progression of incomplete Retinal Pigment Epithelial and Outer Retinal Atrophy, or iRORA, to complete Retinal Pigment Epithelial and Outer Retinal Atrophy, or cRORA, and the progression of drusen to iRORA or cRORA, in patients treated with Zimura 2 mg as compared to patients in the corresponding sham group. Drusen, iRORA and cRORA represent progressive stages of AMD.
The post-hoc analysis data show a 19.6% absolute reduction in the rate of progression from drusen to iRORA or cRORA, for the Zimura 2 mg group as compared to sham at 18 months, representing a relative risk reduction of 72%. The data also show a 21.8% absolute reduction in the rate of progression from iRORA to cRORA for the Zimura 2 mg group as compared to sham at 18 months, representing a relative risk of reduction of 52%.
Planned Phase 3 Clinical Trial in Intermediate AMD
We have been encouraged by the post-hoc analyses data and currently plan to initiate a Phase 3 clinical trial studying Zimura in patients with intermediate AMD. Intermediate AMD is an earlier stage of AMD that precedes GA.
We expect the intermediate AMD trial will be an international, randomized, double-masked, sham-controlled, multi-center trial with approximately 200 patients per treatment group. We expect to treat and follow patients for 24 months. We are currently evaluating other aspects of the design of this trial, including patient inclusion criteria and primary efficacy endpoints. We plan to obtain feedback from regulatory authorities on our plans for this trial and our development strategy in this indication, before initiating this trial during the second half of 2022.
STAR (STGD1 - Ongoing)
STAR is an international, randomized, double-masked, sham controlled, multi-center clinical trial evaluating the safety and efficacy of Zimura for the treatment of STGD1. STAR, similar to GATHER1, was designed to be a Phase 2b screening trial, with the potential to demonstrate statistically significant results depending on the magnitude of the potential benefit observed. If the results are positive and statistically significant, we believe this trial could potentially serve as a clinical trial that can support an application for marketing approval. We initially enrolled 95 patients in the STAR trial, none of whom have any remaining study visits.
In July 2020, we reopened enrollment in this trial in the United States. We continue to enroll new patients and plan to enroll approximately 25 additional patients, with the goal of enrolling a total of approximately 120 patients. As we continue to enroll new patients, we continue to monitor the COVID-19 pandemic closely and may need to slow down or stop patient enrollment in certain geographies depending on the local situation. Newly enrolled patients are randomized on a 1:1 basis to be treated with either Zimura 4 mg or sham for 18 months. We have been and plan to remain masked to the treatment group of all patients in the trial. In addition, we have not reviewed and do not plan to review or analyze efficacy data for any patients in the trial, until the 18-month data has been collected and analyzed for all patients enrolled in the trial. We expect results from this trial to be available after the 12-month top-line data from the GATHER2 trial.
Zimura Manufacturing
In early 2017, we completed the small scale manufacture of multiple batches of Zimura drug substance that we are using to support clinical drug supply for the GATHER2 trial and the expanded STAR trial. We are working with our historical contract manufacturer for Zimura drug substance, Agilent Technologies, Inc., or Agilent, to scale up and potentially validate the manufacturing process for Zimura drug substance. In parallel, we are working with a new contract manufacturer with the goal of assessing whether this manufacturer can produce Zimura drug substance at an adequate scale for potential commercial use. We have experienced issues during technology transfer of the existing manufacturing process to this manufacturer, which has resulted in delays to our timelines with this manufacturer. Subject to successful completion of scale up and validation activities, we currently plan to use Agilent as the primary source of supply of Zimura drug substance upon launch, if approved, and the new manufacturer as a second source of supply of Zimura drug substance. Validation requires that we demonstrate that the drug
substance produced through the scaled up process can be produced consistently, delivering quality product within a range of acceptable specifications. We are continuing analytical method development and qualification with our contract manufacturers and laboratories.
Starting in 2020, we have worked with a contract manufacturer to provide us with additional supply of finished Zimura drug product to support our needs for the GATHER2 trial and the expanded STAR trial. We believe we have sufficient finished Zimura drug product for these two clinical trials. In addition, we are working with our historical fill/finish manufacturer, Ajinomoto Bio-Pharma Services, or Ajinomoto, on fill/finish of Zimura drug product with a new vial, which we believe will allow us to support a more efficient and robust fill/finish operation at a commercial scale. Ajinomoto has produced finished Zimura drug product using the new vial, which we plan to use for a portion of the second-year study visits for patients in the GATHER2 trial. We believe Ajinomoto has the capacity to supply us with finished Zimura drug product with the new vial for our expected commercial supply needs upon launch, if approved.
We order the polyethylene glycol, or PEG, starting material used to make Zimura drug substance from a sole source third-party manufacturer outside the United States. We currently procure the supply on a purchase order basis and are continuing discussions regarding a long-term supply agreement with this manufacturer for the PEG starting material. We believe this supplier will have the capacity to supply us with the PEG that we will need for commercial manufacturing.
IC-500: HtrA1 Inhibitor
We are pursuing the preclinical development of IC-500 for the treatment of GA and potentially other age-related retinal diseases. We have selected IC-500 as the lead compound from our HtrA1 inhibitor program, which includes a number of small molecule compounds that show high affinity and specificity for HtrA1 when tested in vitro.
We are continuing the preclinical development of IC-500. In early 2021, we reviewed our IC-500 development program and explored the potential of a less frequent dosing regimen than monthly dosing. In 2021, we initiated a number of preclinical tolerability and pharmacokinetic studies for IC-500, and we are planning for IND-enabling GLP toxicology studies. We anticipate that the start of the IND-enabling toxicology studies will be later than what we originally planned, primarily due to the limited availability of study slots at CROs attributable to rising demand for their services as well as increased absenteeism of staff at those CROs in wake of the COVID-19 pandemic and the recent Omicron variant.
We have developed a formulation that we believe will be safe and effective for intravitreal administration into the eye, and are conducting current Good Manufacturing Practices, or cGMP, manufacturing activities for IC-500. Based on current timelines and subject to successful preclinical development and cGMP manufacturing, we expect to submit an IND to the FDA for IC-500 in mid-2023.
Gene Therapy Research and Development Programs
IC-100: Product Candidate for RHO-adRP
We have been conducting the preclinical development of IC-100, our novel AAV gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of RHO-adRP. We worked with a gene therapy contract development and manufacturing organization, or CDMO, for preclinical and early-stage clinical supply of IC-100. This CDMO produced, and we released, a cGMP batch of IC-100. In addition, we and the University of Pennsylvania, or Penn, conducted a number of preclinical studies of IC-100 and a natural history study of RHO-adRP patients, including a preclinical toxicology and efficacy study of IC-100 in the naturally occurring canine model of RHO-adRP. We have been considering our development options for this product candidate. We currently plan to seek a collaborator for the future development and potential commercialization of IC-100.
IC-200: Product Candidate for BEST1-Related IRDs
We have been conducting the preclinical development of IC-200, our novel AAV gene therapy product candidate for the treatment of BEST1-related IRDs. We worked with a gene therapy CDMO for preclinical and early-stage clinical supply of IC-200. This CDMO produced, and we released, a cGMP batch of IC-200. In addition, we and Penn conducted a number of preclinical studies of IC-200 and natural history studies of patients with BEST1-related IRDs, including a preclinical toxicology and efficacy study of IC-200 in the naturally occurring canine model of Best disease. We have been considering our development options for this product candidate. We currently plan to seek a collaborator for the future development and potential commercialization of IC-200.
Minigene Programs
AAV vectors are generally limited as a delivery vehicle by the size of their genetic cargo, which is restricted to approximately 4,700 base pairs of genetic code. The use of minigenes seeks to deliver a smaller but still functional form of a
larger gene packaged into a standard-size AAV delivery vector. The goal of minigene therapy is to deliver a gene expressing a protein that, although smaller than the naturally occurring protein, is nonetheless functional for purposes of treating the associated disease.
Starting in 2018, we funded several sponsored research programs at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, or UMMS, seeking to use a minigene approach to develop new gene therapies for several orphan IRDs. These programs (miniCEP290, miniABCA4 and miniUSH2A) are described below. In July 2021, we hired four individuals who were previously at UMMS and working on these sponsored research programs, including the principal investigator for these programs. We have transitioned the preclinical research activities for these programs from UMMS to us and we have established a laboratory for these employees to continue working on these programs and other preclinical ocular research and development activities.
The following is a summary of these minigene programs and their status:
•miniCEP290 (LCA10): This program, which we refer to as the miniCEP290 program, is targeting LCA10, which is associated with mutations in the CEP290 gene. In July 2019, we entered into a license agreement with the University of Massachusetts, or UMass, for exclusive development and commercialization rights to this program. The sponsored research yielded a number of minigene constructs that show encouraging results when tested in a mouse model. UMMS conducted additional experiments to optimize constructs, which were delayed during 2020 because of restrictions placed by UMMS on animal research activities as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. We have identified a lead construct from this program and are considering preclinical development options.
•miniABCA4 (STGD1): This program, which we refer to as the miniABCA4 program, is targeting STGD1, which is associated with mutations in the ABCA4 gene. UMMS granted us an option to obtain an exclusive license to certain patent applications for this program. UMMS generated and evaluated several ABCA4 minigene constructs in both in vitro and in vivo experiments, which yielded what we believe to be encouraging results. We are conducting additional experiments to optimize the constructs and assess their efficacy in the mouse model.
•miniUSH2A (USH2A-related IRDs): This program, which we refer to as the miniUSH2A program, is targeting IRDs associated with mutations in the USH2A gene, including Usher 2A and USH2A-associated non-syndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. UMMS granted us an option to obtain an exclusive license to certain patent applications for this program. Some of the activities in this program were delayed during 2020 as a result of the closure of UMMS animal research laboratories due to the COVID-19 pandemic. UMMS generated and evaluated several USH2A minigene constructs in in vitro experiments and we are planning to evaluate their efficacy in animals. The animal experiments have been delayed as a result of transitioning the work from UMMS to us.
Impact of COVID-19
Beginning in March 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and measures taken to contain it have affected our business and operations in a number of ways. These include, but are not limited to, the following:
•Clinical Trial Operations. In March 2020, we decided to delay the initiation of patient enrollment in our GATHER2 trial. As we initiated patient enrollment in June 2020, we and our clinical trial sites implemented new health and safety practices to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and to support patients and site staff. In addition, we added more than 30 new sites to the GATHER2 trial to help with patient recruitment. Although we have since completed patient enrollment in GATHER2, we may face difficulties in retaining patients or maintaining scheduled visits to the extent patients are affected by the virus or lockdown measures or are fearful of visiting or traveling to our clinical trial sites because of the pandemic. We are aware that a number of patients initially enrolled in the STAR trial missed consecutive visits during the early months of the pandemic, and that a number of patients in our Latin America sites for GATHER2 missed visits because of the COVID-19 pandemic. We do not yet know whether the number of missed visits will increase or decrease in the GATHER2 or STAR trials, or what the impact of missed visits may be on patient retention in those trials or the trial results, especially because we are masked to the treatment of patients during the conduct of the trials. We have been and continue to monitor the situation closely. For a more detailed discussion of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our clinical trial operations, please see the Risk Factor titled, “The COVID-19 pandemic has affected and may continue to affect the initiation and conduct of our clinical trials, including the retention of patients for our GATHER2 clinical trial and patient recruitment and retention for our STAR clinical trial. It may have long-lasting effects on the conduct of clinical trials, which can make our ongoing and any future trials more difficult, costly or time consuming”.
•Third-Party Collaborators and Vendors. Many of our third-party contract manufacturers, academic research collaborators and contract research organizations limited their operations and staff during the COVID-19 pandemic,
which resulted in delays to some of our manufacturing and research and development activities and limited our ability to be on site to oversee these activities. For example, the closure of animal research laboratories at UMMS for several months during 2020 caused delays to the progress of, and to our timelines for receipt of data from, our minigene research programs. Over the past year, several of our vendors have been facing backlogs due to work and demands from other clients, including those who are developing vaccines or medicines for the COVID-19 pandemic, which has limited their availability to perform work for us. For example, we anticipate that the start of the IND-enabling toxicology studies for IC-500 will be later than what we originally planned, primarily due to the limited availability of study slots at CROs attributable to rising demand for their services as well as increased absenteeism of staff at those CROs in wake of the COVID-19 pandemic and the recent Omicron variant. We are also aware that some of our third-party contract manufacturers and storage vendors have experienced high levels of absenteeism due to the Omicron variant and as a result started to limit their operations and on-site activities. These operational and staffing limitations may cause further delays for our development and manufacturing activities. At this time, we do not know whether there will be further impact on the work of our third-party vendors and collaborators due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•Supply Chain and Materials. Shortages, delays and governmental restrictions arising from the COVID-19 pandemic have disrupted and may continue to disrupt the ability of our contract manufacturers to procure items, such as raw materials, that are essential for the manufacture of our product candidates. For example, during 2020, our contract manufacturer for IC-500 drug substance experienced a shortage in obtaining one of the raw materials that was sourced from China, which was caused by the shutdown of local suppliers and the slowdown in trade due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This shortage delayed our process development activities for the drug substance for IC-500 by a number of months. In addition, since 2020, there have been shortages of various animals used in research studies, such as several types of non-human primates, which are typically sourced from China, due to the COVID-19 pandemic and disruptions to the global supply chain. Although our development programs have not yet been affected by these shortages, we are continuing to monitor the situation. Furthermore, in October 2021 we learned that the new manufacturer we are working with for second source supply of Zimura drug substance was experiencing issues with procuring an important raw material common to many manufacturing processes, which occurred due to recent supply chain interruptions and caused a slight delay to our manufacturing timelines with this contract manufacturer.
•Remote Working. We instituted company-wide remote working starting in March 2020. In 2021, we began permitting employees to return to our offices on a voluntary basis in compliance with new health and safety policies we implemented, including a vaccination policy for employees working in our offices. We expect to operate under a hybrid (partially remote and partially in office) working model for the foreseeable near future. We are continuing to monitor and support the health and well-being of our employees and their productivity as remote working continues.
We do not believe that the COVID-19 pandemic, and our actions in response and the costs of those actions, have had a material impact on our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows for the three months or twelve months ended December 31, 2021. The progression of the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid and its impact on our business and operations remains uncertain. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and new variants of the virus, the actions taken to contain it or lessen its impact, including the availability, effectiveness and administration of vaccines, and the economic impact on local, regional, national and international markets. If the delays and other disruptions due to the pandemic become prolonged or more extensive, then we may experience further delays or disruptions to our research and development programs and our financial position, results of operations or cash flows for future periods may be materially affected.
For further information on actual and potential impacts to us as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, see the other sections of this Management's Discussion and Analysis of Results of Operations and Financial Position and the Risk Factors contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Development and Financing Activities
Beginning in 2017, we pursued a business development strategy focused on evaluating various available technologies to treat ophthalmic diseases, particularly those in the back of the eye, and exploring opportunities to obtain rights to additional products and product candidates employing these technologies. Our efforts resulted in the expansion of our research and development pipeline, including the addition of IC-500, IC-100, IC-200 and a number of collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs.
As we continue the development of our product candidates and programs, prepare for the potential commercialization of Zimura and evaluate our overall strategic priorities, we will continue to pursue selective business development and financing opportunities that advance us toward our strategic goals. We plan to continue to evaluate, on a selective and targeted basis,
opportunities to potentially obtain rights to additional product candidates and technologies for retinal diseases, with a focus on sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura. In addition, we continue to explore potential collaboration and out-licensing opportunities for the future development and potential commercialization of our product candidates, including potential collaboration opportunities for the future development and potential commercialization of Zimura in one or more territories outside the United States and collaboration opportunities for the future development and potential commercialization of IC-100 and IC-200.
For information about our follow-on public offerings that we completed in July 2021 and October 2021, please see the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of Management' s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. We expect to continue to pursue capital raising transactions when they are available on terms favorable to us and if the opportunity advances our strategic goals.
Financial Matters
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities of $381.7 million. We estimate that our year-end 2022 cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities will range between $215 million and $225 million. We also estimate that our cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities will be sufficient to fund our planned capital expenditure requirements and operating expenses through at least mid-2024. These estimates are based on our current business plan, which includes the continuation of our ongoing clinical development programs for Zimura in GA and STGD1 and the initiation of an intermediate AMD clinical trial, preparation and potential filing of an NDA and a MAA for Zimura in GA, continuing preparations for a potential commercial launch of Zimura in GA, investing in sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura, and the advancement of our IC-500 development program. Excluded from these estimates are any potential approval or sales milestones payable to Archemix or any potential expenses for actual commercial launch of Zimura, such as sales force expenses, any additional expenditures related to potentially studying Zimura in indications outside of GA, STGD1 and intermediate AMD, or resulting from the potential in-licensing or acquisition of additional product candidates or technologies, or any associated development we may pursue. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Fovista
In December 2016 and August 2017, we received initial top-line data from our three pivotal clinical trials, referred to as OPH1002, OPH1003 and OPH1004, evaluating the anti-platelet derived growth factor, or anti-PDGF, aptamer Fovista® (pegpleranib) administered in combination with anti-VEGF agents for the treatment of wet AMD. These top-line data indicated that the trials failed to achieve their pre-specified primary endpoints. We terminated these trials, as well as several other smaller Fovista trials in wet AMD in 2017. We have no plans for the future development of Fovista.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
As we have no products approved for sale, we do not expect to receive any revenue related to our product candidates until we obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize such products, or until we potentially enter into agreements with third parties for the development and commercialization of our product candidates. If our development efforts for any of our product candidates result in regulatory approval or if we enter into collaboration agreements with third parties, we may generate revenue from product sales or from such third parties.
Our ability to become and remain profitable depends on our ability to generate revenues in excess of our expenses. Our ability to generate revenues from product sales is dependent on our obtaining marketing approval for and commercializing our product candidates or any product candidates we may in-license or acquire. We may be unsuccessful in our efforts to develop and commercialize product candidates or in our efforts to in-license or acquire additional product candidates. Even if we succeed in developing and commercializing one or more of our product candidates, we may never achieve sufficient sales revenue to achieve or maintain profitability.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with the manufacturing, development, and preclinical and clinical testing of our product candidates and costs associated with our gene therapy research programs. Our research and development expenses consist of:
•external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as academic research collaborators, contract research organizations, or CROs, and other vendors and CDMOs for the production and analysis of drug substance and drug product; and
•employee-related expenses for employees dedicated to research and development activities, including salaries, benefits and share-based compensation expense.
Research and development expenses also include costs of acquired product licenses, in-process research and development, and related technology rights where there is no alternative future use, costs of prototypes used in research and development, consultant fees and amounts paid to collaborative partners.
All research and development expenses are charged to operations as incurred in accordance with ASC 730. We account for non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received, rather than when the payment is made. We do not currently utilize a formal time allocation system to capture expenses on a project-by-project basis because we record expenses by functional department. Accordingly, we do not allocate expenses to individual projects or product candidates, although we do allocate some portion of our research and development expenses by project area or product candidate, as shown below.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
As we continue our ongoing clinical trials, plan for and initiate clinical development of Zimura in intermediate AMD and continue our ongoing and planned manufacturing activities for Zimura, we expect our research and development expenses for Zimura to increase. We expect our research and development expenses for IC-500 to increase as we continue preclinical development. We expect our research and development expenses for IC-100 and IC-200 to remain minimal for the foreseeable near future. We expect our research and development expenses for our miniCEP290 program and other gene therapy research programs to remain largely unchanged as we continue those programs. Our research and development expenses may increase if we in-license or acquire any new product candidates or technologies, including potential sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura, or if we commence any new development programs.
We expect the development of our product candidates will continue for at least the next several years. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate that the total remaining costs necessary to complete development, to complete process development and manufacturing scale-up and validation activities, and to potentially seek marketing approval for Zimura for indications outside of GA or for any of our other product candidates.
The successful development of our product candidates is subject to numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•the scope, rate of progress and costs of our research and development activities, including manufacturing activities;
•the potential benefits of our product candidates over other therapies;
•preclinical development results and clinical trial results;
•the terms and timing of regulatory approvals;
•our ability to market, commercialize and achieve market acceptance for any of our product candidates; and
•our ability to successfully file, prosecute, defend and enforce patent claims and other intellectual property rights, together with associated expenses.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our product candidates could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, we are conducting the GATHER2 trial, which is a Phase 3 clinical trial evaluating Zimura for GA, with the expectation that data collected from this trial, if positive, together with other available data, will be sufficient to seek marketing approval for this indication in the United States and the European Union. We may subsequently decide to, or be required by regulatory authorities to, enroll additional patients in the GATHER2 trial, conduct additional clinical trials for Zimura in GA or conduct additional nonclinical studies of Zimura in order to seek or maintain regulatory approval or qualify for reimbursement approval. As a result of any of the above, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of development of Zimura in GA. For example, based on our assessment of the data we have collected for Zimura to date and the requirements of regulatory authorities, we are conducting a pharmacokinetic substudy involving a portion of the patients enrolled in the GATHER2 trial and an additional nonclinical study of Zimura, which has increased the research and development expenses for Zimura.
See the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section of this Item 7 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our current and future financial resources and our expectations regarding our research and development expenses and funding requirements.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel, including share-based compensation expense, in our executive, legal, finance, business development, commercial planning, human resources, investor relations and information technology functions. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to hire additional commercial planning personnel and undertake commercial planning activities to prepare for the potential commercialization of Zimura. Other general and administrative expenses include facility costs and professional fees for legal, including patent-related, services and expenses, consulting and accounting services, and travel expenses.
Interest Income
We currently have invested our cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities in money market funds, U.S. Treasury securities, investment-grade corporate debt securities, asset-backed securities and debt instruments issued by foreign governments, which generate a nominal amount of interest income.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued research and development expenses, revenue recognition, share-based compensation and income taxes described in greater detail below. We base our estimates on our limited historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Of those policies, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid our stockholders in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses. This process involves reviewing quotations and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our
estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses are related to expenses related to our academic research collaborators, CROs, CDMOs and other vendors in connection with research and development and manufacturing activities.
We base our expenses related to academic research collaborators, CROs and CDMOs on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotations and contracts with such vendors that conduct research and development and manufacturing activities on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the applicable research and development or manufacturing expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. There have been no material changes in estimates for the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for all share-based compensation payments issued to employees, non-employee directors, and consultants by estimating the fair value of each equity award. Accordingly, share-based compensation expense is measured based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant, net of forfeitures. We recognize compensation expense for the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest over the period during which the recipient renders the required services to us on a straight-line basis.
We apply the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. Determining the amount of share-based compensation to be recorded requires us to develop estimates of the fair value of stock options as of their grant date. We recognize share-based compensation expense ratably over the requisite service period, which in most cases is the vesting period of the award. For grants containing performance-based vesting provisions, expense is recognized over the estimated achievement period only when the performance-based milestone is deemed probable of achievement. If performance-based milestones are later determined not to be probable of achievement, then all previously recorded stock-based compensation expense associated with such options will be reversed during the period in which we make this determination. Calculating the fair value of share-based awards requires us to make highly subjective assumptions.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value our stock option awards and the options to purchase shares under our employee stock purchase plan. Use of this valuation methodology requires that we make assumptions as to the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, and the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. We calculate expected volatility based on daily historical volatility during the time period that corresponds to the expected option term. We calculate the expected term of stock option grants to employees based on an analysis of actual option exercises. The risk-free interest rate used for each grant is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for instruments with a similar expected life. We utilize a dividend yield of zero based on the fact that we have never paid cash dividends and have no current intention to pay cash dividends. The weighted-average assumptions used to estimate grant date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model were as follows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
We estimate the fair value of restricted stock units, or RSUs, granted to employees using the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
We also estimate forfeitures at the time of grant and revise those estimates in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from our estimates. We use historical data to estimate pre-vesting forfeitures and record share-based compensation expense only for those awards that are expected to vest. To the extent that actual forfeitures differ from our estimates, the difference is recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period when the estimates were revised.
Share-based compensation expense for equity grants to employees, non-employee directors and consultants was $11.2 million, $8.3 million and $9.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had $56.3 million of total unrecognized share-based compensation expense, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average remaining vesting period of approximately 3.3 years. We expect to grant additional stock options that will result in additional share-based compensation expense for our equity awards to employees, non-employee directors and consultants.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we allocated share-based compensation as follows:
In October 2019, our board of directors adopted the 2019 Inducement Stock Incentive Plan, or the Inducement Plan, pursuant to which we may grant, subject to the terms of the Inducement Plan and the rules of The Nasdaq Global Select Market, or Nasdaq, nonstatutory stock options, restricted stock, RSUs, and other stock-based awards up to an aggregate of 1,000,000 shares of our common stock. In March 2020, February 2021, September 2021 and December 2021, our board of directors amended the Inducement Plan to reserve an additional 1,000,000 shares of our common stock, an additional 600,000 shares of our common stock, an additional 1,000,000 shares of our common stock and an additional 1,000,000 shares of our common stock, respectively, for issuance under the plan. The Inducement Plan permits us to, subject to the approval of each grant by the compensation and talent strategy committee of our board of directors, use the stock-based awards available under the Inducement Plan to attract key employees for the growth of our business. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately 1,372,000 shares available for issuance under the Inducement Plan.
Results of Operations
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses were $85.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $22.3 million compared to $62.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $24.8 million increase in costs associated with Zimura, a $7.8 million increase in personnel costs, including share-based compensation associated with additional research and development staffing, and a $0.6 million increase in costs associated with IC-500 which were partially offset by a $5.7 million decrease in costs associated with IC-100, a $4.7 million decrease in costs associated with IC-200 and a $0.9 million decrease in costs associated with our collaborative gene therapy sponsored research programs. The increased costs for Zimura were primarily due to the commencement and completion of patient enrollment for our GATHER2 trial and increased manufacturing activities. The decreased costs for IC-100 and IC-200 primarily reflect decreased manufacturing and preclinical development activities.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses were $29.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.7 million, compared to $26.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to an increase in personnel costs, including shares-based compensation costs, and an increase in external costs, including legal and consulting costs associated with litigation, pre-commercialization activities and other administrative costs necessary to support our operations.
Interest Income
Interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.2 million compared to interest income of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income earned during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to the decrease in interest rate yields.
Income Tax Benefit
We recorded no benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $3.7 million primarily to reflect the settlement of local tax audit.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily through private placements of our common stock and preferred stock, venture debt borrowings, funds received under the Novo Holdings A/S Agreement, our initial public offering, which we closed in September 2013, funds we received under a prior agreement with Novartis Pharma AG related to the licensing and commercialization of Fovista, funds we received in connection with our acquisition of Inception 4, Inc., or Inception 4, in October 2018 and our follow-on public offerings, which we closed in February 2014, December 2019, June 2020, July 2021 and October 2021, including the sale of pre-funded warrants in December 2019 and June 2020. We do not have any committed external source of funds.
We currently have an effective universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3, or the March 2021 Shelf Registration, on file with the SEC registering for sale from time to time up to $300.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depositary shares, subscription rights, warrants and/or units in one or more registered offerings, of which $100.0 million may be offered, issued and sold under an “at-the-market” Sales Agreement, or the ATM Agreement, with Cowen and Company, LLC. We also have an automatically effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3, or the October 2021 Shelf Registration, pursuant to which we may offer and sell an indeterminate amount of shares of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, depositary shares, subscription rights, warrants and/or units in one or more registered offerings.
In July 2021, we closed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 13,397,500 shares of our common stock under the March 2021 Shelf Registration, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 1,747,500 shares of our common stock, at a price to the public of $8.60 per share and at a price to the underwriters of $8.084 per share. The net proceeds from the public offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us totaling approximately $7.4 million, were approximately $107.8 million.
In October 2021, we closed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 10,350,000 shares of our common stock under the October 2021 Shelf Registration, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 1,350,000 shares of our common stock, at a price to the public of $16.750 per share and at a price to the underwriters of $15.745 per share. The net proceeds from the public offering, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us totaling approximately $10.8 million, were approximately $162.6 million.
We have not yet issued and sold any shares of our common stock under the ATM Agreement.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities totaling $381.7 million and no debt. We primarily invest our cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities in money market funds, U.S. Treasury securities, certain investment-grade corporate debt securities, asset-backed securities and debt instruments issued by foreign governments.
The following table shows a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The net cash used in operating activities, which was $98.6 million and $66.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, relates primarily to net cash used to fund our Zimura clinical trials and manufacturing activities and to support the preclinical development activities of IC-500, IC-100 and IC-200.
See "-Funding Requirements" below for a description of how we expect to use our cash for operating activities in future periods.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $21.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily related to the maturities of available-for-sale securities. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $143.8 million and primarily related to the purchases of available-for-sale securities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $272.3 million and relates primarily to cash received from our July 2021 and October 2021 public offerings of our common stock. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $150.6 million and relates primarily to cash received from our June 2020 public offering of our common stock and concurrent private placement.
Funding Requirements
Zimura is in clinical development, IC-500 is in preclinical development, and we are advancing multiple gene therapy research programs. We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we pursue these programs as currently planned. We could incur additional research and development expenses if we modify or further expand the scope of our clinical trials, our preclinical development programs or our gene therapy research programs, or if we in-license or acquire, and undertake development of, additional product candidates and technologies, including sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura and any promising product candidates that emerge from our gene therapy research programs. We could also incur additional research and development expenses if, for example, we are required by the FDA, the EMA or regulatory authorities in other jurisdictions, or if we otherwise decide, to perform clinical trials and/or nonclinical or other studies in addition to those we currently expect to conduct. If we experience delays or disruptions to our research and development programs, including delays in patient enrollment or issues with patient retention or patients missing scheduled visits and treatments, if we experience issues with our preclinical development programs, such as unfavorable toxicology or other preclinical data, if we experience issues with the manufacture and supply of product candidates for our development programs, including issues with process
development or manufacturing scale-up activities, whether such delays or disruptions are due to the COVID-19 pandemic or other reasons, we could incur additional and unexpected expenses as a result of such delays or disruptions and our business and financial results may be materially impacted. Furthermore, if we successfully develop and expect to obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing. We expect to start incurring these expenses as we prepare for the potential commercialization of Zimura. We are party to agreements with Archemix with respect to Zimura, the former equityholders of Inception 4 with respect to IC-500, the University of Florida Research Foundation, Incorporated, or UFRF, and Penn, with respect to IC-100 and IC-200, and UMass with respect to any potential product candidates from our miniCEP290 program, in each case, that impose significant milestone payment obligations on us if we or a potential collaborator achieves specified clinical, regulatory and commercial milestones with respect to these product candidates, as well as certain royalties on net sales with respect to IC-100, IC-200 and any product candidates we choose to develop from our miniCEP290 program. It is likely that any future in-licensing or acquisition agreements that we enter into with respect to additional product candidates or technologies would include similar obligations.
We expect that we will continue to incur significant expenses as we:
•continue the development of Zimura in GA and STGD1 and initiate development of Zimura in intermediate AMD and potentially other indications;
•expand our outsourced manufacturing capabilities for Zimura and IC-500 and begin to establish commercial operations and sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for Zimura;
•prepare an NDA and an MAA for Zimura and seek marketing approval for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•in-license or acquire the rights to, and pursue the development of, other product candidates or technologies for retinal diseases, such as sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura;
•continue the development of IC-500 and pursue our gene therapy research programs;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•hire additional clinical, commercial, medical affairs, regulatory, pharmacovigilance, manufacturing, quality control, quality assurance and scientific personnel; and
•expand our general and administrative functions to support our future growth.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities of $381.7 million. We estimate that our year-end 2022 cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities will range between $215 million and $225 million. We also estimate that our cash, cash equivalents and available-for-sale securities will be sufficient to fund our planned capital expenditure requirements and operating expenses through at least mid-2024. These estimates are based on our current business plan, which includes the continuation of our ongoing clinical development programs for Zimura in GA and STGD1 and the initiation of an intermediate AMD clinical trial, preparation and potential filing of an NDA and a MAA for Zimura in GA, continuing preparations for a potential commercial launch of Zimura in GA, investing in sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura, and the advancement of our IC-500 development program. Excluded from these estimates are any potential approval or sales milestones payable to Archemix or any potential expenses for actual commercial launch of Zimura, such as sales force expenses, any additional expenditures related to potentially studying Zimura in indications outside of GA, STGD1 and intermediate AMD, or resulting from the potential in-licensing or acquisition of additional product candidates or technologies, or any associated development we may pursue. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
We expect the development of our product candidates will continue for at least the next several years. Although we believe we have sufficient financial resources for the activities necessary to complete development of, including manufacturing scale-up and validation activities, and potentially seek marketing approval of Zimura in GA, we expect we will require additional funding in order to launch and commercialize Zimura in GA, if approved. We also expect we will require substantial, additional funding in order to complete the activities necessary to develop and commercialize Zimura for other indications or any of our other product candidates. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the total remaining costs necessary to complete development, to complete process development and manufacturing scale-up and validation activities and to potentially seek marketing approval for Zimura for any other indication or for any of our other product candidates.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, progress, costs and results of our current and future Zimura clinical programs and any further development we may undertake to enable us to file an NDA and an MAA for Zimura in one or more indications;
•the scope, progress, costs and results of process development, manufacturing scale-up and validation activities, analytical method development and qualification, and stability studies associated with Zimura and our other product candidates;
•the timing, scope and costs of establishing a commercial infrastructure for potential commercialization of Zimura and for any other product candidates for which we receive, or expect to receive, marketing approval;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory filings and reviews of our product candidates, including the potential submission and regulatory review of an NDA and an MAA for Zimura in GA;
•our ability to establish collaborations on favorable terms, if at all, if we choose to do so, including a potential collaboration for the further development and potential commercialization of Zimura in one or more territories outside the United States and a collaboration or out-license for the further development and potential commercialization of IC-100 and IC-200;
•the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to, and undertake research or development of, additional product candidates or technologies, including sustained release delivery technologies for Zimura;
•the scope, progress, costs and results of our efforts to develop IC-500, including activities to establish manufacturing capabilities and other preclinical development activities to enable us to file an IND for this product candidate;
•the scope, progress, costs and results from our gene therapy research programs, including costs related to the in-license and future development of any promising product candidates and technologies that emerge from these programs;
•the timing and extent of delays or disruptions to our research and development programs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims; and
•subject to receipt of marketing approval, net revenue received from commercial sales of any of our product candidates, after milestone payments and royalty payments that we would be obligated to make.
We may require additional funding beyond what we currently expect due to unforeseen or other reasons. Our costs may exceed our expectations if we experience an issue in our clinical trials, such as issues with patient enrollment, the retention of enrolled patients, enrolled patients maintaining scheduled visits and receiving scheduled treatments, or the availability of drug supply, if we experience an issue with manufacturing, such as issues with process development, scale-up and validation, or establishing and qualifying second source suppliers and ensuring adequate inventory for our expected needs, if we experience an issue in our preclinical development programs, such as unfavorable toxicology or other preclinical data, or if we modify or further expand the scope of our clinical trials, preclinical development programs or gene therapy research programs. Our costs may also exceed our expectations for other reasons, for example, if we are required by the FDA, the EMA, or regulatory authorities in other jurisdictions to perform clinical trials or nonclinical or other studies in addition to those we currently expect to conduct. For example, we are conducting the GATHER2 trial with the expectation that data collected from such trial, if it is positive, together with other available data, will be sufficient to support an application for marketing approval in the United States and the European Union and we may subsequently decide to, or be required by regulatory authorities to, enroll additional patients in the GATHER2 trial, or conduct additional clinical trials or nonclinical studies of Zimura in order to seek or maintain marketing approval or qualify for reimbursement approval. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic may result in disruptions to the progress of the GATHER2 or STAR trials, including slowing patient enrollment in STAR or causing enrolled patients in either trial to miss their scheduled visits or drop out in greater numbers than we expect, or disruptions to our other research and development programs, which could cause us to continue to expend our cash resources while not progressing our research and development programs as expeditiously as we would have had the pandemic not occurred or persisted. As a result of any of the above, we may need or may seek to obtain additional funding for our continuing operations sooner or in greater amounts than expected.
We do not have any committed external source of funds. Our ability to raise adequate additional financing when needed, and on terms acceptable to us, will depend on many factors. These factors include investors' perceptions of the potential success of our ongoing business, including the development of our product candidates and other programs, and the potential future growth of our business. Additionally, these factors include general market conditions that also affect other companies. For example, the COVID-19 pandemic and governmental responses to the pandemic have caused volatility and uncertainty in the financial markets as well as additional volatility in the price of our stock, which may result in prospective investors being less
likely to invest new capital. These factors may make raising capital difficult, and may result in us accepting terms that are unfavorable to us, especially if we are in need of financing at the particular time. Although we were successful in raising approximately $162.6 million in net proceeds in an underwritten public offering of our common stock in October 2021, we may not be able to successfully raise additional capital in the future. The size of our company and our status as a company listed on The Nasdaq Global Select Market, or Nasdaq, may also limit our ability to raise financing. For example, our ability to raise adequate financing through a public offering may be limited by market conditions and SEC rules based on our current market capitalization. Nasdaq listing rules also generally limit the number of shares we may issue in a private placement to a number less than 20% of the number of shares of our common stock outstanding immediately prior to the transaction, unless we issue such shares at a premium, which investors may be unwilling to accept, or unless we obtain shareholder approval, which can be expensive and time-consuming and can add risk to our ability to complete the financing transaction. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate the development of one or more of our product candidates, our gene therapy research programs, or our future commercialization efforts.
Until such time, if ever, when we can generate substantial product revenues, we may need or may seek to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations, even if we believe that we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders' ownership interests would be diluted, and the terms of these new securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders' rights as common stockholders. The dilutive effect of future equity issuances may be substantial, depending on the price of our common stock at the time of such capital raise, with a lower stock price translating to greater dilution for existing stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, declaring dividends or entering into certain investments or transactions. In addition, we have issued, and may in the future issue additional, equity securities as consideration for business development transactions, which may also dilute our existing stockholders' ownership interests.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, royalty transactions, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, products or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we choose to pursue a collaboration for any of our product candidates, we may be required to relinquish certain valuable rights depending on the terms of such a transaction. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Our need for additional financing may continue even if we are able to successfully develop one or more of our product candidates. Our future commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of such product candidates, which may not be available for at least several years following completion of successful product development, if at all. In addition, if approved, our product candidates may not achieve commercial success. Even if those products are successful and we do achieve profitability, we may not be able to sustain or increase profitability on a quarterly or annual basis. Under most, if not all, of the foregoing circumstances, we may need to obtain substantial additional financing to achieve our business objectives.
Archemix C5 License Agreement
In September 2011, we entered into the C5 License Agreement with Archemix relating to anti-C5 aptamers. In connection with the C5 License Agreement, as amended, we paid Archemix an upfront licensing fee of $1.0 million and issued to Archemix an aggregate of 2,000,000 shares of our series A-1 preferred stock and 500,000 shares of our series B-1 preferred stock. We have paid Archemix an aggregate of $9.0 million in fees based on our achievement of specified clinical milestone events under the C5 License Agreement, including two milestone payments of $1.0 million and $6.0 million triggered by the positive 12-month data from, and by completion of, the GATHER1 trial, which we paid in March 2020 and October 2020, respectively.
Under the C5 License Agreement, for each anti-C5 aptamer product that we may develop under the agreement, including Zimura, we are obligated to make additional payments to Archemix of up to an aggregate of $50.5 million if we achieve specified development, clinical and regulatory milestones, with $24.5 million of such payments relating to a first indication, $23.5 million of such payments relating to second and third indications and $2.5 million of such payments relating to sustained delivery applications. Under the C5 License Agreement, we are also obligated to make additional payments to Archemix of up to an aggregate of $22.5 million if we achieve specified commercial milestones based on net product sales of all anti-C5 products licensed under the agreement. We are also obligated to pay Archemix a double-digit percentage of
specified non-royalty payments we may receive from any sublicensee of our rights under the C5 License Agreement. We are not obligated to pay Archemix a running royalty based on net product sales in connection with the C5 License Agreement.
For more information about the C5 License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-Zimura - Archemix C5 License Agreement" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Inception 4 Merger Agreement
In October 2018, we and Inception 4 entered into the Inception 4 Merger Agreement, pursuant to which we acquired IC-500 and our other HtrA1 inhibitors through a merger transaction.
In addition, pursuant to the Inception 4 Merger Agreement, the former equityholders of Inception 4 will be entitled to receive contingent future payments from us based on the achievement of certain clinical and regulatory milestones of up to an aggregate maximum amount of $105 million, with $45 million of such potential payments relating to GA and $60 million of such potential payments relating to wet AMD. These future milestone payments will be payable in the form of shares of our common stock, calculated based on the price of our common stock over a five-trading day period preceding the achievement of the relevant milestone, unless and until the issuance of such shares would, together with all other shares issued in connection with the Inception 4 Merger, exceed an overall maximum limit of approximately 7.2 million shares, which is equal to 19.9% of the number of issued and outstanding shares of our common stock as of the close of business on the business day prior to the closing date of the Inception 4 Merger, and will be payable in cash thereafter.
For more information about the Inception 4 Merger Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-IC-500 - Inception 4 Merger Agreement" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
RHO-adRP License Agreement with UFRF and Penn
In June 2018, we entered into the RHO-adRP License Agreement with UFRF and Penn. Under the agreement, we agreed to pay an annual license maintenance fee in the low double-digit thousands of dollars, which will be payable on an annual basis until the first commercial sale of a licensed product. In addition, we agreed to reimburse UFRF for the costs and expenses of patent prosecution and maintenance related to the licensed patent rights.
We further agreed to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, up to an aggregate of $23.5 million if we achieve specified clinical, marketing approval and reimbursement approval milestones with respect to a licensed product and additionally, up to an aggregate of $70.0 million if we achieve specified commercial sales milestones with respect to a licensed product.
We are also obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, royalties at a low single-digit percentage of net sales of licensed products. Such royalties are subject to customary reductions for lack of patent coverage and loss of regulatory exclusivity. In addition, such royalties with respect to any licensed product in any country may be offset by a specified portion of any royalty payments actually paid by us with respect to such licensed product in such country under third-party licenses for patent rights or other intellectual property rights that are necessary to manufacture, develop and commercialize the licensed product in such country. Our obligation to pay royalties under the RHO-adRP License Agreement will continue on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the latest of:
•the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent rights covering a licensed product in the country of sale;
•the expiration of regulatory exclusivity covering a licensed product in the country of sale; and
•ten years from the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale.
Beginning on the earlier of the calendar year following the first commercial sale of a licensed product and the first business day of 2031, we are also obligated to pay certain minimum royalties, not to exceed an amount in the low hundreds of thousands of dollars on an annual basis, which minimum royalties are creditable against our royalty obligation with respect to net sales of licensed products due for the year in which the minimum royalty is paid.
If we or an affiliate sublicenses any of the licensed patent rights to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, a low double-digit percentage of the consideration received in exchange for such sublicense, with the applicable percentage based upon the stage of development of the sublicensed product at the time we or the applicable affiliate enters into the sublicense.
If we receive a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher from the FDA in connection with obtaining marketing approval for a licensed product and we subsequently use such priority review voucher in connection with a different product candidate, we will be obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, aggregate payments in the low double-digit millions
of dollars based on certain marketing approval and commercial sales milestones with respect to such other product candidate. In addition, if we sell such a priority review voucher to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UFRF, on behalf of both licensors, a low double-digit percentage of any consideration received from such third party in connection with such sale.
For more information about the RHO-adRP License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-License Agreement with UFRF and Penn for IC-100" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
BEST1 License Agreement with Penn and UFRF
In May 2019, we paid Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a $0.2 million upfront license issuance fee in connection with entry into the BEST1 License Agreement, which was recorded as a research and development expense, and we paid UFRF accrued patent prosecution expenses of approximately $18 thousand, which was recorded as a general and administrative expense. We have also agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, an annual license maintenance fee in the low double-digit thousands of dollars, which fee will be payable on an annual basis until the first commercial sale of a licensed product. In addition, we have agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a one-time patent grant fee in the low triple-digit thousands of dollars, upon the issuance of a U.S. patent that claims inventions disclosed in the licensed patent rights or know-how or inventions generated under certain related sponsored research agreements with Penn or UFRF, and that is exclusively licensed to us. Furthermore, we have agreed to reimburse Penn and UFRF for the costs and expenses of patent prosecution and maintenance related to the licensed patent rights.
We have further agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, up to an aggregate of $15.7 million if we achieve specified clinical, marketing approval and reimbursement approval milestones with respect to one licensed product, and up to an aggregate of an additional $3.1 million if we achieve these same milestones with respect to a different licensed product. In addition, we have agreed to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, up to an aggregate of $48.0 million if we achieve specified commercial sales milestones with respect to one licensed product, and up to an aggregate of an additional $9.6 million if we achieve these same milestones with respect to a different licensed product.
We are also obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, royalties at a low single-digit percentage of net sales of licensed products. Such royalties are subject to customary deductions, credits, and reductions for lack of patent coverage and loss of regulatory exclusivity. In addition, such royalties with respect to any licensed product in any country may be offset by a specified portion of any royalty payments actually paid by us with respect to such licensed product in such country under third-party licenses to patent rights or other intellectual property rights that are necessary to research, develop, manufacture and commercialize the licensed product in such country. Our obligation to pay royalties under the BEST1 License Agreement will continue on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the latest of:
•the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent rights covering the sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale;
•the expiration of regulatory exclusivity covering the applicable licensed product in the country of sale; and
•10 years from the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale.
Beginning on the earlier of the calendar year following the first commercial sale of a licensed product and calendar year 2032, we are also obligated to pay certain minimum royalties, not to exceed an amount in the mid tens of thousands of dollars on an annual basis, which minimum royalties are creditable against our royalty obligation with respect to net sales of licensed products due in the year the minimum royalty is paid.
If we or any of our affiliates sublicense any of the licensed patent rights to a third party, we will be obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a high single-digit to a mid ten's percentage of the consideration received in exchange for such sublicense, with the applicable percentage based upon the stage of development of the sublicensed product at the time we or the applicable affiliate enters into the sublicense.
If we receive a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher from the FDA in connection with obtaining marketing approval for a licensed product and we subsequently use such priority review voucher in connection with a different product candidate outside the scope of the BEST1 License Agreement, we will be obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, aggregate payments in the low double-digit millions of dollars based on certain approval and commercial sales milestones with respect to such other product candidate. In addition, if we sell such a priority review voucher to a third party, we will be obligated to pay Penn, for the benefit of Penn and UFRF, a high single-digit percentage of any consideration received from such third party in connection with such sale.
For more information about the BEST1 License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-License Agreement with Penn and UFRF for IC-200" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
miniCEP290 License Agreement with UMass
In July 2019, we issued to UMass 75,000 shares of our common stock following execution of the miniCEP290 License Agreement pursuant to an exemption from registration afforded by Section 4(a)(2) of the Securities Act. In September 2019, we paid UMass a $0.4 million upfront license fee, which was recorded as a research and development expense, and we paid UMass accrued patent prosecution expenses of approximately $18 thousand, which was recorded as a general and administrative expense.
We have also agreed to pay UMass an annual license maintenance fee in the low double-digit thousands of dollars, which fee will be payable on an annual basis until the expiration of the royalty term for the licensed products. Furthermore, we have agreed to reimburse UMass for the costs and expenses of patent prosecution and maintenance related to the licensed patent rights.
We have further agreed to pay UMass up to an aggregate of $14.75 million in cash and issue up to 75,000 shares of our common stock if we achieve specified clinical and regulatory milestones with respect to a licensed product. In addition, we have agreed to pay UMass up to an aggregate of $48.0 million if we achieve specified commercial sales milestones with respect to a licensed product.
We are also obligated to pay UMass royalties at a low single-digit percentage of net sales of licensed products. Our obligation to pay royalties under the miniCEP290 License Agreement will continue on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis until the later of: (a) the expiration of the last-to-expire licensed patent rights covering the sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale, or (b) 10 years from the first commercial sale of the applicable licensed product in the country of sale. Beginning with the calendar year following receipt of marketing approval for a licensed product, we are also obligated to pay certain minimum royalties, not to exceed an amount in the mid-double-digit thousands of dollars on an annual basis, which minimum royalties are creditable against our royalty obligation with respect to net sales of licensed products due in the year the minimum royalty is paid.
If we or any of our affiliates sublicenses any of the licensed patent rights or know-how to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UMass a high single-digit to a mid-tens percentage of the consideration received in exchange for such sublicense, with the applicable percentage based upon the stage of development of the licensed products at the time we or the applicable affiliate enters into the sublicense.
If we receive a rare pediatric disease priority review voucher, or a priority review voucher, from the FDA in connection with obtaining marketing approval for a licensed product, and we subsequently use such priority review voucher in connection with a different product candidate outside the scope of the miniCEP290 License Agreement, we will be obligated to pay UMass a low-tens percentage of the fair market value of the priority review voucher at the time of approval of such product candidate and a low-twenties percentage of the fair market value of the priority review voucher at the time of achievement of a specified commercial sales milestone for such other product candidate. In addition, if we sell such a priority review voucher to a third party, we will be obligated to pay UMass a low-thirties percentage of any consideration received from such third party in connection with such sale.
For more information about the minicCEP290 License Agreement, please see the section entitled "Licensing and Other Arrangements-License Agreement with UMass for miniCEP290 Program" in Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, we had contractual obligations and commitments to make payments under operating leases, settle obligations related to agreements to purchase goods and services and settle tax and other liabilities. They are summarized in the table below:
Purchase obligations include agreements and contracts that give the supplier recourse to us for cancellation or nonperformance under the contract or contain terms that would subject us to liquidated damages. Such agreements and contracts may, for example, be related to direct materials and certain of our manufacturing and supply agreements.
The table above excludes any milestone payments which may become payable to third parties under license or acquisition agreements as the timing and likelihood of such payments are not known with certainty;
•any royalty payments to third parties as the amounts, timing and likelihood of such payments are not known;
•anticipated expenditures under supply agreements for periods for which we are not yet bound under binding purchase orders; or
•contracts that are entered into in the ordinary course of business that are not material in the aggregate in any period presented above.
In addition to the amounts set forth in the table above, we may be required, under the agreements under which we acquired rights to Zimura, IC-100, IC-200, IC-500 and our miniCEP290 program, to make milestone payments and/or pay royalties. These payments are described in further detail in the descriptions of the applicable agreements set forth in this section.
We also have letter agreements with certain employees that require the funding of a specific level of payments, if certain events, such as a termination of employment in connection with a change in control or termination of employment by the employee for good reason or by us without cause, occur. For a description of these obligations, see our definitive proxy statement on Schedule 14A for our 2021 annual meeting of stockholders, as filed with the SEC on April 7, 2021.
In addition, in the course of normal business operations, we have agreements with contract service providers to assist in the performance of our research and development and manufacturing activities. Expenditures to CROs and CDMOs represent significant costs in preclinical and clinical development. Subject to required notice periods and our obligations under binding purchase orders and any cancellation fees that we may be obligated to pay, we can elect to discontinue the work under these agreements at any time. We may also enter into additional collaborative research, contract research, manufacturing, and supplier agreements in the future, which may require upfront payments and/or long-term commitments of cash.