Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto that appear elsewhere in this Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the sections titled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” included in this Form 10-K, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
IsoPlexis is the Superhuman Cell company. Our systems identify a comprehensive range of multifunctional single cells, i.e. the superhero cells in the human body. These cells assist researchers in understanding and predicting disease
progression, treatment resistance and therapeutic efficacy to advance all of human health. We are a life sciences company building solutions to accelerate the development of curative medicines and personalized therapeutics. Our award-winning single-cell proteomics systems reveal unique biological activity in small subsets of cells, allowing researchers to connect more directly to in vivo biology and develop more precise and personalized therapies.
We are enabling deeper access to in vivo biology and driving durable and potentially transformational research on disease in a new era of advanced medicine. We believe our platform is the first to employ both proteomics and single cell biology in an effort to fully characterize and link cellular function to patient outcomes by revealing treatment response and disease progression. Our single cell proteomics platform, which includes instruments, chip consumables and software, provides an end-to-end solution to reveal a more complete view of protein function at an individual cellular level. Since our commercial launch in June 2018, our platform has been adopted by the top 15 global biopharmaceutical companies by revenue and two-thirds of the comprehensive cancer centers in the United States to help develop more durable therapeutics, overcome therapeutic resistance, and predict patient responses for advanced immunotherapies, cell therapies, gene therapies, vaccines, and regenerative medicines. Our initial focus has been on developing applications of our platform for cancer immunology and cell and gene therapy. We are now expanding our capabilities to include applications for infectious diseases, inflammatory conditions, and neurological diseases.
We currently market and sell our technology with an in-house commercial team in the United States and Europe. We are also utilizing our distribution network to market and sell across multiple countries, including Australia, Belgium, Canada, China, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Israel, Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. We intend to further expand our international presence by growing our distribution networks in Brazil, India, Mexico and beyond.
We manufacture our instruments and chip consumables in our manufacturing facilities in Branford, Connecticut and do not outsource any of our production manufacturing to third party contract manufacturers. Certain of our suppliers of certain critical components and materials are single source suppliers and we do not have supply agreements with certain suppliers of these critical components and materials beyond purchase orders. As part of our overall risk management strategy, we continue to evaluate and identify alternative suppliers for each of our components and materials.
Since our inception in March 2013, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, conducting research and development activities, and filing patent applications. Prior to the completion of our IPO, we financed our operations primarily through the private placement of our securities, the incurrence of indebtedness and, to a lesser extent, grant income and revenue derived from sales of our instruments and chip consumables. On October 12, 2021, we closed the IPO of our common stock through an underwritten sale of 8,333,000 shares of common stock at a price of $15.00 per share. The aggregate net proceeds from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses payable by us, were approximately $110.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, our principal source of liquidity was cash, which totaled $126.6 million.
We completed our first sale of our systems in June 2018 and have experienced significant revenue growth in recent periods. Revenue increased to $17.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Nevertheless, we have incurred recurring losses since inception. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net losses were $81.6 million as compared to $23.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $134.0 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and additional operating losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our expenses will increase in connection with ongoing development and business expansion activities, particularly as we continue to:
•expand our research and development activities;
•obtain, maintain and expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
•market and sell new and existing products and services; and
•attract, hire and maintain qualified personnel to support our expanding business efforts.
Furthermore, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, compliance, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
As a result of these anticipated expenditures, we will need substantial additional financing to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate positive cash flows from operations, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings and, to a lesser extent, grant
income. We may be unable to raise additional funds when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our inability to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our financial performance has been, and in the foreseeable future will continue to be, primarily driven by the following factors. While each of these factors presents significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to pursue our growth strategy and improve our results of operations. Our ability to successfully address the factors below is subject to various risks and uncertainties, including those factors set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
New Customer Adoption of Our Platform
Our financial performance has been, and in the foreseeable future will continue to be, driven by our ability to increase the adoption of our platform and the installed base of our instruments. We plan to drive new customer adoption through a direct sales and marketing organization in the United States and parts of Europe and China and third party distributors in Europe, North America, the Middle East and Asia-Pacific. As of December 31, 2021, we market and sell our technology with an in-house commercial team of approximately 190 team members and also utilize our distribution network to market and sell across multiple countries.
Recurring Revenues from Sales of our Chip Consumables
Our IsoCode and CodePlex chip consumables represent a source of recurring revenue from customers using our platform across a wide range of applications. Our instruments and consumables are designed to work together exclusively. As we expand our installed base of instruments, we expect consumable revenues to increase on an absolute basis and become an increasingly important contributor to our overall revenues.
Adoption of Our Platform Across Existing Customers’ Organizations
There is an opportunity to grow our installed base and expand the number of instruments within organizations that are already utilizing our platform to advance their research and therapeutic development by their purchasing of additional instruments to support multiple locations or to increase capacity.
Adoption of Our Platform for New Applications
We founded our company to help solve critical challenges to accelerating advanced medicines and since our inception, we have developed multiple applications spanning cancer immunology, cell and gene therapy, infectious diseases, inflammatory conditions, and neurological diseases. As we continue to deploy our platform, we intend to concurrently expand the breadth of applications for our technologies to encourage increased use of our platform across our addressable markets. We expect our investments in these efforts to increase as we develop and market new applications, including a diagnostic.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue consists of sales of instruments and consumables in addition to service revenue. Our total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $17.3 million compared to $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We expect that our revenue will be less than our expenses for the foreseeable future and that we will experience losses as we continue to expand our business.
Cost of Product and Service Revenue
The Company’s cost of product revenue primarily consists of manufacturing related costs incurred in the production process, including personnel and related costs, costs of components and materials, labor and overhead, packaging and delivery costs and allocated costs for facilities and information technology. Cost of service revenue consists primarily of personnel and related costs of service and warranty costs to support our customers.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include:
•costs to obtain licenses to intellectual property and related future payments should certain success, development and regulatory milestones be achieved;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense;
•costs of purchasing lab supplies and non-capital equipment used in our research and development activities;
•consulting and professional fees related to research and development activities; and
•facility costs, depreciation, and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We do not track research and development expenses by product candidate. Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect research and development costs to continue to increase for the foreseeable future as our current development programs progress and new programs are added.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of our current or future research and development efforts.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, business development, facility and administrative functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting, tax and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities and increased costs of operating as a public company. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, lawyers and accountants, among other expenses. Additionally, we anticipate increased costs associated with being a public company, including services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and officer insurance costs and investor and public relations costs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of compensation related expenses, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, non-cash stock-based compensation, for sales and marketing personnel, advertising and promotion expenses, consulting and subcontractor fees, sales commissions, recruiting fees, and various other selling expenses. We anticipate that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in the future as we pursue our growth mission, including the hiring of consultants to help us identify and expand into new markets, including additional worldwide markets.
Grant Income
We are engaged in various Small Business Innovation Research (“SBIR”) grants with the federal government to help fund the costs of certain research and development activities. We believe that we have complied with all contractual requirements of the SBIR grants through the date of the financial statements. We do not currently expect future grant income to be a material source of funding for the Company.
Research and Development State Tax Credits
Research and development (“R&D”) tax credits exchanged for cash pursuant to the Connecticut R&D Tax Credit Exchange Program, which permits qualified small businesses engaged in R&D activities within Connecticut to exchange their unused R&D tax credits for a cash amount equal to 65% of the value of exchanged credits, are recorded as a receivable and other income in the year the R&D tax credits relate to, as it is reasonably assured that the R&D tax credits will be received, based upon our history of filing for and receiving the tax credits. R&D tax credits receivable where cash is expected to be received by us more than one year after the balance sheet date are classified as noncurrent in the consolidated balance sheets.
Fair Value Adjustment for Warrants and Loan Commitments
Warrants and loan commitments are freestanding financial instruments that qualify as liabilities or equity and assets, respectively, required to be recorded at their estimated fair value at the inception date and remeasured at each reported balance sheet date thereafter until settlement, with gains and losses arising from changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations during each period. Our outstanding preferred share warrants were converted to common share warrants upon our IPO and were reclassified from liabilities to equity for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations
Comparisons of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the dollar change in those items:
Revenue
Total revenue increased $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. This consisted of an increase of $4.0 million for instruments and $2.9 million for consumables.
The increase in instruments revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was driven by an increase in unit sales generated from a larger commercial team, primarily hired in the second half of 2020, and new executive leadership with the addition of our Chief Commercial Officer in the second quarter of 2020. The increase in consumable revenue in 2021 was driven by an increase in the number of units at customer locations.
Gross Profit
Gross profit as a percentage of total revenues was 50.8% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 52.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gross profit percentage decrease was due to increased cost of raw materials in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $9.8 million, or 87.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in compensation related expenses of $4.1 million from hiring approximately 60 new hires year over year, a $1.2 million increase in professional fees, an increase of $0.6 million in recruiting expenses related to the 60 new hires, an increase of $0.9 million in supplies expense related to an increase in the number of demonstrations performed for potential customers, an increase of $1.3 million in lab materials, an increase of $1.1 million in prototyping for next generation product development and an increase of $0.6 million in other expenses related to supporting a larger research and development organization.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $18.3 million, or 228.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in compensation related expenses of $9.8 million, including increased salary, bonus, benefits, and non-cash stock-based compensation, for additional personnel, including several executives, to support increased activities, an increase of $3.7 million of professional fees, including legal, consulting, accounting, and audit fees, an increase of $1.1 million in patent expenses, an increase of $0.9 million in recruiting expenses, an increase of $1.4 million in office related expenses and an increase of $1.4 million in various other expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $24.3 million, or 179.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to increases in compensation related expenses of $13.6 million, including increased salary, bonus, benefits, non-cash stock-based compensation, for additional sales and marketing personnel, consulting and professional fees of $3.3 million, advertising and promotion expenses of $2.6 million, recruiting expenses of $2.0 million, and various other office, selling and headcount related expenses of $2.8 million. Overall, the increase was driven by the increase in headcount to support our growth mission and the hiring of consultants to help us identify and expand into new markets, including worldwide markets.
Change in fair value of warrants and loan commitments
As a result of changes in fair value, we recognized a $4.5 million change in fair value adjustment of warrants and loan commitments for the year ended December 31, 2021, most of which is attributable to our conversion of warrant liability to equity upon IPO.
Interest expense
As a result of the Credit Agreement, we entered into on December 30, 2020, under which we borrowed $25.0 million on December 30, 2020 and $10.0 million on May 27, 2021, we had $31.6 million of borrowings outstanding as of December 31, 2021, and we recognized $3.6 million in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had $126.6 million in cash. Cash as of December 31, 2021 increased by $19.9 million compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to the factors described under the heading “-Cash Flows” below. Our
primary source of liquidity, other than cash on hand, has been cash flows from issuances of common stock in our IPO, issuances of preferred stock, debt financings and, to a lesser extent, grant income.
Cash Flows
Comparisons of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of net loss of $81.6 million, plus net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $14.7 million, partially offset by net non-cash adjustments of $9.8 million. The primary non-cash adjustment to net income was the change in the fair value of warrants and loan commitment of $4.5 million. Cash flow impact from changes in net operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by increases in inventory, partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of net loss of $23.3 million, partially offset by net non-cash adjustments of $1.6 million, plus net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.7 million. The primary non-cash adjustments to net income included share-based compensation of $0.5 million, depreciation and amortization expenses of $0.9 million, change in fair value of warrants of $0.1 million, and provision for warranty costs of $0.1 million. Cash flow impact from changes in net operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by an increase in inventories and prepaid expenses and other current assets and partially offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $24.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. We purchased $3.8 million of property and equipment. We paid $20.4 million related to purchases of patents from third-parties.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $2.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. We purchased $1.5 million of property and equipment. We paid $0.3 million related to patent costs that were capitalized. We also purchased licenses for $0.5 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $130.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2021. We raised cash through our IPO with net proceeds of $110.5 million. We also borrowed the Tranche B term loan under our Credit Agreement, with net proceeds of $10.0 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $104.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. We raised cash through the issuance of Series C-2 and Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock, with net proceeds of $79.9 million. In addition, we received $24.1 million in net proceeds under the Credit Agreement.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue our research and development efforts and expand our business efforts. Furthermore, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs as a result of being a public company. Accordingly, we will need to obtain additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development efforts, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•future research and development efforts;
•the need to service and refinance our indebtedness;
•our ability to enter into and terms and timing of any collaborations, licensing agreements or other arrangements;
•the costs of sales, marketing, distribution and manufacturing efforts;
•our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our business;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against intellectual property related claims; and
•the costs of operating as a public company
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate positive cash flows from operations, we expect to finance our additional cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, and, to a lesser extent, grants. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of those securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of holders of common stock. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies or future revenue streams or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity offerings, debt financings or grants when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, or reduce our expansion efforts.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Contractual obligations represent future cash commitments and liabilities under agreements with third parties and exclude orders for goods and services entered into in the normal course of business that are not enforceable or legally binding.
On December 30, 2020, we entered into the Credit Agreement, which provides for senior secured financing of up to $50.0 million, consisting of a $25.0 million Tranche A term loan and a $25.0 million Tranche B term loan. The Tranche A term loan of $25.0 million was drawn at the initial closing of the Credit Agreement on December 30, 2020. The Credit Agreement was amended on May 27, 2021 to split the previously remaining $25.0 million delayed draw term loan commitments under the Credit Agreement into a $10.0 million Tranche B term loan and a $15.0 million Tranche C term loan. The Tranche B term loan of $10.0 million was drawn on May 27, 2021. Our ability to draw the $15.0 million Tranche C term loan originally remained available through March 31, 2022 subject to several conditions, including achieving total revenue of at least $20.0 million for the twelve month period then most recently ended. Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the one-month LIBOR rate (with a minimum LIBOR rate for such purposes of 1.75%) plus a margin of 9.50% (11.25% at December 31, 2021). Monthly payments of interest only are due over the term of the Credit Agreement with no scheduled loan amortization. Unless accelerated prior to such date, all amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement are due to be repaid on December 30, 2025.
In addition, the Credit Agreement includes a quarterly minimum total revenue covenant for the applicable trailing twelve month period. On October 29, 2021, we entered into the Second Amendment to, among other things, eliminate the minimum total revenue covenant for the twelve months ending December 31, 2021 and reset the total minimum revenue covenants thereafter. Pursuant to the Second Amendment, the minimum total revenue covenant, as amended, will resume being tested for the twelve months ending March 31, 2022.
On March 30, 2022, we entered into a Third Amendment to Credit Agreement and Guaranty with Perceptive Credit Holdings III, LP pursuant to which the prior $15.0 million Tranche C term loan, which was available through March 31, 2022 subject to several conditions, was changed to $7.5 million and such amount was borrowed on March 30, 2022. In addition, the Third Amendment added a new $7.5 million Tranche D term loan, which remains available through June 30, 2022 subject to several conditions, including pro forma compliance with the covenant showing total revenue of at least $16.8 million for the twelve-month period ending March 31, 2022.
We have multiple operating lease commitments for office and manufacturing space and equipment, which expire through 2026. The future rental payments required to be made by the Company under the operating leases are approximately as follows:
In connection with our entry into a Patent Purchase Agreement (the “Patent Purchase Agreement”) on May 12, 2021 with QIAGEN Sciences, LLC and QIAGEN GmbH (the “Sellers”), we entered into a Supply Agreement with one of the Sellers pursuant to which they have agreed to supply certain reagents to us, and we have agreed to certain annual minimum purchases. The future minimum purchase values are as follows:
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, market and other conditions, and various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable. Although these estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of current events and actions that may impact us in the future, the estimation process is, by its nature, uncertain given that estimates depend on events over which we may not have control. Though the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to our business and operating results presents additional uncertainty, we continue to use the best information available to inform our critical accounting estimates. If market and other conditions change from those that we anticipate, our consolidated financial statements may be materially affected. In addition, if our assumptions change, we may need to revise our estimates, or take other corrective actions, either of which may also have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements. In addition to the accounting policies discussed below, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2” for other significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue is generated primarily from the sale of products and services. Product revenue primarily consists of sales of instruments and chip consumables. Service revenue primarily consists of revenue generated from measuring immune responses using the Company’s technology.
The Company recognizes revenue when control of products and services is transferred to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to receive from the customers in exchange for those products and services. This process involves identifying the contract with a customer, determining the performance obligations in the contract, determining the contract price, allocating the contract prices to distinct performance obligations in the contract, and recognizing revenue when the performance obligations have been satisfied. Revenue recognition for contracts with multiple deliverables is based on the separate satisfaction of each distinct performance obligation within the contract. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer
either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. The Company considers a performance obligation satisfied once the Company has transferred control of a good or service to the customer, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the good or service. The contract price is allocated to each performance obligation in proportion to its standalone selling price. If the product or service has no history of sales or if the sales volume is not sufficient, the Company relies upon prices set by management, adjusted for applicable discounts.
The Company records revenue from product sales when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with customers are satisfied. Generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of the goods to customers at the time of shipment. The Company also generates service revenues by measuring immune responses using the Company’s technology. The Company recognizes service revenue when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with customers are satisfied, which is generally at the time the analysis data is made available to the customer or agreed-upon milestones are reached. The Company makes judgments as to its ability to collect outstanding receivables and provides allowances when collection becomes doubtful.
Revenue is recorded net of discounts and sales taxes collected on behalf of governmental authorities. Employee sales commissions are recorded as sales and marketing expenses when incurred as the amortization period for such costs, if capitalized, would have been one year or less.
Share-Based Compensation
Our determination of the fair value of stock options with time-based vesting on the date of grant utilizes the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and is impacted by our common stock price as well as other variables including, but not limited to, expected term that options will remain outstanding, expected common stock price volatility over the term of the option awards, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends.
The fair value of a stock-based award is recognized over the period during which an optionee is required to provide services in exchange for the option award, known as the requisite service period (usually the vesting period) on a straight-line basis. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized based on the fair value determined on the date of grant and is reduced for forfeitures as they occur. Estimating the fair value of equity-settled awards as of the grant date using valuation models, such as the Black-Scholes option pricing model, is affected by assumptions regarding a number of complex variables. Changes in the assumptions can materially affect the fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
As there had been no public market for our common stock prior to our IPO, the estimated fair value of our common stock had been determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock, and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These third-party valuations were performed in accordance with the guidance outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants’ Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Our common stock valuations were prepared using one or more of the following methods: the option pricing method (“OPM”), the probability-weighted expected return method (“PWERM”) or the hybrid method, which combines both the OPM and the PWERM. The OPM uses market approaches to estimate our enterprise value and treats common stock and preferred stock as call options on the total equity value of a company, with exercise prices based on the value thresholds at which the allocation among the various holders of a company’s securities changes. Under this method, the common stock has value only if the funds available for distribution to stockholders exceed the value of the preferred stock liquidation preferences at the time of a liquidity event, such as a strategic sale or a merger. A discount for lack of marketability of the common stock is then applied to arrive at an indication of value for the common stock. The PWERM is a scenario-based analysis that estimates the value per share based on the probability-weighted present value of expected future investment returns, considering each of the possible outcomes considered by us, as well as the economic and control rights of each share class.
In addition to considering the results of these third-party valuations, our board of directors considered both objective and subjective factors, including:
•the prices at which we sold our redeemable convertible preferred stock and the superior rights and preferences of the redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to our common stock at the time of each grant;
•the progress of our research and development;
•our stage of development and our business strategy;
•external market conditions affecting the biotechnology industry, and trends within the biotechnology industry;
•our financial position, including cash on hand, and our historical and forecasted performance and operating results;
•the lack of an active public market for our common stock and our redeemable convertible preferred stock; and
•the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our company in light of prevailing market conditions.
Expected Term-We have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (10 years).
Expected Volatility-Due to our limited operating history and a lack of company specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards.
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of our stock options.
Expected Dividend-We have not issued any dividends in our history and do not expect to issue dividends over the life of the options and therefore have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimate, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
Estimates of the fair value of common stock are no longer necessary to determine the fair value of new awards in periods ended after the closing of our IPO, since the underlying shares have begun trading publicly.
Valuation of warrants
Prior to our IPO, we issued warrants exercisable into Series A-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock and Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock in connection with debt issuances. These warrants were classified as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 30, 2020, as we determined that they met the definition of a freestanding financial instrument since they are legally detachable and also determined that such instruments represent forward sale contracts on redeemable shares and, accordingly, the instruments should be accounted for as a liability separate from the redeemable convertible preferred stock. They are reported at fair value at inception with an allocation of the proceeds from the debt issued. We remeasure these liabilities to fair value at each reporting date, and immediately prior to exercise or settlement, and recognize changes in the fair value of the liabilities in our consolidated statements of operations recorded as “change in fair value of warrants.” The warrant exercisable into Series A-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock was exercised on May 11, 2021, at an exercise price of $12.58608 per share for 3,178 shares of Series A-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock. Upon closing of the IPO on October 12, 2021, the warrant exercisable into Series D redeemable convertible preferred stock was converted into a warrant exercisable for a total of 811,374 shares of common stock with an exercise price of $9.62 per warrant share. In connection with the Third Amendment to the Credit Agreement dated March 30, 2022, the exercise price of the warrants has been changed from $9.62 per warrant share to $6.00 per warrant share. The common stock warrant is no longer considered “potentially redeemable” and the fair value of the warrant liability as of October 12, 2021 has been reclassified from liabilities to equity in accordance with ASC 480 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
The JOBS Act
The JOBS Act permits an emerging growth company such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, we will not be subject to new or revised accounting standards at the same time that they become applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an emerging growth company. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.