Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We were incorporated in 2009 under the laws of the state of Delaware. Our mission is to accelerate life science research and development via a single global marketplace platform that connects researchers to subjects, specimens, and associated data. We are headquartered in Lexington, Massachusetts. We operate as one operating and reporting segment.
In addition to creating a single global platform where both specimen providers and researchers can connect, the platform automates the process of searching for and selecting specimens for research. The platform taps into healthcare provider data to gain insights into the available samples in biobanks or laboratories, or to gain insights into the patient populations to support specimen collections directly from research subjects. The platform receives de-identified data from electronic medical records, laboratory information systems, and other healthcare data sources of available specimens and research subjects and harmonizes the data across all participating organizations.
Researchers can search this data using our intuitive, web-based user interface to obtain specimens more efficiently. They can instantly find the specific specimens they need for their studies, request quotes for these specimens or for custom collections directly from research subjects, place orders, and track and manage their specimens and associated data across projects.
Biospecimen providers also gain efficiencies using the iSpecimen Marketplace, not only because the platform provides instant access to a large researcher base, but because the technology orchestrates the bioprocurement workflow from specimen request to fulfilment. Specimen providers access intuitive dashboards to view requests, create proposals, and track and manage their orders.
Finally, the platform helps with administrative and reporting functions for researchers, suppliers, and our internal personnel, including user and compliance management.
The iSpecimen Marketplace is composed of four major functional areas: search, workflow, data, and administration and reporting. We continue to invest in the evolution of these areas to improve engagement with the platform and liquidity across it. Our core business objective is to retain and grow both researcher and supplier usage of our platform to support biospecimen procurement, as well as to position our Company to explore other adjacent business opportunities that can benefit from the use of the iSpecimen Marketplace.
The iSpecimen Marketplace currently supports the supply chain management and bioprocurement process for specimens and associated data. We generate revenue by procuring various specimens from hospitals, laboratories, and other supply sites comprising our network, and delivering them to its medical research customers using its proprietary software to identify and locate the required specimens. Costs paid to acquire specimens from hospitals and laboratories generally varies depending upon the sample type, collection requirements, and data provided. We generally operate in a “just in time” fashion, meaning we procure specimens from our suppliers and distribute specimens to our customers after we obtain an order for specimens from a research client. Generally, we do not speculatively purchase and bank samples in anticipation of future, unspecified needs. We believe our approach offers many advantages over a more traditional inventory-based supplier business model where biorepositories take inventory risks, and where inventory turnover and cash conversion cycles can be lengthy.
On March 30, 2021, we effected a 1-for-5.545 reverse stock split of our issued and outstanding shares of common stock, as well as effected a proportional adjustment to the existing conversion ratios for our redeemable convertible preferred stock. All historical share and per share information shown herein and in our financial statements and related notes have been retroactively adjusted to give effect to the reverse stock split.
On June 16, 2021, we completed an IPO in which we issued and sold 2,250,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $8.00 per share, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $18,000,000. On July 1, 2021, we issued and sold 337,500 additional shares of common stock, pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of its overallotment option, at a public offering price of $8.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $2,700,000. The net proceeds from the overallotment were $2,500,000 after deducting underwriting discounts of $200,000. Inclusive of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, we received approximately $18,200,000 in net proceeds from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts of $1,900,000 and other offering costs of $600,000.
Upon completion of the IPO, the Company converted all 1,291,012 shares of outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock into 1,291,012 shares of common stock, all $5,500,000 of its outstanding principal and all unpaid and accrued interest of approximately $1,300,000 of the convertible notes into 1,206,614 shares of common stock at a conversion price of $5.60 per share, and $4,000,000 of
its outstanding principal and accrued interest of $700,000 of the bridge notes as amended (‘Bridge Notes”), into 842,429 shares of common stock at a conversion price of $5.60 per share. As of December 31, 2021, there were no convertible notes outstanding.
On August 13, 2021, we entered into a loan agreement (the “Term Loan”) and as a result, received proceeds of $3,500,000. This funding was used to pay the remaining balance of $3,000,000 on the Bridge Notes. As of December 31, 2021, there were no Bridge Notes outstanding.
On December 1, 2021, we closed on a private placement offering (“PIPE”) for gross proceeds of approximately $21,000,000, before deducting approximately $1.4 million for underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses, for (i) an aggregate of 1,749,999 shares of common stock and (ii) warrants, which are exercisable for an aggregate of up to 1,312,500 shares of common stock.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Our Operations
We are subject to the risks arising from the COVID-19 outbreak’s social and economic impacts on the healthcare services industry. Our management believes that the social and economic impacts, which include but are not limited to the following, could have a significant impact on future financial condition, liquidity, and results of operations: (i) restrictions on in-person activities arising from shelter-in- place, or similar isolation orders, that limit our ability to procure specimens through our supply chain; (i) decline in researcher demand for specimens; and (iii) deteriorating economic conditions, such as increased unemployment rates and recessionary conditions.
Beginning in March 2020, COVID-19 affected our supply chain’s ability to fulfill specimen requests. As healthcare providers dealt with the COVID-19 pandemic, many temporarily shuttered their research operations, including biospecimen collection capabilities, as they deployed resources to more critical parts of their organization or their employees stayed home to support social distancing measures.
In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, we implemented measures to help stabilize revenue, improve our cash position, and reduce costs. In May 2020, we applied for and received a loan in the amount of $783,008 from the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act. Cost saving measures included the elimination of non-essential travel and in-person training activities, deferral of certain planned expenditures, and the furlough of 7% of our employees in August 2020.
To stabilize revenue, we added COVID-19 samples to our product line to support growing research in this area and also contracted with mobile phlebotomy service providers to more easily collect specimens from research subjects who may be practicing social distancing. We received our first request for samples from patients with a prior or current COVID-19 infection on March 18, 2020, and through December 31, 2021, we fulfilled additional COVID-19 specimen requests. Because of our large, geographically diverse network with many sites around the country and the world, we were able to respond quickly to this new demand and match requests for COVID-19 specimens to sites in areas of outbreak. As a result, during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately 31%, and 35%, respectively, of our total purchase orders were related to COVID-19 specimens.
While our supply sites are mostly operational as of December 31, 2021, we expect that while the pandemic lasts, we will continue to experience slowdowns in specimen collections as the pandemic surges in various parts of the world due to social distancing on the part of research subjects, supply partner site employees, and customer research organizations. There is still considerable uncertainty around the duration of this COVID-19 outbreak and its future impact. While we implemented measures to help stabilize revenue as well as measures to reduce costs in response to the COVID-19 outbreak, given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, we expect this matter to continue to have an impact on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity, which cannot be reasonably estimated at this time.
Impact of Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine on Our Operations
The short and long-term implications of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are difficult to predict at this time. The imposition of sanctions and counter sanctions may have an adverse effect on the economic markets generally and could impact our business and the businesses of our supply partners, especially those in the Ukraine and Russia. Because of the highly uncertain and dynamic nature of these events, it is not currently possible to estimate the impact of the Russian - Ukraine war on our business and the companies from which we obtain supplies.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue by procuring various specimens from hospitals, laboratories, and other supply sites, for our medical research customers using our proprietary software, the iSpecimen Marketplace, to identify, locate, and ultimately validate the required specimens to our customers’ requested specifications. The Company’s performance obligation is to procure a specimen meeting the customer specification(s) from a supplier, on a “best efforts” basis, for our customer at the agreed price per specimen as indicated in the customer contract with the Company. We do not currently charge suppliers or customers for the use of our proprietary software. Each customer will execute a material and data use agreement with the Company or agrees to online purchase terms, each of which includes terms such as specimen and data use, shipment terms, payment and cancellation terms. These are then supplemented by purchase orders that specify specimen requirements including detailed inclusion/exclusion criteria, quantities to be collected, and pricing. Collectively, these customer agreements represent the Company’s contracts with its customer. Generally, contracts have fixed unit pricing. For certain specimen orders, a refundable customer deposit may be required prior to order fulfillment depending on project set-up requirements, presented as deferred revenue. The Company expects to recognize the deferred revenue within the next twelve months.
We recognize revenue over time, as we have created an asset with no alternative use and we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date. At contract inception, we review a contract and related order upon receipt to determine if the specimen ordered has an alternative use by us. Generally, specimens ordered do not have an alternative future use to us and our performance obligation is satisfied when the related specimens are accessioned. We use an output method to recognize revenue for specimens with no alternative future use. The output is measured based on the number of specimens accessioned.
Customers are typically invoiced upon shipment. Depending on the quantity of specimens ordered, it may take several accounting periods to completely fulfill a purchase order. In other words, there can be multiple invoices issued for a single purchase order, reflecting the specimens being accessioned over time. However, specimens are generally shipped as soon as possible after they have been accessioned.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue primarily consists of the purchase price to acquire specimens from hospitals and laboratories, inbound and outbound shipping costs, supply costs related to samples; payment processing and related transaction costs, and costs paid to the supply sites to support sample collections. Shipping costs upon receipt of products from suppliers are recognized in cost of revenue.
Additionally, we believe that loss from operations is a more meaningful measure of profitability than gross profit due to the nature of specimens accessioned and the diversity of our pricing.
Technology
Technology costs include payroll and related expenses for employees involved in the development and implementation of our technology; software license and system maintenance fees, outsourced data center costs, data management costs, depreciation and amortization, and other expenses necessary to support technology initiatives. Collectively, these costs reflect the efforts we make to offer a wide variety of products and services to our customers. Technology and data costs are generally expensed as incurred.
A portion of technology costs are related to research and development. Costs incurred for research and development are expensed as incurred, except for software development costs that are eligible for capitalization. Research and development costs primarily include salaries and related expenses, in addition to the cost of external service providers.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing costs primarily consist of payroll and related expenses for personnel engaged in marketing and selling activities, including salaries and sales commissions, travel expenses, public relations and social media costs, ispecimen.com website development and maintenance costs, search engine optimization fees, advertising costs; direct marketing costs, trade shows and events fees, marketing and customer relationship management software, and other marketing-related costs.
Supply Development
We have agreements with supply partners that allow us to procure specimens from them and distribute these samples to customers. Supply development costs primarily include payroll and related expenses for personnel engaged in the development and management of this supply network, related travel expenses, regulatory compliance costs to support the network, and other supply development and management costs.
Fulfillment
Fulfillment costs primarily consist of those costs incurred in operating and staffing operations and customer service teams, including costs attributable to assess the feasibility of specimen requests, creating and managing orders, picking, packaging, and preparing customer orders for shipment, responding to inquiries from customers, and laboratory equipment and supplies.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of costs for corporate functions, including payroll and related expenses for human resources, legal, finance, and executive teams, associated software licenses, facilities and equipment expenses, such as depreciation and amortization expense and rent, outside legal expenses, insurance costs, and other general and administrative costs.
Financial Operations Overview and Analysis for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased by approximately $2,951,000 or 36%, from approximately $8,184,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $11,135,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to a more seasoned sales team, continued demand for specimens from patients with known COVID-19 test results, and an increasing demand for specimens in non-COVID-19 research areas. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 our revenue derived from specimens related to COVID-19 accounted for approximately 28% and 43%, respectively, of our total revenue. Specimens accessioned during the current year decreased by approximately 1,300 or 6% to approximately 20,800, compared to approximately 22,100 of specimens accessioned during the year ended December 31, 2020. However, a change in specimen mix resulted in an increase in average selling price per specimen of approximately $165 or 44% compared to the prior year.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by approximately $1,664,000, or 46%, from approximately $3,585,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $5,249,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 which was attributable to a 55% increase in the average cost per specimen impacted by the specimen mix during the current year over the prior year, offset by the 6% decrease in the number of specimens accessioned during the current year ended over the same prior year period. The significant increase in the average cost per specimen is the result of both a changing specimen mix and a significant project in 2020 which yielded lower average costs per specimen.
Technology
Technology expenses increased by approximately $373,000 or 25% from approximately $1,465,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $1,838,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily related to increases in depreciation
and amortization of approximately $182,000, operating and maintenance expenses of approximately $133,000, and project expenses for the development of the Company’s technology that were not capitalizable of approximately $58,000.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased approximately $639,000, or 36%, from approximately $1,784,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $2,423,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in payroll and related expenses of approximately $421,000, external marketing efforts of approximately $120,000, and general operating expense related to sales and marketing of approximately $115,000, partially offset by a reduction in general expenses related to sales and marketing of approximately $16,000.
Supply Development
Supply development expenses increased approximately $77,000, or 15%, from approximately $497,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $574,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in payroll and related expenses of approximately $113,000, partially offset by a decrease in operating and regulatory compliance costs of approximately $33,000.
Fulfillment
Fulfillment costs increased approximately $504,000, or 59%, from approximately $860,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $1,364,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in payroll and related expenses of approximately $477,000 for personnel engaged in pre-sales feasibility assessments and post-sales fulfillment activities and post-sales activities such as order processing and management, shipping and receiving, and customer service of approximately $31,000, partially offset by a decrease in other fulfillment expenses of approximately $10,000.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased approximately $3,214,000 or 134%, from approximately $2,399,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $5,613,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was attributable to increases in compensation related costs of approximately $1,150,000, including approximately $737,000 for a special IPO bonus that was provided to all employees in the form of cash and restricted stock units and board compensation of approximately $65,000, insurance of approximately $726,000, primarily related to director and officer insurance as a public company, approximately $705,000 for professional services, primarily for legal, accounting and consulting expenses related to becoming a public company, approximately $298,000 related to the loss on sale of accounts receivable, outsourced information technology and software licenses of approximately $246,000, the allowance for doubtful accounts of approximately $53,000, travel expenses of approximately $44,000 and other general and administrative expenses of approximately $15,000, slightly offset by a decrease in utility and facility costs of approximately $23,000.
Other Expense, net
Other expense, net increased by approximately $791,000, or 35%, from approximately $2,246,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $3,037,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in other expense, net was primarily attributable to a loss on the extinguishment of Bridge Notes and Related Party Bridge Notes of approximately $2,740,000, a loss on extinguishment of Convertible Notes of approximately $260,000, a difference in the change in fair value of the derivative liability related to the Convertible Note of approximately $112,000, as well as other items of approximately $50,000, partially offset by a change in fair value of the derivative liability related to the Bridge Notes and Related Party Bridge Notes of approximately $1,583,000, and a gain on the extinguishment of note payable of approximately $788,000 due to the forgiveness of the total outstanding balance of the Paycheck Protection Program Loan.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, our available cash totaled approximately $27,739,000 which represented an increase of approximately $27,043,000 compared to December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $30,443,000 which represents an increase of approximately $49,106,000 compared to the deficit of $18,663,321 as of December 31, 2020. Since inception, we have relied upon raising capital to finance our operations. On June 21, 2021, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 2,250,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $8.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $18,000,000. The net proceeds from the IPO were $15,700,000 after deducting underwriting discounts of $1,700,000 and other offering costs of $600,000. On July 1, 2021, we sold an additional 337,500 shares of our common stock, pursuant to the underwriters' partial exercise of its overallotment option, at a public offering price of $8.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $2,700,000. The net proceeds from the overallotment were $2,500,000 after deducting underwriting discounts of $200,000. In aggregate, we received approximately $18,200,000 after deducting underwriting discounts of $1,900,000 and other offering costs of $600,000.
On August 13, 2021, we received proceeds of $3,500,000 from the Term Loan and paid the remaining balance of $3,000,000 on the Bridge Notes. As of December 31, 2021, there were no Bridge Notes outstanding.
Factoring Agreement
On January 1, 2021, we entered into a factoring agreement with Versant Funding, LLC (“Versant”), pursuant to which we agreed to sell a minimum of $1,200,000 of our accounts receivable without recourse. We have sold, without recourse, total net receivables of approximately $2,300,000 under the Factoring Agreement to Versant. Without recourse indicates that we assign and transfer our rights, title, and interest in and to the accounts receivable to Versant, meaning that we are not liable to repay all or any portion of the advance amount if any portion of the accounts receivable is not paid by our customer(s). Information on accounts receivable identified for factoring are provided and verified by Versant prior to being accepted for factoring. Pursuant to the Factoring Agreement, we receive an advance of 75% of the value of the purchased accounts receivable upfront. Upon receipt of the payment from the customer, Versant calculates the applicable factoring fee from invoice date through the actual collection date and remits the remaining 25% holdback of the value of the factored accounts receivable, less their factoring fees, to us. The factoring fees range from 2.5% to 15% of the purchase
price of the accounts receivable based on the age of the accounts receivable when collected. We are also charged for certain reimbursable administrative fees incurred on our behalf for the management of the program. In connection with the Factoring Agreement, we entered into a Security Agreement, granting to Versant a security interest in substantially all of our assets to secure our obligations under the Factoring Agreement.
The Factoring Agreement was terminated on June 30, 2021. Factoring fees paid under this arrangement totaled approximately $298,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Upon termination of the Factoring Agreement, all future payments of accounts receivable shall be made directly to the Company.
Note Payable Loan Forgiveness
On January 13, 2021, the Paycheck Protection Program Loan and related interest of $788,156 was fully forgiven by the U.S. Small Business Administration.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was approximately $10,668,410, which consisted of a net loss of $8,961,815 offset by non-cash charges of approximately $3,576,000, which primarily includes a $2,740,425 loss on extinguishment of Bridge Notes, $958,639 related to amortization of internally developed software, $869,600 of amortization of discount on Amended Bridge Notes, $622,064 in stock based compensation, a $260,185 loss on extinguishment of Convertible Notes, $161,074 in bad debt expense, $45,358 related to depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, $12,500 in of common stock issued in exchange for services, $4,605 of amortization of debt issuance costs on note payable, and $1,088 of amortization of discount and debt issuance costs on Convertible Notes, partially offset by a $1,311,700 loss on derivative liabilities, and a $788,156 gain on extinguishment on note payable.
Total changes in assets and liabilities of approximately $5,282,000 were primarily driven by a $1,708,922 decrease in accrued interest, a $1,637,124 increase in accounts receivable, a $1,086,259 increase in accounts receivable-unbilled, a $959,754 decrease in accounts payable, and a $218,508 decrease in deferred revenue, offset by a $198,893 increase in accrued expenses, a $90,894 decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and a $38,503 decrease in tax credit receivable.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $288,380, which consisted of a net loss of $4,652,084 offset by non-cash charges of approximately $1,323,000 which primarily includes $774,929 related to amortization of internally developed software, a $159,000 loss on derivative liability, $143,435 of amortization of discount and debt issuance costs on Convertible Notes, $108,096 in bad debt expense, $92,866 in stock based compensation, and $44,758 related to depreciation and amortization of property and equipment.
Total changes in assets and liabilities of approximately $3,041,000 were primarily driven by a $1,951,429 increase in accrued interest, an increase of $1,054,638 in accounts payable, an increase of $873,254 in deferred revenue, an increase in accrued expenses of $282,142, and a decrease in tax credit receivable of $104,624, offset by a $800,908 increase in accounts receivable, a $226,374 increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, and an increase in accounts receivable-unbilled of $198,185.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,037,917 and $1,102,612 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $1,035,367 of capitalization of internally developed software and $2,550 for purchase of property and equipment. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $1,102,186 of capitalization of internally developed software, and purchases of property and equipment of $426.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $38,749,397 and $2,033,008 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $20,999,988 of proceeds
received from the issuance of common stock in connection with the PIPE, $18,000,000 of proceeds received from the issuance of common stock in connection with the IPO, $3,500,000 of proceeds received from the issuance of note payable, $2,497,501 of net proceeds from the issuance of over-allotment shares of common stock, $500,000 of proceeds received from the issuance of Bridge Notes payable, $58,648 of proceeds received from the exercise of stock options, and $992 of proceeds received from the exercise of warrants, partially offset by the $3,000,000 payment of principal to the holders of the Bridge Notes, $2,339,816 for the payment of offering costs in connection with the issuance of common stock in connection with the IPO, $1,434,999 for the payment of offering costs in connection with the issuance of common stock in connection with PIPE, and $32,917 for the payment of debt issuance costs in connection with the note payable.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of proceeds received from the issuance of Bridge Notes payable totaling $1,250,000 and proceeds received from the Paycheck Protection Program of $783,008.
Effects of Inflation and Supply Chain Shortages
Our operations are heavily reliant on specimen availability, and as a result, we often receive more requests than we can fulfill. While the Company is subject to these types of supply chain constraints that are specific to the specimen industry, we have not been affected by the more common supply chain issues currently affecting the economy, specifically surrounding transportation. Due to the small size of the packages that we ship, our carriers have been able to continue making timely deliveries during the year ended December 31, 2021.
We have experienced negative effects of inflation in certain areas of our business due to the high rates of inflation in the world’s current economy. This inflation is affecting employee salaries, which account for a significant portion of our operating costs. Additionally, costs of supplies have been affected by inflation, however, these costs are not significant to the Company’s results.
Inflation has not had a significant impact on the cost of specimens due to our long-term contracts maintained with vendors, which include revenue sharing plans.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”), we use adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”), a non-GAAP financial measure, to understand and evaluate our core operating performance. This non-GAAP financial measure, which may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies, is presented to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our financial performance and should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP.
We define our non-GAAP financial measure of Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, excluding income tax benefit, change in fair value of derivative liabilities, loss on extinguishment of Bridge Notes and Related Party Bridge Notes, gain on extinguishment of note payable, interest expense, depreciation and amortization, and share-based compensation expense.
We believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information about our financial performance, enhances the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects, and allows for greater transparency with respect to a key metric used by our management for financial and operational decision-making. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that otherwise could be masked by the effect of the expenses that we exclude in Adjusted EBITDA. In particular, we believe the exclusion of share-based compensation expense provides a useful supplemental measure in evaluating the performance of our operations and provides better transparency into our results of operations.
We are presenting the non-GAAP measure of Adjusted EBITDA to assist investors in seeing our financial performance through the eyes of management, and because we believe this measure provides an additional tool for investors to use in comparing our core financial performance over multiple periods with other companies in our industry.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation from, or as a substitute for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA compared to net loss, the closest comparable GAAP measure. Some of these limitations are that:
Ø Adjusted EBITDA excludes the change in fair value of the derivative liability, which represents a non-cash charge related to the change in fair value for the embedded features on the Convertible Notes, Bridge Notes, and Related Party Bridge Notes;
Ø Adjusted EBITDA excludes the loss on the extinguishment of Bridge Notes and Relates Party Bridge Notes;
Ø Adjusted EBITDA excludes the gain on the extinguishment of note payable;
Ø Adjusted EBITDA excludes amortization of debt issuance costs and discounts on Convertible Notes which are components to interest expense;
Ø Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain recurring, non-cash charges such as depreciation of leasehold improvements, property and equipment and amortization of internally developed software and, although these are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future; and
Ø Adjusted EBITDA excludes share-based compensation expense which has been, and will continue to be for the foreseeable future, significant recurring expenses in our business and an important part of our compensation strategy.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most comparable GAAP financial measure, for each of the periods presented:
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
A summary of the significant accounting policies is provided in Note 2 of our financial statements.
Discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, revenue, and expenses at the date of the financial statements. Generally, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions in accordance with GAAP that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider the most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations because they require our most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. The following accounting policies involve estimates that are
considered critical due to the level of subjectivity and judgment involved, as well as the impact on our financial position and results of operations.
Internally Developed Software
We capitalize certain internal and external costs incurred during the application development stage of internal use software projects until the software is ready for its intended use. Amortization of the asset commences when the software is complete and placed into service and is recorded in operating expenses. We amortize completed internal-use software over its estimated useful life of five years on a straight-line basis. Costs incurred during the planning, training and post-implementation stages of the software development life cycle are classified as technology and expensed to operations as incurred. Costs that do not meet the capitalization criteria are expensed as incurred.
Share-based Compensation
We record share-based compensation for options granted to employees, non-employees, and to members of the board of directors for their services on the board of directors based on the grant date fair value of awards issued, and the expense is recorded on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are recognized when they occur.
We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options. The use of the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model requires management to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of the common stock consistent with the expected life of the option, risk-free interest rates and expected dividend yields of the common stock. We have concluded that its historical share option exercise experience does not provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term. Therefore, the expected term was determined according to the simplified method, which is the average of the vesting tranche dates and the contractual term. Due to the lack of company specific historical and implied volatility data, the estimate of expected volatility is primarily based on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. For these analyses, companies with comparable characteristics are selected, including enterprise value and position within the industry, and with historical share price information sufficient to meet the expected life of the share-based awards. We compute the historical volatility data using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of its share-based awards. The risk-free interest rate is determined by reference to U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with remaining maturities similar to the expected term of the options. We have not paid, and do not anticipate paying, cash dividends on shares of its common stock.
Common Stock Valuations
For all periods prior to our initial public offering, there was no public market for our common stock, and, as a result, the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying our share-based awards was estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. To determine the fair value of our common stock underlying option grants, our Board of Directors considered, among other things, input from management, valuations of our common stock prepared by unrelated third-party valuation firms in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, and our Board of Directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant, and factors that may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. These factors included, but were not limited to:
Ø our results of operations and financial position, including our levels of available capital resources;
Ø our stage of development and material risks related to our business;
Ø our business conditions and projections;
Ø the valuation of publicly traded companies in the life sciences and Scientific Research & Development sectors, as well as recently completed mergers and acquisitions of peer companies;
Ø the lack of marketability of our common stock as a private company;
Ø the prices at which we sold shares of our convertible preferred stock to outside investors in arms- length transactions;
Ø the rights, preferences, and privileges of our convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock;
Ø the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for our securityholders, such as an initial public offering or a sale of our Company, given prevailing market conditions;
Ø the hiring of key personnel and the experience and expertise of management;
Ø trends and developments in our industry; and
Ø external market conditions affecting the life sciences and Scientific Research & Development industry sectors.
For our valuations of common stock performed, we used a hybrid method of the Option Pricing Method (“OPM”) and the Probability-Weighted Expected Return Method (“PWERM”). PWERM considers various potential liquidity outcomes. Our approach included the use of an initial public offering scenario and a scenario assuming continued operation as a private entity. Under the hybrid OPM and PWERM, the per share value calculated under the OPM and PWERM are weighted based on expected exit outcomes and the quality of the information specific to each allocation methodology to arrive at a final estimated fair value per share of the common stock before a discount for lack of marketability is applied.
To determine the fair value of our common stock, we first determined our enterprise value using accepted valuation approaches; adjusted these valuation approaches with relevant discounts; weighted the results appropriately; and then allocated the equity value to our common stock and common stock equivalents. Our enterprise value was estimated using two generally accepted approaches: the income approach and the market approach. The income approach estimates enterprise value based on the estimated present value of future cash flows the business is expected to generate over its remaining life. The estimated present value is calculated using a discount rate reflective of the risks associated with an investment in a similar company in a similar industry or having a similar history of revenue growth. The market approach measures the value of a business through an analysis of recent sales or offerings of comparable investments or assets, and in our case, focused on comparing us to a group of our peer companies. In applying this method, valuation multiples are derived from historical and projected operating data of the peer company group. We then apply the selected multiples to our operating data to arrive at a range of indicated enterprise values of the Company. We then subtracted the net debt to determine equity value.
As a result of the IPO in June 2021, it is not necessary to determine the fair value of our common stock, as our shares are traded in the public market.
Recent Accounting Standards
For information on recent accounting standards, see Note 2 to our financial statements.
JOBS Act Transition Period
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act, was enacted. Section 107 of the JOBS Act provides that an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an “emerging growth company” can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies.
We have elected not to “opt out” of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we will adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard and will do so until such time that we either (i) irrevocably elect to “opt out” of such extended transition period or (ii) no longer qualify as an emerging growth company.
We are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we intend to rely on certain of these exemptions, including without limitation, (i) providing an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and (ii) complying with any requirement that may be adopted
by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements, known as the auditor discussion and analysis. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (i) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more; (ii) the last day of 2026; (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years; or (iv) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC.