Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections titled “Risk Factors,” “Information About Thayer” and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this proxy statement/prospectus. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31. As used in this section, unless the context suggests otherwise, “we,” “us,” “our,” or “Thayer” refer to Thayer Ventures Acquisition Corporation.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on July 31, 2020. We were formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, or the initial business combination. We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and our initial public offering, or IPO. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the consummation of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income
in the form of income earned on investments held in the Trust Account on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the IPO. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
Our sponsor is Thayer Ventures Acquisition Holdings LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on December 10, 2020. On December 15, 2020, we closed the IPO and issued 17,250,000 units, which included 2,250,000 additional units to cover an over-allotment option we granted to the underwriters, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $172.5 million, and incurring offering costs of $9.2 million, inclusive of $6.9 million in deferred underwriting commissions and net of reimbursement from underwriters of $1.7 million. We refer to the shares of Class A Common Stock included in the units as the public shares.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated a private placement of 7,175,000 warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, to our sponsor, generating proceeds of $7.2 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the private placement, $176.0 million ($10.20 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the IPO and certain of the proceeds from the private placement were placed in a Trust Account located in the U.S. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, which will be invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under
the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete a business combination before June 15, 2022, which is 18 months from the closing of our IPO, and our stockholders have not amended our Existing Thayer Certificate of Incorporation to extend such date, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price,
payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case, to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $113,000 outside of the Trust Account and a $3.8 million of working capital deficit (not taking into account approximately $178,000 in tax obligations that may be paid using investment income classified in the Trust Account).
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain on our IPO in exchange for the issuance of the Founder Shares, and loan proceeds from the sponsor of $400,000 under a promissory note. We repaid the promissory note in full on December 15, 2020, concurrent with the closing of our IPO. Subsequent to the closing of the IPO, our liquidity needs have been satisfied through the net proceeds from the IPO and the private placement that are held outside of the trust account.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15,
“Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the liquidation, mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after June 15, 2022. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization, or WHO, announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19).
In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19
outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19
pandemic continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, our ability to complete an initial business combination, may be adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19
pandemic or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an initial business combination in a timely manner. Our ability to consummate an initial business combination may also depend on our ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021, was related to our formation, the preparation for the IPO, and since the closing of the IPO, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income
in the form of income earned on investments held in the Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $4.9 million, which consisted of $5.2 million in general and administrative costs, approximately $152,000 of franchise tax expense offset by approximately $388,000 change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities and income earned on investments held in Trust Account of approximately $42,000.
For the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $3.0 million, which primarily consisted of $109,000 in general and administrative costs, approximately $84,000 of franchise tax expense, $411,000 of financing costs - derivative warrant liabilities, and.$2.4 million in change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares and private placement warrants are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement we entered into in connection with our IPO. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands that we register such securities, subject to specified conditions. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the consummation of the business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not be required to effect or permit any registration or cause any registration statement to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up
period.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $3.45 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the IPO. The underwriters also made a payment to us in an amount equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $1.7 million in the aggregate to reimburse certain of our expenses.
An additional fee of $0.40 per unit, or $6.9 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred underwriting commissions will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Deferred Consulting Fees
In September 2020, we entered into an engagement letter with a consultant to obtain advisory services in connection with our search for a business combination target, pursuant to which we agreed to pay a $10,000 initial fee upon execution and a deferred success fee of $50,000 upon the consummation of our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Investments Held in Trust Account
Our portfolio of investments held in trust is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. Our investments held in the trust account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these investments are included in net gain from investments held in trust account in the accompanying statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the trust account are determined using available market information.
Derivative Warrant liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed
at the end of each reporting period. In accordance with ASC Topic 825-10
“Financial Instruments”, offering costs attributable to the issuance of the derivative warrant liabilities have been allocated based on their relative fair value of total proceeds and are recognized in the statement of operations as incurred.
The Public Warrants and the Private Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The initial fair value of the Public Warrants have been measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and the Private Warrants were estimated using Black-Scholes. The fair value of the Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021 is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. As the transfer of Private Warrants to anyone who is not a permitted transferee would result in the Private Warrants having substantially the same terms as the Public Warrants, we determined that the fair value of each Private Warrant is equivalent to that of each Public Warrant. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current
liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for its Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity
. Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity.
Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of the Initial Public Offering, 17,250,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10-S99,
the Company has elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Effective with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share
. We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of common stock outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the Initial Public Offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option) and the Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 15,800,000 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events and their inclusion would be antidilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted net income (loss) per share is the same as basic net income (loss) per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from July 31, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Adopted Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board, or FASB, issued Accounting Standards Update, or ASU, No. 2020-06,
Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic
470-20)
and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic
815-40):
Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity
, which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under GAAP. This ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We early adopted the ASU on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, ASUs, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging
growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging
growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.