ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations are based upon its consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the related disclosure of contingent liabilities. On an on-going basis, management evaluates past estimates and judgments, including those related to bad debts, inventories, accrued liabilities, derivative liabilities, and contingencies. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The Company believes the following critical accounting policies affect its more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue based on the five-step model for revenue recognition as prescribed by ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, as follows: (1) identify the contract with the customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the prices to the performance obligations; and (5) recognize revenue. The Company has some agreements that contain general commercial terms and product prices but do not contain an obligation to provide goods to the customer. Our performance obligation, which is established when the customer submits a purchase order and the Company accepts the order, is to deliver the product based on the purchase order received. The Company typically recognizes revenue at the time of shipment, at which time the title passes to the customer, and there are no further performance obligations.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company measures and recognizes expense for all share-based payments at fair value. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option valuation model to estimate fair value for all stock options on the date of grant. For stock options that vest over time, the Company recognizes compensation cost on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for the entire award. The Company recognizes forfeitures as they occur.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs, including salaries, benefits, and share-based compensation, research materials, facility overhead, lab supplies, depreciation, administrative expenses and contractor fees, are charged to operations as incurred.
Legal Contingencies
The Company may, in the ordinary course of business, be involved in legal proceedings involving securities, contractual and employment relationships, product liability claims, patent rights, environmental matters, and a variety of other matters, the outcomes of which are not within the Company’s complete control and may not be known for extended periods of time. Legal costs associated with defending these matters are expensed as incurred.
The Company records a liability in its consolidated financial statements for damages and/or costs related to claims, settlements, and judgments where the Company has assessed that the loss is probable and an amount can be reasonably estimated.
Results of Operations
Financial presentation
The following sets forth a discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal years ended 2022, 2021, and 2020. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in such forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Item 1A - Risk Factors,” beginning on page 25 of this Report. (In thousands)
(a) Expressed as a percentage of sales, net
Sales
Fiscal 2022 sales, net increased 7% compared to fiscal 2021.The main driver of this growth was a 23% increase in other sales primarily due to increased treatments for brain cancer, including GammaTile™. In addition, part of the sales growth was due to moderate price increases that were implemented in November 2021. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in prostate cancer treatments.
Fiscal 2021 sales, net increased 4% compared to fiscal 2020. The main driver of this growth was a 68% increase in other sales primarily due to increased treatments for brain cancer, including GammaTile™. In addition, part of the sales growth was due to moderate price increases that were implemented in January 2020. These increases were partially offset by a reduction in prostate cancer treatments that we believe was due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic from stay-at-home orders in various states as well as hospitals' focus on treating COVID-19 patients.
(a) Expressed as a percentage of sales, net
Prostate Brachytherapy.
Prostate sales were up approximately 3% in fiscal 2022. We believe this was partially due to easing of stay-at-home orders in various states and slightly less impact from COVID-19 and a price increase that was implemented in November 2021. This led to a slight increase in sales for prostate treatments during fiscal year 2022 when compared to fiscal year 2021.
Management believes continued growth in prostate brachytherapy revenues will be the result of physicians, payors, and patients increasingly considering overall treatment advantages including costs compared with non-brachytherapy treatments, better treatment outcomes and improvement in the quality of life for patients. The American Cancer Society estimates that nearly 268,490 new prostate cancer cases will be diagnosed in calendar year 2022, which represents an increase of approximately 7% over the calendar year 2021 estimate (American Cancer Society, 2022). This increase is due to patients being unable to access treatment or putting treatment off due to the COVID pandemic, but there is no assurance that this will occur and if it occurs that it will have a positive impact on the Company's performance. We believe the trend to use brachytherapy in lieu of other options is starting to improve our performance but there is no assurance as to how long this trend will continue.
Management believes increased pressure to deliver effective healthcare in both terms of outcome and cost drove treatment options in fiscal 2022 with prostate brachytherapy receiving more consideration than in previous years.
Other Sales.
Other sales include but is not limited to brain, lung, head/neck, gynecological, pelvic treatments, and services. Other sales grew by approximately 23% in fiscal 2022. The main driver of this growth was increased treatments for brain cancer including GammaTile™. Initial applications for these other brachytherapy treatments are primarily used in recurrent cancer treatments or salvage cases that are generally difficult to treat aggressive cancers where other treatment options are either ineffective or unavailable.
Other brachytherapy treatments are subject to the influence of a small pool of innovative physicians who are the early adopters of the technology who also tend to be faculty at teaching hospitals training the next generation of physicians. This causes the revenue created by these types of treatment applications to be more volatile and varies significantly from year to year. Additionally, with other brachytherapy surgical procedures there remains inconsistency and uncertainty regarding reimbursement for the procedures. This unreliable reimbursement for these new procedures will remain until specific coding and coverage policies are established, which could take years. Individual centers weigh the value of the procedure with their other treatment priorities on a patient by patient basis. Isoray believes that additional clinical data will begin to build a compelling argument to support reimbursement and increased adoption of the procedures; however, any growth will be inconsistent in the near term.
GammaTile™
For several years the Company has focused on many different applications of its Cesium-131 brachytherapy seeds in the cranial cavity to target many forms of brain cancer. Most recently, the Company has focused on using braided strand configurations and on a collaboration with GammaTile, LLC, now known as GT Medical Technologies, Inc. (GT Med Tech), which has a technology which use biodegradable “tiles” to deliver the Cesium-131 brachytherapy seeds into contact with cancerous tumors in the brain.
GammaTile™ Therapy was in a limited market release beginning in January 2019 and in a full market release beginning in January 2020. Total revenues from sales to GT Med Tech in fiscal 2022 were slightly more than fourteen percent of total revenues. While GT Med Tech continues to assure Isoray that its sales and marketing efforts will show steady improvements in sales there is no assurance this will occur.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales consisted primarily of the costs of manufacturing and distributing the Company’s products. The fiscal 2022 increase was primarily the result of increased labor, materials costs and depreciation. Labor expenses increased by $534,000 due to additional headcount as well as annual merit increases. Materials isotope costs increased by $525,000. Higher freight costs for isotope resulted from the use of cargo flights rather than passenger flights to transport isotope from Russia to our facility due to the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on passenger flights and the ongoing war in Ukraine resulting in our need to re-route our flights through more expensive alternatives. In addition, due to lower than anticipated sales volumes, we had excess isotope on hand which went unused. Depreciation increased $104,000 due to equipment placed into service during the second half of fiscal 2021.
The fiscal 2021 increase was primarily the result of increased labor and materials costs. Labor expenses increased by $156,000 due to additional headcount as well as annual merit increases. Materials isotope costs increased by $126,000. Higher freight costs for isotope resulted from the use of cargo flights rather than passenger flights to transport isotope from Russia to our facility due to the COVID-19 pandemic's impact on passenger flights. In addition, due to lower than anticipated sales volumes, we had excess isotope on hand which went unused. Non-isotope materials costs increased $63,000 due to increased ordering of some items in an effort to mitigate any potential supply chain issues due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as price increases from some of our suppliers.
During both fiscal 2021 and 2022, the Company purchased isotope in excess of known customer orders to provide enough isotope to fill anticipated orders which did not materialize. The excess isotope is utilized in the production of upcoming orders where possible considering the decay rates of Cesuim-131. Any loss of isotope to decay is also included as a cost of production during the current period.
Research and development expenses
Research and development consisted primarily of the costs related to employee and third-party research and development activities. The fiscal 2022 increase was due mainly to increases in protocol, payroll, and consulting expenses. The Company conducted new research which contributed to a $15,000 increase in protocol expenses. Payroll expenses increased by $708,000 due to the expansion of our research and development team through reallocating existing resources and adding additional headcount as well as annual merit increases. Consulting expenses relating to market research of potential new products to be acquired by the Company increased by $272,000.
The fiscal 2021 increase was due mainly to increases in protocol, payroll, and consulting expenses. The Company conducted new research which contributed to a $122,000 increase in protocol expenses. Payroll expenses increased by $184,000 due to the expansion of our research and development team through reallocating existing resources and adding additional headcount as well as annual merit increases. Consulting expenses relating to market research increased by $124,000.
Sales and marketing expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of the costs related to the internal and external activities of the Company’s sales, marketing and customer service division. The fiscal 2022 increase was due to increased payroll of $274,000 resulting from higher sales growth when compared to fiscal 2021as well as increased travel of $143,000 and conventions and tradeshow expense of $77,000 as a result increased travel and in-person tradeshows as COVID-19 restrictions lessened. These increases were partially offset by a reduction of $101,000 in consulting expenses mainly due to reclassification of reimbursement consulting to general and administrative expenses.
The fiscal 2021 decrease was due to reduced payroll of $334,000 resulting from lower sales growth when compared to fiscal 2020 and the reversal of share based compensation expense upon separation of our former Executive Vice President of Sales and Marketing, as well as reduced travel of $132,000 and conventions and tradeshow expense of $28,000 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the costs related to the executive, quality assurance and regulatory affairs (QA/RA), finance, human resources and information technology functions of the Company. The increase in fiscal 2022 is due to a payroll increase of $1.2 million resulting from increased headcount, annual merit increases, and increase in share-based compensation as the fiscal 2021 awards were granted in July 2021, increased insurance premiums primarily relating to D&O insurance of $55,000, increased consulting expenses primarily from information technology consulting and reimbursement consulting that was reclassified from sales and marketing of $155,000, employment hiring expense increased by $207,000, increased public company related expenses of $94,000, travel increased $60,000, professional services increased $52,000, and software costs increased by $17,000.
The increase in fiscal 2021 was primarily the result of higher payroll of $145,000 due to incentive compensation and promotions, increased insurance premiums of $74,000 primarily relating to D&O insurance (which increased industry-wide), other expense of $45,000 primarily related to employee relations and hiring expense. These were partially offset by decreased public company related expenses of $109,000, reduced legal fees of $56,000, and fewer travel expenses of $56,000 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the majority of annual employee and director stock grants have historically been granted in the fiscal fourth quarter, however the 2021 year’s awards were granted in July 2021, subsequent to the close of the fiscal fourth quarter 2021, thus reducing share-based stock compensation expense in the full-year fiscal year-end 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Impact of COVID-19
From the onset of the COVID-19 global health pandemic we have been proactive in implementing plans to ensure the health and well-being of our employees, while remaining focused on providing uninterrupted product flow to the physicians and patients who count on us. We seamlessly transitioned many employees to work from home and made other adjustments to ensure the continuity of our business through this time. At the beginning of the pandemic, we moved quickly to ensure that our inventory of non-isotope supplies were appropriate in case our supply chain was disrupted. In addition, we set in motion our strategy to maintain a continuous and uninterrupted supply of isotope from our suppliers in Russia including the review of alternative freight services due to the cancellation of many international flights.
As COVID-19 spread, many states implemented new guidelines in an attempt to mitigate the spread of the virus and to conserve certain medical supplies. Those guidelines led to the cancellation or postponement of elective and non-emergency surgical procedures, including prostate brachytherapy procedures. During fiscal year 2022, our sales revenues increased 7% compared to the fiscal year 2021, but we were still below the average monthly prostate revenues attained in our third quarter of fiscal year 2020 prior to the onset of COVID-19’s impact on our operations. We believe this is due to stay-at-home orders and hospitals’ focus on COVID-19, resulting in a delay or cancellation of patients scheduled to be seen by physicians. This resulted in fewer or delayed urology referrals for prostate brachytherapy treatment.
As more states gradually lift restrictions on non-essential surgeries and other activities, we have received customer feedback of anticipated increases in implant volumes as patients begin returning from quarantines for office visits and consultations but there is no assurance this will occur or be sustained or what impact variants such as the Delta, Omicron 4, and Omicron 5 might cause to our operations. In the meantime, we continue to tightly manage our expenses and make fluid adjustments to isotope orders to meet potential increased treatment demands.
Impact of Conflict in Ukraine
In February 2022, Russian military forces launched a military action in Ukraine, and sustained conflict and disruption in the region is likely to continue. The length, impact, and outcome of this ongoing military conflict is highly unpredictable and could lead to significant market and other disruptions, including significant instability in financial markets, supply chain interruptions, political and social instability, trade disputes or trade barriers, changes in consumer or purchaser preferences, as well as an increase in cyberattacks and espionage. Russia’s recognition of two separatist republics in the Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine and military action against Ukraine led to substantial expansion of sanction programs imposed by the United States and other countries against Russia, Belarus, the Crimea Region of Ukraine, the so-called Donetsk People’s Republic, and the so-called Luhansk People’s Republic.
In retaliation against the sanctions and as part of measures to stabilize and support the volatile Russian financial and currency markets, the Russian authorities imposed significant currency control measures aimed at restricting the outflow of foreign currency and capital from Russia, imposed various restrictions on transacting with non-Russian parties, banned exports of various products, and imposed other economic and financial restrictions. The situation is rapidly evolving, and additional sanctions by Russia on the one hand, and by the other countries on the other hand, could adversely affect the global economy, financial markets, energy supply and prices, certain critical materials and metals, supply chains, and global logistics and could adversely affect our business, financial condition, and results of operations.
While we had trouble with sending wires to Russia from our local bank in Richland, Washington due solely to its own internal policies which we have since resolved and were forced to redirect flights to obtain supply of our Cesium-131, there has been no further impact on our operations and our relationship with our Russian rector suppliers remains excellent; however there is no assurance we will not experience disruptions from the banking system or our suppliers themselves in the future and this could result in a material adverse effect on our financial results. Any such disruption may also magnify the impact of other risks described in this Report.
Because our supply of Cesium-131 is obtained from nuclear reactors located in Russia, the Company is susceptible to any supply chain disruptions resulting from military actions, the sanctions, or otherwise, and any such disruption could materially affect our ability to obtain the Cesium-131 needed for our products. Management and our Board of Directors are actively monitoring the situation in Ukraine and Russia and assessing its impact on our business, including our medical isotope suppliers. To date, we have not experienced any material interruptions in our medical isotope supplies needed to support our operations due to the conflict. However, we have no way to predict the progress or outcome of the military conflict in Ukraine or its impacts in Ukraine, Russia, Belarus, Europe, or the U.S. The extent and duration of the military action, sanctions, and resulting market disruptions could be significant and could potentially have substantial impact on the global economy and our business for an unknown period of time.
Liquidity and capital resources
The Company assesses its liquidity in terms of its ability to generate cash to fund its operating, investing and financing activities. The Company has historically financed its operations through selling equity to investors. During fiscal 2022, the Company raised approximately $56,000 pursuant to the exercise of options to purchase common stock. Existing cash reserves from prior capital raises were used to fund the Company's operations and capital expenditures during fiscal 2022 and 2021 respectively.
Our cash flows for fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020 respectively, are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to an approximate net loss of $7.27 million net of approximately $1.41 million in adjustments for non-cash activity such as depreciation and amortization expense, the accretion of asset retirement obligation, and share-based compensation. Changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed approximately $1.85 million to the cash used by operating activities.
Net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to an approximate net loss of $3.39 million net of approximately $617,000 in adjustments for non-cash activity such as depreciation and amortization expense, the accretion of asset retirement obligation, and share-based compensation. Changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed approximately $67,000 to the cash used by operating activities.
Net cash used by operating activities in fiscal 2020 was primarily due to an approximate net loss of $3.45 million net of approximately $640,000 in adjustments for non-cash activity such as depreciation and amortization expense, the accretion of asset retirement obligation, and share-based compensation. Changes in operating assets and liabilities contributed approximately $835,000 to the cash used by operating activities.
Cash flows from investing activities
Investing activities for all years are presented by primary transaction category. Investing activities consisted of transactions related to the purchase of fixed assets as well as the purchase and subsequent maturity of certificates of deposit or US Treasury Bills. Management will continue to invest in technology and machinery that improves and streamlines production processes and to invest and reinvest maturing certificates of deposit and US Treasury Bills in low-risk investment opportunities that safeguard assets and provide greater assurance those resources will be liquid and available for business needs as they arise.
Cash flows from financing activities
Financing activities for all years are presented by primary transaction category. Financing activities in fiscal 2022, 2021, and 2020 were primarily due to sales of common stock through an underwritten offering, net, at the market offerings, net, and warrant and option exercises each net of preferred dividends paid. Financing activities were significantly decreased in fiscal 2022 compared to 2021 due to the underwritten offerings, net, in fiscal 2021.
Projected FY 2023 Liquidity and Capital Resources
Operating activities
Management forecasts that fiscal 2023 cash requirements will be similar to previous years and that current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet projected operating cash needs for the next twelve months. Monthly operating expenses are budgeted to increase for sales and marketing, research and development and general and administrative expenses in fiscal 2023 as management works to implement its strategy. Assuming no extraordinary expenses occur (whether operating or capital), if management is successful at implementing its strategy to focus on renewed emphasis to drive the consumer to the prostate market and meets or exceeds its growth targets of twenty-five percent increase in revenue in fiscal 2023 and this annual growth continues, the Company anticipates reaching cashflow break-even in three to four years. These assumptions do assume that GammaTile™ will contribute to total revenue but do not incorporate any significant growth in the other non-prostate applications as they generate nominal revenues today but if they show significant improvement, cashflow break-even could occur sooner. There is no assurance that the targeted sales growth will materialize but management is encouraged by the depth and experience of its sales team and its track record of growth during the last three fiscal years.
Capital expenditures
Management has completed the design of a future production and administration facility. If suitable construction financing is obtained and the facility constructed, it is believed that the new facility will have non-cash depreciation cost equal to or greater than the monthly rental cost of the current facility.
Management is reviewing all aspects of production operations (including process automation), research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative functions to evaluate the most efficient deployment of capital to ensure that the appropriate materials, systems, and personnel are available to support and drive sales.
Beginning in fiscal 2017 and continuing through fiscal 2021, the Company has invested approximately $1,064,000 in the automation of five production processes. The equipment developed for all five processes have been placed in service as of the end of fiscal 2021. This investment was implemented to allow the Company to significantly increase the output of Cesium-131 brachytherapy seeds, while allowing the Company to decrease the labor costs related to seed production and also improving the overall safety of our operations.
Financing activities
On January 23, 2020, the Company filed a Form S-3 registration statement which became effective on February 4, 2020, with the potential to register up to $80 million of equity securities. On March 31, 2020, the Company entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement (the “Agreement”) with Oppenheimer & Co., Inc. (“Oppenheimer”). The common stock sold pursuant to the Agreement was distributed at the market prices prevailing at the time of sale. The Agreement provided that Oppenheimer would be entitled to compensation for its services at a commission rate of 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of common stock sold plus reimbursement of certain expenses. As of June 30, 2020, the Company had sold an aggregate of 1,247,232 shares under the Agreement at an average price of approximately $0.738 per common share for gross proceeds of approximately $920,000 and net proceeds of approximately $874,000. No shares were sold under this Agreement during fiscal year 2021. On October 19, 2020, the Company terminated the Agreement, effective on the same date.
On October 22, 2020, the Company sold 18,269,230 shares of its common stock at a price of $0.52 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $9,500,000, pursuant to the registration statement on Form S-3 that became effective on February 4, 2020. The net proceeds from the offering were approximately $8,471,000. Additionally, the Company issued to the purchasers warrants to purchase up to 9,134,615 shares of common stock. The warrants have an exercise price of $0.57 per share of common stock, are exercisable immediately, and expire five years from the date of issuance. If exercised for cash, future exercises of these warrants will provide additional capital to the Company. As of June 30, 2022, 998,488 of these warrants remain outstanding.
On February 8, 2021, the Company sold 36,000,000 shares of its common stock at a price of $1.25 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $45,000,000, pursuant to the registration statement on Form S-3 that became effective on February 4, 2020. Additionally, the Company granted the underwriters an option to purchase an additional 5,400,000 shares of common stock at a purchase price of $1.25 per share for the purpose of covering overallotments, which was exercised on February 8, 2021 and generated gross proceeds of approximately $6,750,000. Total gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $51,750,000 and total net proceeds were approximately $47,904,000.
During fiscal 2021, the Company received approximately $7.8 million as a result of the exercise of 12,318,877 warrants to purchase common stock and $0.5 million as a result of the exercise of 970,315 options to purchase common stock.
During Fiscal 2022, the Company received approximately $0.06 million as a result of the exercise of 125,000 options to purchase common stock.
When it does require capital in the future, the Company expects to finance its cash needs through sales of equity, possible strategic collaborations, debt financing or through other sources that may be dilutive to existing stockholders, Management anticipates that if it raises additional financing that it will be at a discount to the market price and it will be dilutive to stockholders.
Other Commitments and Contingencies
The Company’s purchase commitments and obligations include all open purchase orders and contractual obligations entered into in the ordinary course of business, including commitments with contract manufacturers and suppliers, for which we have not received the goods or services and acquisition and licensing of intellectual property. Although open purchase orders are considered enforceable and legally binding, the terms generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule, and/or adjust our requirements based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services. Non-cancellable purchase commitments and obligations that will exist beyond fiscal 2022 and that are not separately presented as a liability on the balance sheet are listed below (in thousands):
Pending Merger
On September 27, 2022, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) by and among the Company, Isoray Acquisition Corp., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”), Viewpoint Molecular Targeting, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Viewpoint”), and Cameron Gray, as the representative of the Owners (as defined therein). Viewpoint is an alpha-particle radiopharmaceutical company in the alphaemitter market developing oncology therapeutics and complementary imaging agents. The Merger Agreement provides that, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, Merger Sub will merge with and into Viewpoint, with Viewpoint continuing as the surviving corporation as a wholly owned subsidiary of Isoray (such transaction, the “Merger”). Under the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger each issued and outstanding share of common stock of Viewpoint will be converted into the right to receive (i) 3.3212 shares of Isoray common stock rounded to the nearest whole share, (ii) any cash in lieu of fractional shares of Isoray common stock payable pursuant to the Merger Agreement, and (iii) any dividends or other distributions to which the holder thereof becomes entitled to upon the surrender of such shares of Viewpoint common stock. Other than as set forth in (ii) in the preceding sentence, there will be no cash consideration paid in connection with the Merger. Following completion of the Merger, the stockholders of Viewpoint immediately prior to the closing of the Merger will own 49% of the fully-diluted outstanding capital stock of the Company.
Upon the closing of the Merger, Isoray will increase the size of its Board of Directors from four members to not less than five members. Three of the directors will be designated by Isoray and two of the directors will be designated by Viewpoint. Lori Woods, our current CEO and a director, will be one of the directors appointed by Isoray and will serve as the chairperson. Thijs Spoor, Viewpoint’s current CEO, will be one of the directors appointed by Viewpoint. The remaining directors, if any, will be mutually agreed upon by Lori Woods and Thijs Spoor. Also upon the closing of the Merger, Lori Woods will resign from her position as CEO of Isoray and Thijs Spoor will be named CEO of Isoray. Jonathan Hunt will continue as Isoray’s Chief Financial Officer.
Consummation of the Merger is subject to the satisfaction or waiver of various closing conditions, including: (i) performance in all respects by each party of its covenants and agreements, (ii) Isoray and Viewpoint each obtaining approval by its stockholders of the Merger and related matters, (iii) any necessary consents or approvals by governmental and regulatory authorities and non-governmental third-parties being obtained, and (iv) there being no event, change, or occurrence which individually or together with any other event could reasonably be expected to have a material adverse effect on either Isoray or Viewpoint.
The Merger Agreement contains certain restrictions on the conduct of the Company’s and Viewpoint’s respective businesses between the date of signing the Merger Agreement and the earlier of the closing of the Merger or the termination of the Merger Agreement. During such period, Isoray and Viewpoint each must conduct its business in the ordinary course and consistent with past practices in all material respects and may not enter into any material transactions without the other party’s consent. For a more detailed summary of the Merger Agreement, see our Form 8-K filed with the SEC on September 28, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Impact of Inflation
Inflation had minimal impact on our net sales and revenues or on loss from continuing operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Accounting Standards Updates Adopted
In November 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-18, Collaborative Arrangements (Topic 808): Clarifying the Interaction Between Topic 808 and Topic 606, which, among other things, provides guidance on how to assess whether certain collaborative arrangement transactions should be accounted for under Topic 606. The amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019, with early adoption permitted. The standard was adopted on July 1, 2020 and had no effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Standards Updates to Become Effective in Future Periods
Other accounting standards that have been issued or proposed by FASB that do not require adoption until a future date are not expected to have a material impact on the consolidated financial statements upon adoption. The Company does not discuss recent pronouncements that are not anticipated to have an impact on or are unrelated to its financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or disclosures.