Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Introduction / Overview
iSun, Inc., the principal office of which is located in Williston, Vermont, is one of the largest commercial solar engineering, procurement and construction (“EPC”) companies in the country and is expanding across the Northeastern United States (“U.S.”). The Company is a second-generation business founded under the name Peck Electric Co. (“Peck Electric”) in 1972 as a traditional electrical contractor. The Company’s core values are to align people, purpose, and profitability, and since taking leadership in 1994, Jeffrey Peck, the Company’s Chief Executive Officer, has applied such core values to expand into the solar industry. Today, the Company is guided by the mission to facilitate the reduction of carbon emissions through the expansion of clean, renewable energy and we believe that leveraging such core values to deploy resources toward profitable business is the only sustainable strategy to achieve these objectives.
The world recognizes the need to transition to a reliable, renewable energy grid in the next 50 years. Vermont and Hawaii are leading the way in the U.S. with renewable energy goals of 75% by 2032 and 100% by 2045, respectively. California committed to 100% carbon-free energy by 2045. The majority of the other states in the U.S. also have renewable energy goals regardless of current Federal solar policy. We are a member of Renewable Energy Vermont, an organization that advocates for clean, practical and renewable solar energy. The Company intends to use near-term incentives to take advantage of long-term, sustainable energy transformation with a commitment to the environment and to its shareholders. Our triple bottom line, which is geared towards people, environment, and profit, has always been our guide since we began installing renewable energy and we intend that it remain our guide over the next 50 years as we construct our energy future.
After installing more than 400 megawatts of solar energy, we believe that we are well-positioned for what we believe to be the coming transformation to an all renewable energy economy. As a result of the completion of our business combination transaction with Jensyn Acquisition Corp. (“Jensyn”) on June 20, 2019, pursuant to which we acquired Peck Electric Co. (the “Reverse Merger and Recapitalization”), we have now opened our company to the public market as part of our strategic growth plan. We are expanding across the Northeastern U.S. to serve the fast-growing demand for clean renewable energy. We are open to partnering with others to accelerate our growth process, and we are expanding our portfolio of company-owned solar arrays to establish recurring revenue streams for many years to come. We have established a leading presence in the market after five decades of successfully serving our customers, and we are now ready for new opportunities and the next five decades of success.
We have a three-pronged growth strategy that includes (1) organic expansion across the Northeastern United States, (2) conducting accretive merger and acquisition transactions to expand geographically, and (3) investing into company-owned solar assets.
On January 19, 2021, we completed a business combination (the “Merger Agreement”) pursuant to which we acquired iSun Energy LLC (“iSun Energy”). The Business Combination was an acquisition treated as a merger and reorganization and iSun Energy became a wholly owned subsidiary of The Peck Company Holdings, Inc. Immediately prior to the Merger Agreement, we changed our name to iSun, Inc.
On April 6, 2021, iSun Utility, LLC (“iSun Utility”), a Delaware limited liability company and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, Adani Solar USA, Inc., a Delaware corporation (Adani”), and Oakwood Construction Services, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Oakwood”) entered into an Assignment Agreement (the “Assignment”), pursuant to which iSun Utility acquired all rights to the intellectual property of Oakwood and its affiliates (the “Project IP”). Oakwood is a utility-scale solar EPC company and a wholly-owned subsidiary of Adani. The Project IP includes all of the intellectual property, project references, templates, client lists, agreements, forms and processes of Adani’s U.S. solar business.
On September 8, 2021, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) by and among the Company, iSun Residential Merger Sub, Inc., a Vermont corporation (the “Merger Sub”) and wholly-owned subsidiary of iSun Residential, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“iSun Residential”) and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, SolarCommunities, Inc., a Vermont benefit corporation (“SunCommon”), and Jeffrey Irish, James Moore, and Duane Peterson as a “Shareholder Representative Group” of the holders of SunCommon’s capital stock (the “SunCommon Shareholders”), pursuant to which the Merger Sub merged with and into SunCommon (the “Merger”) with SunCommon as the surviving company in the Merger and SunCommon became a wholly-owned subsidiary of iSun Residential. The Merger was effective on October 1, 2021.
With the filing of our Form S-3 Registration Statement on December 4, 2020, we have the ability to access the capital markets up to $50,000,000 in aggregate to support our statement growth strategy. The access to capital accelerates our growth process and allows us to continue our expansion plans into new territories, aggressively pursue accretive merger and acquisition transactions and continue investing in our company-owned solar assets which now consist of the product offerings of iSun Energy LLC. As of March 31, 2022, there is currently approximately $21.2 million in gross proceeds potentially available for additional sales pursuant to the Registration Statement as we received aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $10.5 million from a sale of Common Stock in a Registered Direct Offering and gross proceeds of approximately $6.8 million through ATM offerings.
In February 2021, SolarCommunities, Inc, our indirect wholly-owned subsidiary, was fortunate to obtain a loan under the CARES Act Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) of $2,000,000. The loan allowed us to maintain our workforce during the shutdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. On December 6, 2021, SunCommon received notification from Citizens Bank N.A. that the Small Business Administration has approved the forgiveness of the PPP loan in its entirety and as such, the full $2,000,000 has been recognized in the income statement as a gain upon debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2021.
On April 24, 2020, the Company was fortunate to obtain a loan under the CARES Act Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) of $1,487,624. The loan allowed us to maintain our workforce during the shutdown caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. On December 1, 2020, the Company received notification from NBT Bank that the Small Business Administration has approved the forgiveness of the PPP loan in its entirety and as such, the full $1,496,468 has been recognized in the income statement as a gain upon debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Equity and Ownership Structure
On January 19, 2021, we completed a business combination (the “Merger Agreement”) pursuant to which we acquired iSun Energy LLC (“iSun Energy”). The Business Combination was an acquisition treated as a merger and reorganization and that iSun Energy became a wholly owned subsidiary of The Peck Company Holdings, Inc. Following the Merger Agreement, we changed our name to iSun, Inc. (formerly The Peck Company Holdings, Inc,).
On April 6, 2021, iSun Utility, LLC (“iSun Utility”), a Delaware limited liability company and wholly-owned subsidiary of iSun, Adani Solar USA, Inc., a Delaware corporation (Adani”), and Oakwood Construction Services, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Oakwood”) entered into an Assignment Agreement (the “Assignment”), pursuant to which iSun Utility acquired all rights to the intellectual property of Oakwood and its affiliates (the “Project IP”). Oakwood is a utility-scale solar EPC company and was a wholly-owned subsidiary of Adani. The Project IP includes all of the intellectual property, project references, templates, client lists, agreements, forms and processes of Adani’s U.S. solar business.
On September 8, 2021, iSun, Inc. entered into an Agreement and Plan of Merger (the “Merger Agreement”) by and among the Company, iSun Residential Merger Sub, Inc., a Vermont corporation (the “Merger Sub”) and wholly-owned subsidiary of iSun Residential, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“iSun Residential”) and wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, SolarCommunities, Inc., a Vermont benefit corporation (“SunCommon”), and Jeffrey Irish, James Moore, and Duane Peterson as a “Shareholder Representative Group” of the holders of SunCommon’s capital stock (the “SunCommon Shareholders”), pursuant to which the Merger Sub merged with and into SunCommon (the “Merger”) with SunCommon as the surviving company in the Merger and SunCommon became a wholly-owned subsidiary of iSun Residential. The Merger was effective on October 1, 2021.
We now conduct all of our business operations exclusively through our wholly-owned direct and indirect subsidiaries, iSun Residential, Inc., SolarCommunities, Inc. iSun Industrial, LLC, Peck Electric Co., Liberty Electric, Inc., iSun Utility, LLC, iSun Energy, LLC and iSun Corporate, LLC.
Critical Accounting Policies
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Significant estimates include estimates used to review the Company’s impairments and estimations of long-lived assets, impairment on investment, revenue recognition utilizing a cost to cost method, allowances for uncollectible accounts, and the valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. The Company bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable in the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606 (“Topic 606”). Under Topic 606, revenue is recognized when, or as, control of promised goods and services is transferred to customers, and the amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for the goods and services transferred. We primarily recognize revenue over time utilizing the cost-to-cost measure of progress on contracts for specific projects and for certain master service and other service agreements.
Contracts. We derive revenue primarily from construction projects performed under: (i) master and other service agreements, which are typically priced using either a time and materials or a fixed price per unit basis; and (ii) contracts for specific projects requiring the construction and installation of an entire infrastructure system or specified units within an infrastructure system, which are subject to multiple pricing options, including fixed price, unit price, time and materials, or cost plus a markup.
The total contract transaction price and cost estimation processes used for recognizing revenue over time under the cost-to-cost method is based on the professional knowledge and experience of our project managers, engineers and financial professionals. Management reviews estimates of total contract transaction price and total project costs on an ongoing basis. Changes in job performance, job conditions and management’s assessment of expected variable consideration are factors that influence estimates of the total contract transaction price, total costs to complete those contracts and our profit recognition. Changes in these factors could result in revisions to revenue in the period in which the revisions are determined, which could materially affect our consolidated results of operations for that period. Provisions for losses on uncompleted contracts are recorded in the period in which such losses are determined. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, project profit was affected by less than 5% as a result of changes in contract estimates included in projects that were in process as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Performance Obligations. A performance obligation is a contractual promise to transfer a distinct good or service to a customer and is the unit of account under Topic 606. The transaction price of a contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation and recognized as revenue when or as the performance obligation is satisfied. Our contracts often require significant services to integrate complex activities and equipment into a single deliverable and are therefore generally accounted for as a single performance obligation, even when delivering multiple distinct services. Contract amendments and change orders, which are generally not distinct from the existing contract, are typically accounted for as a modification of the existing contract and performance obligation. The vast majority of our performance obligations are completed within one year.
When more than one contract is entered into with a customer on or close to the same date, management evaluates whether those contracts should be combined and accounted for as a single contract as well as whether those contracts should be accounted for as one, or more than one, performance obligation. This evaluation requires significant judgment and is based on the facts and circumstances of the various contracts.
Union Labor
The Company uses union labor in order to construct and maintain the solar, electric and data work that comprise the core activities of its business. As such, contributions were made by the Company to the National Joint Apprenticeship and Training Committee, the National Electrical Benefit Funds, Union Pension Plans and a union Health and Welfare Fund. Each employee contributes monthly to the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (“IBEW”). The Company’s contract with the IBEW expires May 31, 2022.
The Company’s management believes that access to unionized labor provides a unique advantage for growth, because workforce resources can be scaled efficiently utilizing labor unions in other states to meet specific project needs in other states without substantially increasing fixed costs for the Company.
Business Insurance / Captive Insurance Group
In 2018, Peck Electric joined a captive insurance group. The Company’s management believes that belonging to a captive insurance group will stabilize business insurance expenses and will lock in lower rates that are not subject to change from year-to-year and instead are based on the Company’s favorable experience modification rate.
Revenue Drivers
The Company’s business includes the design and construction of solar arrays for its customers. Revenue is recognized for each construction project on a percentage of completion basis. From time to time, the Company constructs solar arrays for its own account or purchases a solar array that must still be constructed. In these instances, no revenue is recognized for the construction of the solar array. In instances where the Company owns the solar array, revenue is recognized for the sale of the electricity generated to third parties. As a result, depending on whether it is building for others or for its own account, the Company’s revenue is subject to significant variation.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
REVENUE AND COST OF EARNED REVENUE
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our revenue increased 115% to $45.3 million compared to $21.1 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of earned revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, was 108% higher at $38.9 million compared to $18.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our revenue increased as a result of multiple acquisitions throughout 2021 that added new revenue streams, of the 115% revenue, approximately 53% was organic and 62% was a result of acquisitions. In addition to our historical commercial and industrial customer base, we added the capabilities to serve residential, small commercial and utility customers as well as support the demand for electric vehicle infrastructure across all our customer demographics. Our fourth quarter resulted in record revenue of approximately $27.0 million with $12.6 million generated from residential customers and $14.4 million generated from commercial and industrial customers.
Gross profit was $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This compares to $2.3 million of gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gross margin was 14.16% in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 11.13% in the year ended December 31, 2020. Approximately 89% of revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 was from solar installations compared to 80% of revenues in the year ended December 31, 2020. The solar installation represents higher margin installation in comparison to our traditional electrical and data installations which lead to an increase in gross margin. While we did see an increase in overall gross margin in comparison to prior year, our margins for the first half of 2021 were negatively impacted by the industry wide increase in material and commodity pricing as well as inefficiencies related to the shortages in the labor markets.
For 2022, we anticipate an increase in revenue over 2021 due to several factors. The demand for solar and electric vehicle infrastructure continues to increase across all customer groups. Our residential division has customer orders of approximately $19.2 million expected to be completed within four to six months, our commercial division has a contracted backlog of approximately $9.3 million expected to be completed within six to eight months, our industrial division has a contracted backlog of approximately $73.8 million expected to be completed within twelve to eighteen months and our utility division has 550 MW of projects currently under development with an estimated commencement date in the third quarter of 2022. Historically, we have engaged with existing customers throughout the Northeast. The capabilities of our development and professional services team have allowed us to engage in project development in new geographic regions which will further our expansion opportunities.
SELLING AND MARKETING EXPENSES
We rely on referrals from customers and on its industry reputation, and therefore have not historically incurred significant selling and marketing expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized sales and marketing expenses of approximately $0.2 million that had been incurred by SunCommon. SunCommon is a wholly-owned subsidiary and our residential division brand and will incur marketing expenses as a means to generate sales demand.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
Total general and administrative (G&A) expenses were $13.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As a percentage of revenue, G&A expenses increased to 29.0% in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 15.9% in the year ended December 31, 2020. In total dollars, G&A increased as we developed our internal platform to support the growth of our new customer revenue channels. With the acquisitions throughout 2021, we increased G&A significantly in order to maintain operational consistency across the newly acquired entities, approximately $1.235 million were related to non-recurring transactional expenses incurred as part of the acquisitions. As we assess efficiencies, we would anticipate the realization of operation synergies which would allow an overall reduction in G&A in future periods.
WAREHOUSE AND OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES
Warehousing and other operating expenses increase to $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The main contributions to the increase were a move to a new facility in 2021 to support the revenue growth, additional warehousing facilities through the acquisitions and an increase in depreciation expense.
OTHER INCOME (EXPENSES)
Interest expense for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, was $0.5 million compared to $0.3 million for the same period of the prior year as a result of the B Riley Capital credit facility utilized to support the acquisition of SunCommon. We recognized a gain on the forgiveness of the PPP loan of $2.0 million and $1.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. We recognized a gain from the change in fair value of the warrant liability of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and a loss of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
INCOME (BENEFIT) TAX EXPENSE
The US GAAP effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 was 23.48% and December 31, 2020 was 33.20%. The proforma effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 was 21.0% and December 31, 2020 was 21.0%. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the change in the effective tax rate (“ETR”) is driven by the non-taxable income generated from the forgiveness of a loan under the CARES Act Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) of $2.0 million and $1.5 million, respectively.
NET LOSS
The net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.2 million compared to a net loss of $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Certain Non-GAAP Measures
We periodically review the following key non-GAAP measures to evaluate our business and trends, measure our performance, prepare financial projections, and make strategic decisions.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
Included in this presentation are discussions and reconciliations of earnings before interest, income tax and depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) and EBITDA adjusted for certain non-cash, non-recurring or non-core expenses (“Adjusted EBITDA”) to net loss in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA excludes certain non-cash and other expenses, certain legal services costs, professional and consulting fees and expenses, and one-time Reverse Merger and Recapitalization expenses and certain adjustments. We believe that these non-GAAP measures illustrate the underlying financial and business trends relating to our results of operations and comparability between current and prior periods. We also use these non-GAAP measures to establish and monitor operational goals.
These non-GAAP measures are not in accordance with, or an alternative to, GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute or superior to, the other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Using only the non-GAAP financial measures, particularly Adjusted EBITDA, to analyze our performance would have material limitations because such calculations are based on a subjective determination regarding the nature and classification of events and circumstances that investors may find significant. We compensate for these limitations by presenting both the GAAP and non-GAAP measures of our operating results. Although other companies may report measures entitled “Adjusted EBITDA” or similar in nature, numerous methods may exist for calculating a company’s Adjusted EBITDA or similar measures. As a result, the methods that we use to calculate Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the methods used by other companies to calculate their non-GAAP measures.
The reconciliations of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, are shown in the table below:
(1)
Other costs consist of one-time expenses related to the acquisitions of iSun Energy, LLC, Oakwood Construction Services, LLC and SolarCommunities, Inc. In addition, the Company was required to restate its financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 due to a change in the accounting for the treatment of warrants. The Company also held two Special Meetings of Stockholders in order to amend its Second Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation.
(2)
As the forgiveness of the PPP loan is considered a one-time expense, the Company considered including the forgiveness of $2.0 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, as a reconciling item. The Company excluded the forgiveness on the basis that had it not been awarded a PPP loan, the Company would have terminated, furlough or reduced its workforce during the COVID-19 pandemic shutdown.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
We had $2.2 million in unrestricted cash at December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.7 million at December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, our working capital deficit was $10.3 million, net of non-cash liabilities, compared to a working capital surplus of $0.2 million at December 31, 2020. Included in the working capital deficit was a short-term loan for approximately $6.0 million which was paid in full subsequent to year end and approximately $2.4 million in non-cash liabilities. To date, the Company has relied predominantly on operating cash flow to fund its operations, borrowings from its credit facilities, sales of Common Stock and exercise of public warrants. The availability of financing and the cash flow from operations mitigates the potential for substantial doubt.
We believe that the aggregate of our existing cash and cash equivalents, including our working capital line of credit and sales of Common Stock pursuant to our shelf registration, will be sufficient to meet our operating cash requirements for at least 12 months from the date these financial statements are made available. The demand for solar and electric vehicle infrastructure continues to increase across all customer groups. Our residential division has customer orders of approximately $19.2 million expected to be completed within four to six months, our commercial division has a contracted backlog of approximately $9.3 million expected to be completed within six to eight months, our industrial division has a contracted backlog of approximately $73.8 million expected to be completed within twelve to eighteen months and our utility division has 550 MW of projects currently under development with an estimated commencement date in the third quarter of 2022. The customer demand across our segments will provide short-term operational cash flow.
Sales of Common Stock pursuant to the Form S-3 Registration Statement filed on December 4, 2020, have provided funds to support our growth strategy. The access to capital accelerates our growth process and allows us to continue our expansion plans into new territories, aggressively pursue accretive merger and acquisition transactions and continue investing in our company-owned solar assets which now consist of the product offerings of iSun Energy LLC. As of March 31, 2022, there is currently approximately $21.2 million potentially available for sales pursuant to the Registration Statement as we received aggregate proceeds of approximately $10.5 million through a Registered Direct Offering and approximately $6.8 million through the sale of Common Stock in ATM offerings.
Cash flow used by operating activities was $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.4 million of cash provided by operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash provided by operating activities was primarily the result of the increase in accounts receivable of $8.1 million and an increase in costs and estimated earning in excess of billings of $2.7 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $36.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.1 million used in the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was related to the acquisition of SunCommon of $25.2 million and minority investments of $8.0 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $43.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.2 million of cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash flow provided by financing activities was primarily driven by the proceeds from the exercise of public warrants of $20.9 million, a registered direct offering of Common Stock of $9.6 million and proceeds from the sale of Common Stock in ATM offerings of $6.9 million.