Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Industrial Tech Acquisitions II, Inc. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from January 4, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the initial public offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income and unrealized gains from the cash and marketable securities held in the trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 4, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net loss of $3,758, which consisted of formation and operating costs of $3,768, partially offset by bank interest income of $10.
Liquidity, Going Concern and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $19,542 in our operating bank account, and working capital deficit of $191,888 (excluding deferred offering costs). Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares and proceeds from a promissory note to our sponsor.
Subsequent to the annual period covered by this annual report on Form 10-K, we consummated the initial public offering and private placement. Of the net proceeds from the initial public offering and private placement, $175,950,000 of cash was placed in the trust account and $1,319,675 of cash was held outside of the trust account and is available for working capital purposes.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we have alleviated the substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and has sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds to pay existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
We have agreed to pay an affiliate of the sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support commencing on the date of the initial public offering. Upon completion of the initial business combination or liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources are based on our financial information. We describe our significant accounting policies in Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Financial Statements included in this report. Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies require that management apply significant judgments in defining the appropriate assumptions integral to financial estimates. On an ongoing basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Judgments are based on historical experience, terms of existing contracts, industry trends and information available from outside sources, as appropriate. However, by their nature, judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty, and, therefore, actual results could differ from our estimates.
Deferred Offering Costs
Deferred offering costs consist of legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that were directly related to the initial public offering. Should the initial public offering prove to be unsuccessful, these deferred costs, as well as additional expenses to be incurred, will be charged to operations.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, will be re-assessed at the end of each reporting period. Derivative warrant liabilities will be classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Warrant Liability
We account for private placement warrants for shares of our common stock that are not indexed to our own shares as liabilities at fair value on the balance sheet. The private placement warrants are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date and any change in fair value is recognized as a component of other income (expense), net on the statement of operations. We will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value until the earlier of the exercise or expiration of the warrants. At that time, the portion of the warrant liability related to the warrants will be reclassified to additional paid-in capital.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
Our Class A common stock that was sold as part of the units in the initial public offering contains a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with the our liquidation, or if there is a stockholder vote or tender offer in connection with the initial business combination. In accordance with ASC 480-10-S99, we classify such public shares subject to redemption outside of permanent equity as the redemption provisions are not solely within the control of us. The public shares sold as part of the units in the initial public offering was issued with other freestanding instruments (i.e., public warrants) and as such, the initial carrying value of public shares classified as temporary equity was the allocated proceeds determined in accordance with ASC 470-20. The public shares are subject to ASC 480-10-S99 and are currently not redeemable as the redemption is contingent upon the occurrence of events mentioned above. According to ASC 480-10-S99-15, no subsequent adjustment is needed if it is not probable that the instrument will become redeemable.
Net Loss Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. Weighted average shares were reduced for the effect of an aggregate of 562,500 shares of common stock that were subject to forfeiture if the over-allotment option was not exercised by the underwriters. At December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of us. As a result, diluted loss per common share is the same as basic loss per common share for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective on January 1, 2024 for small reporting company and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.