Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Management’s Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) is intended to facilitate an understanding of Intevac’s business and results of operations. This MD&A should be read in conjunction with Intevac’s Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Form 10- K.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements and should also be read in conjunction with the cautionary statement set forth at the beginning of this Form 10-K.
MD&A includes the following sections:
•
Overview:
a summary of Intevac’s business, measurements and opportunities.
•
Results of Operations:
a discussion of operating results.
•
Liquidity and Capital Resources:
an analysis of cash flows, sources and uses of cash, and financial position.
•
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates:
a discussion of estimates that that involve a significant level of estimation uncertainty and have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
Discontinued Operations
On December 30, 2021, the Company completed the sale of its Photonics business to EOTECH. As a result of the disposition, the results of operations from the Photonics reporting segment are reported as “Net income from discontinued operations, net of taxes” in the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of this Annual Report. The Company has recast prior period amounts presented within this Annual Report to provide visibility and comparability.
Overview
Intevac is a provider of vacuum deposition equipment for a wide variety of thin-film applications, and a leading provider of digital night-vision technologies and products to the defense industry. The Company leverages its core capabilities in high-volume manufacturing of small substrates to provide process manufacturing equipment solutions to the hard disk drive (“HDD”), display cover panel (“DCP”), photovoltaic (“PV”) solar cell, and advanced semiconductor packaging (“ASP”) industries. Intevac’s customers include manufacturers of hard disk media, DCPs and solar cells, and semiconductor outsourced assembly and test companies. Intevac operates in a single segment: Thin-film Equipment (“TFE”). Product development and manufacturing activities occur in North America and Asia. Intevac also has field offices in Asia to support its customers. Intevac’s products are highly technical and are sold primarily through Intevac’s direct sales force.
Intevac’s results of operations are driven by a number of factors including success in its equipment growth initiatives in the DCP, solar and ASP markets and by worldwide demand for HDDs. Demand for HDDs depends on the growth in digital data creation and storage, the rate of areal density improvements, and the end-user
demand for PCs, enterprise data storage, nearline “cloud” applications, video players and video game consoles that include such drives. Intevac continues to execute its strategy of equipment diversification into new markets by introducing new products, such as for a thin-film physical vapor deposition (“PVD”) application for protective coating for DCP manufacturing, a thin-film PVD application for PV solar cell manufacturing, and a PVD fan-out
application for ASP. Intevac believes that expansion into these markets will result in incremental equipment revenues for Intevac and decrease Intevac’s dependence on the HDD industry. Intevac’s equipment business is subject to cyclical industry conditions, as demand for manufacturing equipment and services can change depending on supply and demand for HDDs, cell phones, PV cells, and semiconductor chips as well as other factors such as global economic conditions and technological advances in fabrication processes.
Fiscal 2020 financial results reflected a challenging environment, partially as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic. In fiscal 2020, we recognized revenue on two 200 Lean HDD systems. Fiscal 2020 net income reflected lower net revenues and higher operating expenses, offset in part by higher contributions from gross margins. Higher selling general and administrative expenses resulted primarily from higher variable compensation expenses and incremental e-commerce
costs to launch our Diamond Dog e-commerce
website, which we subsequently discontinued in fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2020, we received $567,000 in government assistance related to COVID-19
from the government of Singapore, of which $328,000 was reported as a reduction of cost of net revenues, $90,000 was reported as a reduction of research and development (“R&D”) expenses and $149,000 was reported as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses. During fiscal 2020, we did not recognize an income tax benefit on its U.S. net operating loss.
Fiscal 2021 financial results reflected a continued challenging environment. In fiscal 2021, we recognized revenue on our first MATRIX PVD system for ASP and sold the Photonics division and recognized a gain of $54.3 million and received cash of $70 million upon the closing of the transaction. Fiscal 2021 financial results for our continuing operations reflect a challenging environment as HDD equipment sales were lower than fiscal 2020 levels and we did not recognize revenue on any 200 Lean HDD systems compared to two 200 Lean HDD systems in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021, we recorded an $8.4 million inventory valuation write-down primarily related to our solar and Vertex inventory due to business conditions and lack of demand and $1.0 million accrual for settlement of the Private Attorneys General Act (“PAGA”) lawsuit. During fiscal 2021, we received $83,000 in government assistance related to COVID-19
from the government of Singapore, of which $56,000 was reported as a reduction of cost of net revenues, $10,000 was reported as a reduction of R&D expenses and $17,000 was reported as a reduction of selling, general and administrative expenses. During fiscal 2021, we did not recognize an income tax benefit on its U.S. net operating loss.
Intevac expects that fiscal 2022 HDD equipment sales will be similar to fiscal 2021 levels as a customer is expected to take delivery of one 200 Lean HDD system in backlog during the fiscal year. During the first half of fiscal 2022, the Company plans to streamline its organization and is embarking on a corporate restructuring process that reflects our new single segment structure, which no longer will include the complexity of managing two substantially different business units within one company. We believe that these changes will position the Company for profitability and positive cash flow generation.
The Impact of COVID-19
The impact of COVID-19,
including changes in consumer behavior, pandemic fears, and market downturns, as well as restrictions on business and individual activities, has created significant volatility in the global economy and led to reduced economic activity. Although COVID-19
vaccines are now broadly distributed and administered, there remains significant uncertainty concerning the magnitude of the impact and the duration of the COVID-19
pandemic. As new strains of COVID-19
develop, the continued impacts to our business could be material to our fiscal 2022 results. Further, the impacts of inflation on our business and the broader economy, which may be exacerbated by the economic recovery from the COVID-19
pandemic, may also impact our financial condition and results of operations. Our customers may delay or cancel orders due to reduced demand, supply chain disruptions, and/or travel restrictions and border closures. We have experienced pandemic-related delays in our evaluation and development work. In response to COVID-19,
we implemented initiatives to safeguard our employees, including work-from-home protocols. In June 2021, we began reopening our offices on a regional basis in accordance with local authority guidelines while ensuring that our return to work is thoughtful, prudent, and handled with a safety-first approach. All employees in the United States who could work from home did so through the middle of June 2021, when we fully reopened our offices as restrictions were lifted by the applicable authorities. All employees in Singapore that can do so continue to work remotely and will do so until restrictions are lifted by the applicable authorities in Singapore. Our employees’ health and safety is our top priority, and we will continue to monitor local restrictions across the world, the administration and efficacy of vaccines and the number of new cases.
In Singapore, Intevac received government assistance under the Job Support Scheme (“JSS”). The purpose of the JSS was to provide wage support to employers to help them retain their local employees. Under the JSS, Intevac received $83,000 and $567,000 in JSS grants in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. Under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”), we deferred the payment of the employer portion of payroll taxes in fiscal 2020 and received tax benefits from the employee retention tax credit. We repaid the first installment of the deferred payroll taxes at the end of fiscal 2021.
During both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, the Company’s expenses included approximately $159,000, due to costs related to actions taken in response to COVID-19.
Results of Operations
Net revenues
Net revenues consist primarily of sales of equipment used to manufacture thin-film disks, PV cells, DCPs, and advanced semiconductor packaging and related equipment.
The decrease in revenues in fiscal 2021 versus fiscal 2020 was due primarily to lower systems sales, as we only recognized revenue on one MATRIX PVD system for ASP and no 200 Lean HDD systems, offset in part by increases in revenue recognized on technology upgrades, service and spare parts. In fiscal 2020, we recognized revenue on two 200 Lean HDD systems, technology upgrades, service and spare parts.
Backlog
Backlog at January 1, 2022 included one 200 Lean HDD system. Backlog at January 2, 2021 did not include any 200 Lean HDD systems.
Significant portions of Intevac’s revenues in any particular period have been attributable to sales to a limited number of customers. The following customers accounted for at least 10 percent of Intevac’s consolidated net revenues in fiscal 2021 and 2020.
* Less than 10%
Revenue by geographic region
International sales include products shipped to overseas operations of U.S. companies. The decrease in sales to the U.S. region in 2021 versus 2020 reflected lower HDD upgrade, spare and service sales to U.S. customers. Sales to the Asia region in 2021 did not include any systems, as compared to two 200 Lean HDD systems in 2020. Sales to the Europe region in 2021 included one MATRIX PVD system for ASP. Sales to the Europe region in 2020 were not significant.
Gross margin
Cost of net revenues consists primarily of purchased materials and also includes assembly, test and installation labor and overhead, customer-specific engineering costs, warranty costs, provisions for inventory reserves and scrap.
Gross margin was 18.3% in fiscal 2021 compared to 43.0% in fiscal 2020. Fiscal 2021 gross margins declined over fiscal 2020 as a result of lower revenues and lower factory utilization. Fiscal 2021 gross margin reflected an $8.4 million inventory valuation write-down primarily related to our solar and Vertex inventory, as well as a lower margin on the first MATRIX PVD system for ASP that we have sold thus far. Gross margins will continue to vary depending on a number of factors, including product mix, product cost, system configuration and pricing, factory utilization, and provisions for excess and obsolete inventory.
Research and development
Research and development expense consists primarily of salaries and related costs of employees engaged in, and prototype materials used in ongoing research, design and development activities for PV cell manufacturing equipment, DCP manufacturing equipment, HDD disk sputtering equipment, and semiconductor Fan-out
equipment.
Research and development spending in fiscal 2021 decreased compared to fiscal 2020 due to lower spending on semiconductor Fan-out,
DCP and PV development, offset in part by higher spending on HDD development.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense consists primarily of selling, marketing, customer support, financial and management costs. All domestic sales and the majority of international sales of HDD disk sputtering products in Asia are made through Intevac’s direct sales force. Intevac has offices in Singapore, Malaysia and China to support Intevac’s customers in Asia.
Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased in fiscal 2021 over the amount spent in fiscal 2020 due to lower variable compensation expenses and lower e-commerce
costs but were offset in part by the $1.0 million accrual for settlement of the PAGA lawsuit, higher stock compensation expenses, higher legal expenses, and higher consulting expenses related to network security.
Cost reduction plans
During the third quarter of fiscal 2021, Intevac substantially completed implementation of the 2021 cost reduction plan (the “2021 Cost Reduction Plan”), which was intended to reduce expenses and reduce its workforce by 5.2 percent. The total cost of implementing the 2021 Cost Reduction Plan was $319,000, of which $224,000 was reported under cost of net revenues and
$95,000 was reported under operating expenses. Substantially all cash outlays in connection with the 2021 Cost Reduction Plan were completed in fiscal 2021. Implementation of the 2021 Cost Reduction Plan is expected to reduce salary, wages and other employee-related expenses by approximately $2.0 million on an annual basis.
During the third quarter of fiscal 2020, Intevac substantially completed implementation of the 2020 cost reduction plan (the “2020 Cost Reduction Plan”), which was intended to reduce expenses and reduce its workforce by 1.0 percent. The total cost of implementing the 2020 Cost Reduction Plan was $103,000, of which $16,000 was reported under cost of net revenues and $87,000 was reported under operating expenses. Substantially all cash outlays in connection with the 2020 Cost Reduction Plan were completed in fiscal 2020. Implementation of the 2020 Cost Reduction Plan is expected to reduce salary, wages and other employee-related expenses by approximately $864,000 on an annual basis.
Interest income and other income (expense), net
Interest income and other income (expense), net in fiscal 2021 included $29,000 of interest income on investments, other income of $30,000 offset in part by $65,000 of foreign currency losses. Interest income and other income (expense), net in fiscal 2020 included $284,000 of interest income on investments offset in part by $139,000 of foreign currency losses. The decrease in interest income in 2021 over 2020 reflected lower interest rates on Intevac’s investments and lower invested balances.
Provision for income taxes
Intevac’s effective tax rate from continuing operations was (2.6%) for fiscal 2021 and (19.6%) for fiscal 2020 and we recorded an income tax expense of $575,000 in fiscal 2021 and $1.7 million in fiscal 2020. The income tax expense consists primarily of income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business and foreign withholding taxes. We maintain a full valuation allowance for domestic deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards and certain domestic tax credits. Intevac’s effective tax rate differs from the U.S. statutory rate in both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 primarily due to the Company not recognizing an income tax benefit on the domestic loss.
The income tax expense for fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 was largely the result of foreign withholding taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions. We did not recognize income tax expense on the gain from the sale of Photonics. The gain for federal purposes was offset by net operating losses. In California we used tax credits to offset the tax due on the gain.
During 2019 the Company received an unfavorable decision on its appeal to a tax audit in Singapore. Management determined that the Company could no longer support a more likely than not position. Accordingly, the Company recorded a charge of $732,000 in provision for income taxes. During 2020 the Company appealed the decision to the Singapore High Court, which was denied. Management decided not to pursue additional appeals and the matter is fully settled. Presently, there are no other active income tax examinations in the jurisdictions where Intevac operates.
We assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered based upon our consideration of many factors, including the current economic climate, our expectations of future taxable income, and our ability to project such income. We maintain a full valuation allowance for our U.S. deferred tax assets due to uncertainty regarding their realization as of January 1, 2022.
Discontinued operations
Income from discontinued operations consists primarily of the results of operations of the Photonics business which was sold to EOTECH on December 30, 2021. Income from discontinued operations in fiscal 2021 increased to $49.7 million as compared to net income of $11.5 million in fiscal 2020 primarily due to the gain on the sale of the Photonics business of $54.3 million, partially offset by the loss from the Photonics division, net of tax, which includes $2.6 million of asset impairment and restructuring charges related to impairment on the right-of-use
(“ROU”) asset, lease exit costs associated with a rent subsidy provided to EOTECH and employee termination costs.
Revenues declined 39% as compared to the prior year primarily as a result of lower product sales revenues and lower contract R&D work. Development work on the multi-year IVAS contract award for the development and production of digital night-vision cameras to support the U.S. Army’s Integrated Visual Augmentation System (“IVAS”) program completed in early 2021. Gross margins declined from 39.7% in fiscal 2020 to 23.6% in fiscal 2021 due to lower revenue levels, incremental start-up
costs for non-recurring
engineering associated with the first shipments of the IVAS product and lower margins on contract R&D work primarily due to additional development costs on the IVAS program. R&D spending increased from $888,000 in fiscal 2020 to $2.7 million in fiscal 2021, primarily related to incremental start-up
non-recurring
engineering costs associated with the IVAS product and higher spending on the development of the next generation of the low light level CMOS camera. Selling, general and administrative expense increased from $5.8 million in fiscal 2020 to $5.9 million in fiscal 2021, primarily related to higher bid and proposal costs, offset in part by lower variable compensation costs.
Upon the closing of the sale of the Photonics business on December 30, 2021, we received initial gross proceeds of $70.0 million. In January 2022, we delivered to EOTECH a draft closing statement that would reduce the working capital portion of the purchase price by $74,000. As a result, we have recognized a gain on the sale of $54.3 million computed as $70 million initial gross proceeds less (i) the potential $74,000 post closing adjustment, (ii) the carrying value of the assets and liabilities of $12.4 million transferred in the transaction and (iii) $3.2 million in transaction-related costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At January 1, 2022, Intevac had $121.2 million in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments compared to $50.4 million at January 2, 2021. During fiscal 2021, cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments increased by $70.8 million due primarily to the sale of the Photonics division, cash generated by operating activities and cash received from the sale of Intevac common stock to Intevac’s employees through Intevac’s employee benefit plans, offset in part by cash used for purchases of fixed assets and tax payments related to the net share settlement of restricted stock units.
Cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments consist of the following:
Cash generated by operating activities totaled $278,000 in fiscal 2021 compared to $8.9 million in fiscal 2020. Lower operating cash flow in fiscal 2021 was a result of a larger loss recognized from continuing operations.
Accounts receivable totaled $14.3 million at January 1, 2022 and $28.6 million at January 2, 2021. The number of days outstanding for Intevac’s accounts receivable was 90 at January 1, 2022 compared to 83 at January 2, 2021. Net inventories totaled $5.8 million at January 1, 2022 compared to $21.7 million at January 2, 2021. During fiscal 2021, we recorded an
$8.4 million inventory valuation write-down primarily on our solar and Vertex inventory due to business conditions and lack of demand. Inventory turns were 0.8 in fiscal 2021 and were 0.4 in fiscal 2020. Accounts payable increased to $5.3 million at January 1, 2022 compared to $4.3 million at January 2, 2021 and included a payable of $2.0 million as a commission to the investment banker for the Photonics sale. Other accrued liabilities were $3.7 million at January 1, 2022 and $3.6 million at January 2, 2021 and included a $1.0 million accrual for the settlement of the PAGA lawsuit. Accrued payroll and related liabilities decreased to $5.5 million at January 1, 2022 compared to $7.7 million at January 2, 2021 as a result of lower variable compensation accruals. Customer advances increased from $33,000 at January 2, 2021 to $2.1 million at January 1, 2022 as a result of recognition of new orders. Other long term liabilities decreased to $363,000 at January 1, 2022 compared to $457,000 at January 2, 2021 as a result of the payment of the first installment of the deferred payroll tax liabilities under the CARES Act.
Investing activities generated cash of $71.2 million in fiscal 2021 and $599,000 in fiscal 2020. Proceeds from the sale of the assets that comprised the Photonics business totaled $70.0 million in fiscal 2021. Proceeds from sales and maturities of investments net of purchases of investments, totaled $2.4 million in fiscal 2021 and $2.0 million in fiscal 2020, respectively. Capital expenditures were $1.2 million in fiscal 2021, and $2.6 million in fiscal 2020.
Financing activities generated cash of $1.9 million in fiscal 2021 and $1.1 million in fiscal 2020. The sale of Intevac common stock to Intevac’s employees through Intevac’s employee benefit plans provided $2.6 million in fiscal 2021 and $1.9 million in fiscal 2020. Tax payments related to the net share settlement of restricted stock units were $734,000 in fiscal 2021 and $402,000 in fiscal 2020. In November 2013, Intevac’s Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program authorizing up to $30 million in repurchases. On August 15, 2018, Intevac’s Board of Directors approved a $10.0 million increase to the original stock repurchase program authorizing up to $40.0 million in repurchases. Cash used to repurchase common stock totaled $0 and $393,000 in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Intevac’s investment portfolio consists principally of investment grade money market mutual funds, U.S. treasury and agency securities, asset backed securities, certificates of deposit, commercial paper, municipal bonds and corporate bonds. Intevac regularly monitors the credit risk in its investment portfolio and takes measures, which may include the sale of certain securities, to manage such risks in accordance with its investment policies.
As of January 1, 2022, approximately $25.0 million of cash and cash equivalents and $3.4 million of investments were domiciled in foreign tax jurisdictions. Intevac expects a significant portion of these funds to remain offshore in the short term. If the Company chose to repatriate these funds to the United States, it would be required to accrue and pay additional taxes on any portion of the repatriation subject to foreign withholding taxes.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments and cash flows from operating activities will be adequate to meet our liquidity needs for the next twelve months and for the foreseeable future beyond the next twelve months. Our significant funding requirements include procurement of manufacturing inventories, operating expenses, non-cancelable
operating lease obligations, capital expenditures and variable compensation. We have flexibility over some of these uses of cash, including capital expenditures and discretionary operating expenses, to preserve our liquidity position. Capital expenditures for fiscal 2022 are projected to be approximately $4.4 million related to network infrastructure and security, and laboratory and test equipment to support our R&D programs.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
Off-balance
sheet firm commitments relating to outstanding letters of credit amounted to approximately $786,000 as of January 1, 2022. These letters of credit and bank guarantees are collateralized by $786,000 of restricted cash. We do not maintain any other off-balance
sheet arrangements, transactions, obligations, or other relationships that would be expected to have a material current or future effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported. Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements describes the significant accounting policies used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements. Certain of these significant accounting policies are considered to be critical accounting policies. Note that these critical accounting policies and estimates relate solely to our continuing operations. The accounting policies related to our discontinued operations are discussed in Note 2, “Divestiture and Discontinued Operations,” to our consolidated financial statements.
A critical accounting policy is defined as one that is both material to the presentation of Intevac’s consolidated financial statements and requires management to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments that could have a material effect on Intevac’s financial condition or results of operations. Specifically, these policies have the following attributes: (1) Intevac is required to make assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time of the estimate; and (2) different estimates Intevac could reasonably have used, or changes in the estimate that are reasonably likely to occur, would have a material effect on Intevac’s financial condition or results of operations.
Estimates and assumptions about future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty. Intevac bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions believed to be applicable and reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates may change as new events occur, as additional information is obtained and as Intevac’s operating environment changes. These changes have historically been minor and have been included in the consolidated financial statements as soon as they became known. In addition, management is periodically faced with uncertainties, the outcomes of which are not within its control and will not be known for prolonged periods of time. These uncertainties are discussed in the section above entitled “Risk Factors.” Based on a critical assessment of its accounting policies and the underlying judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of those policies, management believes that Intevac’s consolidated financial statements are fairly stated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America and provide a meaningful presentation of Intevac’s financial condition and results of operations.
Management believes that the following are critical accounting policies:
Revenue Recognition
A majority of our equipment sales revenue, which includes systems, technology upgrades, service and spare parts is recognized when products are shipped from our manufacturing facilities. We recognize revenue for equipment sales at a point in time following the transfer of control of such products to the customer, which typically occurs upon shipment or delivery depending on the terms of the underlying contracts. Intevac recognizes revenue in certain circumstances before delivery has occurred (commonly referred to as bill and hold transactions). In such circumstances, among other things, risk of ownership has passed to the customer, the customer has made a written fixed commitment to purchase the finished goods, the customer has requested the finished goods be held for future delivery as scheduled and designated by them, and no additional performance obligations exist by Intevac. For these transactions, the finished goods are segregated from inventory and normal billing and credit terms granted. Our contracts with customers may include multiple performance obligations. Under the revenue standard we allocate revenue for such arrangements to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to customers or by using expected cost plus margin. The expected costs associated with our base warranties are recognized as expense when the equipment is sold.
Inventories
Inventories are valued using average actual costs and are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. The carrying value of inventory is reduced for estimated obsolescence by the difference between its cost and the net realizable value based upon assumptions about future demand. Intevac evaluates the inventory carrying value for potential excess and obsolete inventory exposures by analyzing historical and anticipated demand. In addition, inventories are evaluated for potential obsolescence due to the effect of known and anticipated engineering change orders and new products. If actual demand were to be substantially lower than estimated, additional inventory adjustments for excess or obsolete inventory might be required, which could have a material adverse effect on Intevac’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
Warranty
Intevac estimates the costs that may be incurred under the warranty it provides and records a liability in the amount of such costs at the time the related revenue is recognized. Estimated warranty costs are determined by analyzing specific product and historical configuration statistics and regional warranty support costs. Intevac’s warranty obligation is affected by product failure rates, material usage, and labor costs incurred in correcting product failures during the warranty period. As Intevac’s customer service engineers and process support engineers are highly trained and deployed globally, labor availability is a significant factor in determining labor costs. The quantity and availability of critical replacement parts is another significant factor in estimating warranty costs. Unforeseen component failures or exceptional component performance can also result in changes to warranty costs. If actual warranty costs differ substantially from our estimates, revisions to the estimated warranty liability would be required.
Income Taxes
Intevac accounts for income taxes by recognizing deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax bases of recorded assets and liabilities, net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets are also reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Management has determined that it is more likely than not that its future taxable income will not be sufficient to realize its entire deferred tax assets.
In determining whether to establish or maintain a valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset, the Company reviews available evidence to determine whether it is more likely than not that all or a portion of the Company’s net deferred tax assets will be realized in future periods. Consideration is given to various positive and negative factors that could affect the realization of the net deferred tax assets. In making such a determination, the Company considers, among other things, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning
strategies, historical financial performance, the length of statutory carry forward periods, experience with operating loss and tax credit carry forwards not expiring unused. If the Company determines that it would be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, the Company would make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
The effective tax rate is highly dependent upon the geographic composition of worldwide earnings, tax regulations governing each region, non-tax
deductible expenses and availability of tax credits. Management carefully monitors the changes in many factors and adjusts the effective income tax rate as required. If actual results differ from these estimates, Intevac could be required to record additional valuation allowances on deferred tax assets or adjust its effective income tax rate, which could have a material adverse effect on Intevac’s business, financial condition and results of operations.
The calculation of tax liabilities involves significant judgment in estimating the impact of uncertainties in the application of complex tax laws. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with Intevac’s expectations could have a material impact on Intevac’s results of operations and financial condition.
Equity-Based Compensation
Intevac records compensation expense for equity-based awards using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This model requires Intevac to estimate the expected volatility of the price of Intevac’s common stock and the expected life of the equity-based awards. Estimating volatility and expected life requires significant judgment and an analysis of historical data. Intevac accounts for forfeitures as they occur rather than estimating expected forfeitures. Intevac may have to increase or decrease compensation expense for equity-based awards if actual results differ significantly from Intevac’s estimates.