ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Iveda has been offering real-time IP video surveillance technologies to our customers since 2005. While we still offer video surveillance technologies, our core product line has evolved to include AI intelligent search technology that provide true intelligence to any video surveillance system and IoT (Internet of Things) devices and platforms. Our evolution is in response to digital transformation demands from many cities and organizations across the globe. Our IvedaAI intelligent video search technology adds critical intelligence to normally passive video surveillance systems. IvedaAI provides AI functions to any IP camera and most popular network video recorders (NVR) and video management systems (VMS). IvedaAI comes with an appliance or server, preconfigured with multiple AI functions based on the end user requirements.
AI Functions
● Object Search
● Face Search (No Database Required)
● Face Recognition (from a Database)
● License Plate Recognition (100+ Countries), includes make and model
● Intrusion Detection
● Weapon Detection
● Fire Detection
● People Counting
● Vehicle Counting
● Temperature Detection
● Public Health Analytics (Facemask Detection,
● QR and Barcode Detection
Key Features
● Live Camera View
● Live Tracking
● Abnormality Detection - Vehicle/Person wrong direction detection
● Vehicle/Person Loitering Detection
● Fall Detection
● Illegal Parking Detection
● Heatmap Generation
IvedaAI consists of deep-learning video analytics software running in a computer/server environment that can either be deployed at an edge level or data center for centralized cloud model. We combined hardware and artificial intelligence software for fast and efficient video search for objects stored in an external (NVR) or storage device and live streaming video data from any IP camera.
IvedaAI works with any ONVIF-compliant IP cameras and most popular NVR/VMS (Video Management System) platforms, enabling accurate search across dozens to thousands of cameras in less than 1 second. IvedaAI products are designed to maximize efficiency, save time, and cut cost. Instead of watching hours of video recording after-the-fact, users can set up alerts.
Iveda offers many IoT sensors and devices for various applications such as energy management, smart home, smart building, smart community and patient/elder care. Our gateway and station serve as the main hub for sensors and devices in any given area. They are equipped with high-level communication protocols such as Zigbee, WiFi, Bluetooth, and USB. They connect to the Internet via Ethernet or cellular data network. We provide IoT platforms that enable centralized device management and push digital services on a massive scale. Our smart devices include water sensor, environment sensor, entry sensor, smart plug, siren, body temperature pad, care watch and tracking devices.
We also offer smart power technology for office buildings, schools, shopping centers, hotels, hospitals, and smart city projects. Our smart power hardware is equipped with an RS485 communication interface allowing the meters to be connected to various third-party SCADA software for monitoring and control purposes. This line of product includes smart power, water meter, smart lighting controls systems, and smart payment system.
Iveda’s Cerebro manages all the components of our smart power technology including statistics on energy consumption. Cerebro is a software platform designed to integrate multiple unconnected energy, security and safety applications and devices and control them through one comprehensive user interface.
Cerebro’s roadmap includes dashboard for all of Iveda’s platforms for central management of all devices. Cerebro is system agnostic and will support cross-platform interoperability. The common unified user interface will allow remote control of platforms, sensors and subsystems throughout an entire environment. This integration and unification of all subsystems enable acquisition and analysis of all information on one central command center, allowing comprehensive, effective, and overall management and protection of a city.
In the last few years, the smart city concept has been a hot topic among cities across the globe. With little to no human interaction, technology increases efficiency, expedites decision making, and reduces response time. Dwindling public safety budgets and resources has necessitated the transformation. More and more municipalities are using next-generation technologies to improve the safety and security of its citizens. Our response is our complete suite of IoT technologies, including AI intelligent video search technology, smart sensors, tracking devices, video surveillance systems, and smart power.
We license our platform and sell IoT hardware to service providers such as telecommunications companies, integrators and other technology resellers already providing services to an existing customer base. Partnering with service providers that have an existing loyal customer base allows us to focus on servicing just a handful of our partners and concentrating on our technology offering. Service providers leverage their end-user infrastructure to sell, bill, and provide customer service for Iveda’s product offering. This business model provides dual revenue streams - one from hardware sales and the other from monthly licensing fees.
MEGAsys, our subsidiary in Taiwan, specializes in deploying new, and integrating existing, video surveillance systems for airports, commercial buildings, government customers, data centers, shopping centers, hotels, banks, and Safe City. MEGAsys combines security surveillance products, software, and services to provide integrated security solutions to the end user. Through MEGAsys, we have access not only to Asian markets but also to Asian manufacturers and engineering expertise. MEGAsys is our research and development arm, working with a team of developers in Taiwan.
In April, 2011, we completed our acquisition of MEGAsys, a company founded in 1998 by a group of sales and research and development professionals from Taiwan Panasonic Company. MEGAsys, our subsidiary in Taiwan, specializes in deploying new, and integrating existing, video surveillance systems for airports, commercial buildings, government customers, data centers, shopping centers, hotels, banks, and Safe City initiatives in Taiwan and other neighboring countries. MEGAsys combines security surveillance products, software, and services to provide integrated security solutions to the end user. Through MEGAsys, we have access not only to Asian markets but also to Asian manufacturers and engineering expertise. MEGAsys is our research and development arm, working with a team of developers and managing our relationship with the Industrial Technology Research Institute (“ITRI”) in Taiwan. MEGAsys also houses the application engineering team that supports Sentir implementation for our service provider customers in Asia. The Company depends on MEGAsys as the majority of the company’s revenues have come from MEGAsys since we acquired them in April 2011. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, MEGAsys’s operations accounted for 93% and 71% of our total revenue, respectively.
The acquisition of MEGAsys provided the following benefits to our business:
● An established presence and credibility in Asia and access to the Asian market.
● Relationships in Asia for cost-effective research and development of new product offerings and securing the best pricing for end user devices.
● Sourcing of products directly using MEGAsys’s product sourcing expertise to enhance our custom integration capabilities.
● Enhancements to the global distribution potential for our products and services.
In November 2012, we signed a cooperation agreement with ITRI, a research and development organization based in Taiwan. Together with ITRI, we have developed cloud-video services. Pursuant to the cooperation agreement, we licensed, through our subsidiary, Sole-Vision Technologies, Inc., the right to use U.S. Patent No. 8,719,442 (as well as its Taiwanese and Chinese counterparts) with respect to the development of cloud-video technologies.
In June and August 2014, in collaboration with our local partner in the Philippines, we shipped our ZEE cloud plug-and-play cameras for delivery to the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (“PLDT”) for distribution to its customers with a cloud video surveillance service offering, utilizing our Sentir platform.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Conditions and Results of Operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. A description of our critical accounting policies and related judgments and estimates that affect the preparation of our financial statements is set forth in our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020. Such policies are unchanged.
New Accounting Standards
There were no new standards recently issued which would have an impact on our operations or disclosures.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net Revenue
We recorded net consolidated revenue of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $0.4 million, or 29%. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our recurring service revenue was $264,402, or 14% of net revenue, and our equipment sales and installation revenue was $1.65 million, or 86% of net revenue. In fiscal 2020, our recurring service revenue was $325,680, or 22% of consolidated net revenue, and our equipment sales and installation revenue was $1.2 million, or 78% of net revenue. The increase in total revenue in 2021 compared with the same period in fiscal 2020 is attributable primarily to increased equipment sales from MEGAsys as a result of additional long-term contracts awarded and started during 2021.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue was $1.1 million (57% of revenue; gross margin of 43%) for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $1.0 million (67% of revenue; 33% gross margin) for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of ($0.1 million), or (9%). The increase in cost of revenue was primarily driven by increased MEGAsys revenue. The increase in overall gross margin was also primarily attributed to increased MEGAsys revenue as a result of additional long-term contracts awarded and started during 2021.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses were $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.8 million, or 107%. This net increase in operating expenses in 2021 compared with 2020 is due primarily related to a ramp up in personnel in the US based administrative, sales and technical support personnel as well as research and development expenses for IvedaAI. Additional professional expenses have been incurred during this period with an effort to get financial information filed with the OTC Markets and filing of the Form 10-12g registration statement.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations increased to $2.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $1.5 million, or 122%. A majority of the increase in loss from operations was primarily due to increased operating expenses offset by a $0.3 million increase in gross profit.
Other Expense-Net
Other expense-net was $273,295 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $373,560 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $100,265, or 27%. The majority of the other expense is interest expense accrued for convertible debentures, valuation of the convertible debenture features and the value of warrants given as incentive for the convertible debentures.
Net Loss
Net loss was $3.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared with $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1.4 million, or 87%, in net loss was caused primarily by a increase in operating expenses related to a ramp up in personnel in the US based administrative, sales and technical support personnel as well as research and development expenses for IvedaAI. Additional professional expenses have been incurred during this period with an effort to get financial information filed with the OTC Markets and filing of the Form 10-12g registration statement.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $1,091,246 in our U.S.-based segment and $294,029 in our Taiwan-based segment, compared to $32,574 in our U.S.-based segment and $216,947 in our Taiwan-based segment as of December 31, 2020. This increase in our cash and cash equivalents is primarily a result of the $2.8 million sale of Common Stock with Warrants during the year ended December 31, 2021. There are no legal or economic factors that materially impact our ability to transfer funds between our U.S.-based and Taiwan-based segments.
Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.0 million compared to $0.1 million net cash used during the nine months ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of the $3.08 million net loss including $1.1 million of non-cash charges (primarily stock option compensation and warrants for services), $0.3 million in accounts receivable, $0.3 of inventory, prepaids and advances to suppliers offset by approximately $0.5 million in additional accrued expenses. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of the net loss and offset by $0.4 million in additional accrued expenses as well as $0.7 million collection of accounts receivable.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $24,513. Net cash used by investing activities during the nine months ended December 31, 2020 was $21,915.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.1 million compared with $0.1 million provided during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 is primarily a result of the $2.8 million sale of Common Stock with Warrants during the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of an increase in short-term debt balances at the U.S based operations.
We have experienced significant operating losses since our inception. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $29 million in net operating loss carryforwards available for federal income tax purposes, which will begin to expire in 2025. We did not recognize any benefit from the federal net operating loss carryforwards in 2021 or 2020. We also had approximately $2.0 million in state net operating loss carryforwards, which expire after five years.
We have limited liquidity and have not yet established a stabilized source of revenue sufficient to cover operating costs, based on our current estimated burn rate. Accordingly, our continuation as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate greater revenue through increased sales and/or our ability to raise additional funds through the capital markets. No assurance can be given that we will be successful in future financing and revenue-generating efforts. Even if funding is available, we cannot assure investors that it will be available on terms that are favorable to our existing stockholders. Additional funding may be achieved through the issuance of equity or debt securities that could be significantly dilutive to the percentage ownership of our existing stockholders. In addition, these newly issued securities may have rights, preferences, or privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders. Accordingly, such a financing transaction could materially and adversely impact the price of our common stock.
Substantially all of our cash is deposited in three financial institutions, two in the United States and one in Taiwan. At times, amounts on deposit in the United States may be in excess of the FDIC insurance limit. Deposits in Taiwan financial institutions are insured by CDIC (“Central Deposit Insurance Corporation”) with maximum coverage of NTD 3 million. At times, amounts on deposit in Taiwan may be in excess of the CDIC insurance limit.
Our accounts receivable are unsecured, and we are at risk to the extent such amounts become uncollectible. Although we perform periodic evaluations of our customers’ credit and financial condition, we generally do not require collateral in exchange for our products and services provided on credit.
We provide an allowance for doubtful collections, which is based upon a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information, and existing economic conditions. Payment terms for our U.S.-based segment require prepayment for most products before they are shipped and monthly Sentir licensing fees, which are due in advance on the first day of each month. For our U.S.-based segment, accounts receivable that are more than 120 days past due are considered delinquent. Payment terms for our Taiwan-based segment vary based on our agreements with our customers. Generally, we receive payment for our products and services within one year of commencing the project, except that we retain 5% of the total payment amount and release such amount one year after the completion of the project. For our U.S.-based segment, we had no doubtful accounts receivable allowances for the quarters ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For our Taiwan-based segment, we set up no doubtful accounts receivable allowances for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We deem the rest of our accounts receivable to be collectible based on certain factors, including the nature of the customer contracts and past experience with similar customers. Delinquent receivables are written off based on individual credit valuation and specific circumstances of the customer, and we generally do not charge interest on past due receivables.
The COVID-19 pandemic represents a fluid situation that presents a wide range of potential impacts of varying durations for different global geographies, including locations where the Company has offices, employees, customers, vendors and other suppliers and business partners.
Like most businesses, the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate the same began to have impacts on our business in March 2020. By that time, much of our first fiscal quarter was completed. During the remainder of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, the Company observed decreases in demand from certain customers, including primarily municipalities and commercial customers in Taiwan as well as delays in project timelines in Taiwan. The Company estimates that the COVID-19 pandemic resulted in decreases of approximately $1.2 million revenues and $0.3 million gross profit contribution for the year ended December 31, 2020 and $0.2 million revenues and $0.05 million gross profit contribution for the three months ended March 31, 2021. However, the Company is beginning to experience an increase in demand for the nine months ended December 31, 2021, compared to the last half of 2020.
Given the fact that the Company’s products are sold through a variety of distribution channels, the Company expects its sales will experience more volatility as a result of the changing and less predictable operational needs of many customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Company is aware that many companies, including many of its suppliers and customers, are reporting or predicting negative impacts from COVID-19 on future operating results. Although the Company observed significant declines in demand for its products from certain customers during 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, the Company believes that the impact of the COVID-19 remains too fluid and unknown, hindering the Company from determining the long-term demand for current products. The Company also cannot be certain how demand may shift over time as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic may go through several phases of varying severity and duration.
The Company does not expect there to be material changes to its assets on its balance sheet or its ability to timely account for those assets. The Company has also reviewed the potential impacts on future risks to the business as it relates to collections, returns and other business-related items.
To date, travel restrictions and border closures have not materially impacted its ability to obtain inventory or manufacture or deliver products or services to customers. However, if such restrictions become more severe, they could negatively impact those activities in a way that would harm the business over the long term. Travel restrictions impacting people can restrain our ability to assist its customers and distributors as well as impact its ability to develop new distribution channels, but at present the Company does not expect these restrictions on personal travel to be material to our business operations or financial results. The Company has taken steps to restrain and monitor its operating expenses and therefore it does not expect any such impacts to materially change the relationship between costs and revenues.
Like most companies, the Company has taken a range of actions with respect to how it operates to assure it complies with government restrictions and guidelines as well as best practices to protect the health and well-being of its employees and its ability to continue operating its business effectively. To date, the Company has been able to operate its business effectively using these measures and to maintain internal controls as documented and posted. The Company also has not experienced challenges in maintaining business continuity and does not expect to incur material expenditures to do so. However, the impacts of COVID-19 and efforts to mitigate the same have remained unpredictable and it remains possible that challenges may arise in the future.
The actions the Company has taken so far during the COVID-19 pandemic include, but are not limited to requiring all employees who can work from home to work from home and increasing its IT networking capability to best assure employees can work effectively outside the office.
The Company currently believes revenue for the year ending December 31, 2021 has been impacted due to the conditions noted. Based on the Company’s current cash position and its projected cash flow from operations, the Company believes that it will have sufficient capital and or have access to sufficient capital through public and private equity and debt offerings to sustain operations for a period of one year following the date of this filing. If business interruptions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic were to be prolonged or expanded in scope, the business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows would be negatively impacted. The Company will continue to actively monitor this situation and will implement actions necessary to maintain business continuity.
Effects of Inflation
For the periods for which financial information is presented, we do not believe that the current levels of inflation in the United States have had a significant impact on our operations. Likewise, we do not believe that the current levels of inflation in Taiwan have had a significant impact on the operations of MEGAsys.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not have any undisclosed borrowings or debt, and we have not entered into any synthetic leases. We are, therefore, not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market, or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The impact on our business operations and any associated risks related to these policies are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations when such policies affect our reported or expected financial results.
In the ordinary course of business, we have made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial condition in the preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
The material estimates for our company are that of the stock-based compensation recorded for options and warrants issued and the income tax valuation allowance recorded for deferred tax assets. The fair values of options and warrants are determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. We have no historical data on the accuracy of these estimates. The estimated sensitivity to change is related to the various variables of the Black-Scholes option pricing model stated below. The specific quantitative variables are included in the notes to the financial statements. The estimated fair value of options and warrants is recognized as expense on the straight-line basis over the options’ and warrants’ vesting periods. The fair value of each option and warrant granted is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the expected life, dividend yield, expected volatility, and risk-free interest rate weighted-average assumptions used for options and warrants granted. Expected volatility for 2014 and 2013 was estimated using the Dow Jones U.S. Industry indexes sector classification methodology for industries similar to that in which we operate. The risk-free rate for periods within the contractual life of the option and warrant is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the grant date. The expected life of options and warrants is based on the average of three public companies offering services similar to ours.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We have a significant amount of property and equipment primarily consisting of leased equipment. We review the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets using the methodology prescribed in ASC 360 “Property, Plant and Equipment.” Recoverability of long-lived assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to the undiscounted future net operating cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured as the amount by which the carrying value of the assets exceeds their fair value.
Basis of Accounting and Going Concern
Our financial statements have been prepared on the accrual basis of accounting in conformity with GAAP. In addition, the accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. We generated accumulated losses of approximately $31.0 million through December 31, 2021 and have insufficient working capital and cash flows to support operations. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from this uncertainty.
Revenue and Expense Recognition
We recognize revenue when (1) persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists, (2) title transfer has occurred, (3) the price is fixed or readily determinable, and (4) collectability is reasonably assured. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 60, “Revenue Recognition.” Sales are recorded net of sales returns and discounts, which are estimated at the time of shipment based upon historical data. Revenue from monitoring services are recognized when the services are provided. Expenses are recognized as incurred.
Revenue from fixed-price equipment installation contracts are recognized on the percentage-of-completion method. The percentage completed is measured by the costs incurred to date as a percentage of estimated total costs for each contract. This method is used because we consider expended costs to be the best available measure of progress on these contracts. Because of inherent uncertainties in estimating costs and revenue, it is at least reasonably possible that the estimates used will change.
Contract costs include all direct material, subcontractors, labor costs, and equipment costs and those indirect costs related to contract performance. General and administrative costs are charged to expense as incurred. Provisions for estimated losses on uncompleted contracts are made in the period in which such losses are determined. Changes in job performance, job conditions, and estimated profitability may result in revisions to costs and income and are recognized in the period in which the revisions are determined. Changes in estimated job profitability resulting from job performance, job conditions, contract penalty provisions, claims, change orders, and settlements are accounted for as changes in estimates in the current period. Profit incentives are included in revenue when their realization is reasonably assured. Claims are included in revenue when realization is probable and the amount can be reliably estimated.
The liability, “Billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts,” represents billings in excess of revenue recognized.
Stock-Based Compensation
On January 1, 2006, we adopted the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718, “Share-Based Payment,” which requires the recognition of an expense related to the fair value of stock-based compensation awards. We elected the modified prospective transition method as permitted by ASC 718. Under this transition method, stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 includes compensation expense for stock-based compensation granted on or after the date ASC 718 was adopted based on the grant-date fair value estimated in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718. We recognize compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the award. The fair value of stock-based compensation awards granted prior to, but not yet vested as of December 31, 2010 and 2009, was estimated using the “minimum value method” as prescribed by the original provisions of ASC 718, “Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation” and therefore, no compensation expense was recognized for these awards in accordance with ASC 718. We recognized $801,908 and $165,167 of stock-based compensation expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.