Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report.
Overview
We are a Maryland corporation primarily focused on investing in, financing and managing mortgage-backed securities (“MBS”) and other mortgage-related assets. Our objective is to provide attractive risk-adjusted returns to our stockholders, primarily through dividends and secondarily through capital appreciation. To achieve this objective, we currently invest in the following:
•Residential mortgage-backed securities (“RMBS”) that are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency such as the Government National Mortgage Association (“Ginnie Mae”) or a federally chartered corporation such as the Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) (collectively “Agency RMBS”);
•Commercial mortgage-backed securities (“CMBS”) that are not guaranteed by a U.S. government agency or a federally chartered corporation (“non-Agency CMBS”);
•RMBS that are not guaranteed by a U.S. government agency or a federally chartered corporation (“non-Agency RMBS”);
•To-be-announced securities forward contracts (“TBAs”) to purchase Agency RMBS;
•Commercial mortgage loans; and
•Other real estate-related financing arrangements.
We have also historically invested in the following:
•CMBS that are guaranteed by a U.S. government agency such as Ginnie Mae or a federally chartered corporation such as Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac (collectively “Agency CMBS”);
•Credit risk transfer securities that are unsecured obligations issued by government-sponsored enterprises (“GSE CRT”); and
•Residential mortgage loans.
We continuously evaluate new investment opportunities to complement our current investment portfolio by expanding our target assets and portfolio diversification.
We conduct our business through our wholly-owned subsidiary, IAS Operating Partnership L.P. (our “Operating Partnership”). We are externally managed and advised by Invesco Advisers, Inc. (our “Manager”), an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of Invesco Ltd. (“Invesco”).
We have elected to be taxed as a real estate investment trust (“REIT”) for U.S. federal income tax purposes under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. To maintain our REIT qualification, we are generally required to distribute at least 90% of our REIT taxable income to our stockholders annually. We operate our business in a manner that permits our exclusion from the definition of an “Investment Company” under the 1940 Act.
Factors Impacting Our Operating Results
Our operating results can be affected by a number of factors and primarily depend on the level of our net interest income and the market value of our assets. Our net interest income, which includes the amortization of purchase premiums and accretion of purchase discounts, varies primarily as a result of changes in market interest rates and prepayment speeds, as measured by the constant prepayment rate (“CPR”) on our assets. Interest rates and prepayment speeds vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. The market value of our assets can be impacted by credit spread premiums (yield advantage over U.S. Treasury notes) and the supply of, and demand for, assets in which we invest.
Market Conditions
Macroeconomic factors that affect our business include interest rate spread premiums, governmental policy initiatives, residential and commercial real estate prices, credit availability, consumer personal income and spending, corporate earnings, employment conditions, financial conditions and inflation.
Financial conditions eased significantly over the first half of 2021, as markets responded to an encouraging decrease in COVID-19 cases and deaths. However, the easing of conditions peaked at mid-year and tightened during the second half of the year as a resurgence of COVID-19 cases and concerns over large increases in inflation caused investors to turn cautious. These concerns have only increased as we enter the first weeks of 2022, as more aggressive removal of stimulus by the Federal Reserve becomes priced into the market and is reflected in tighter financial conditions. Despite the tighter conditions of the second half of 2021, the equity markets were strong throughout the year, with the S&P 500 Index increasing by 26.9% during 2021, including a gain of 10.6% during the fourth quarter. The NASDAQ gained 21.4% for the year, including an increase of 8.3% during the fourth quarter. Equities have dropped sharply to start 2022, however, with the S&P down 5.3% and the NASDAQ down 9.0% through the end of January.
The employment picture improved steadily throughout the course of 2021, with gains in nonfarm payrolls averaging 537,000 for the year and 365,000 during the fourth quarter. The unemployment rate also improved markedly, declining from 6.7% at end of 2020 to 3.9% at the end of 2021. Consumer activity was positive during the year, with most of the increases in consumer spending and retail sales skewed towards the first half of the year, as the resurgence in COVID-19 cases and sharp increases in price levels took their toll during the second half of 2021. Consumer confidence measures also reflected this dynamic, showing confidence levels peaking around mid-year before dropping during the second half of 2021.
Interest rates rose across the yield curve during 2021, as market expectations of increases to the Federal Funds target rate by the Federal Open Market Committee (“FOMC”) impacted shorter maturities and increases in inflation affected longer dated maturities. During 2021, the yield on the 2 year Treasury note increased 61 basis points to 0.73%, the yield on the 5 year Treasury increased 90 basis points to 1.26% and the yield on the 10 year Treasury ended the year at 1.51%, up 60 basis points. Most of the rate increases that occurred on the short end of the curve occurred during the fourth quarter, as the 2 year increased 46 basis points during the quarter, reflecting a dramatic repricing of Federal Funds futures contracts caused by an equally dramatic increase in prices. At year-end, the pricing of these contracts reflected an expectation that the FOMC will increase the Federal Funds target rate by approximately 125 basis points by mid-2023 as compared to an expectation of no increases at the end of 2020. Unsurprisingly, interest rate volatility also increased drastically throughout the year, particularly when measured against shorter term interest rates.
One of the largest concerns for both the markets and the FOMC during 2021 has been the severe rise in inflation. The personal consumption expenditure index ended 2021 with an increase to 4.9% compared to 1.5% at the end of 2020. Likewise, commodities also saw significant increases during 2021, with West Texas Intermediate crude oil recording a 58.8% increase and the Commodity Research Bureau commodity index gaining 38.5%. Breakeven rates on U.S Treasury inflation-protected securities (“TIPs”), which reflect investors' expectations of future inflation, have broken out to levels not seen in several years. The inflation rate implied by 2 year and 5 year TIPs was 3.22% and 2.91%, respectively, at the end of the year.
CMBS risk premiums increased in the fourth quarter of 2021 due to elevated new issuance, renewed COVID-19 concerns resulting from the Omicron variant, higher inflation and increased interest rate volatility. Despite these concerns, the economy continued to show signs of improvement. This pick-up in economic activity has translated to improving employment levels, increased commercial real estate activity and continued property price appreciation. While commercial mortgage loan delinquencies remain elevated across many property types, they continue to decline from their post-pandemic peak levels. The lodging and retail sectors have experienced the highest level of loan delinquencies due to travel restrictions and a severe slowdown in activity. Office, multi-family and industrial property sectors continue to post relatively lower delinquency levels. Loans secured by office properties have benefited from long-term tenant leases and industrial warehouse properties have benefited from growing online shopping, as online retailers have demanded more space to support their fulfillment process.
The housing market has staged a robust recovery since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, driven in part by low mortgage rates and tight supply conditions. Demographic trends and changes in housing preferences shaped by the pandemic
have contributed to solid demand, especially for single family homes. This strength is reflected in rapid home price appreciation, which has only recently begun to moderate. Meanwhile, credit spreads on residential mortgage-backed securities have reversed the widening that occurred in March 2020, but finished 2021 well off the lows reached earlier in the year.
Nevertheless, many individual homeowners have been adversely impacted by the economic consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic. The U.S. government has responded by passing a number of fiscal stimulus measures and relief programs for households and businesses directly or indirectly impacted by the virus. Stimulus payments and the provision of borrower relief including forbearance and loan modifications have substantially reduced borrower defaults and loan losses relative to levels that would have likely occurred without these actions.
Agency RMBS significantly underperformed over the course of 2021, marking the sector’s worst total return since 2013 and the worst year of performance relative to U.S. Treasuries since 2011. Increased interest rate volatility and elevated market expectations for more restrictive monetary policy were particularly harmful for low coupon 30 year Agency RMBS, which benefited the most from the Federal Reserve’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, net purchases of $580 billion from the Federal Reserve and nearly $400 billion by commercial banks was mostly offset by heavy supply from mortgage originators, which eclipsed record levels in 2021 reaching approximately $870 billion of net issuance. During the second half of 2021, Agency RMBS performance was negatively impacted by the market’s anticipation that the Federal Reserve’s MBS purchase program would be slowed or stopped in an effort to remove accommodative policies in its fight against inflation. While prepayment speeds remained elevated, premiums on specified pool Agency RMBS fell in 2021 as investor demand for prepayment protection waned given higher mortgage rates. Prepayment speeds should moderate in the months ahead, as seasonal factors and higher mortgage rates dampen housing and refinancing activity. The dollar roll market for low coupon TBAs continues to be attractive, as implied financing rates remained negative given persistent demand from the Federal Reserve and commercial banks. Overall, we remain cautious on the Agency RMBS sector, as more restrictive monetary policy and worsening supply and demand technicals may weigh on valuations.
As we move into 2022, investors are focused first and foremost on the Federal Reserve and how their removal of policy accommodation to fight persistent inflation will impact rates and risk assets. Another concern is the impact of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and how the trajectory of new cases might impact economic activity. These concerns leave us with a cautious outlook for the coming year.
Proposed Changes to LIBOR
The FCA, which regulates LIBOR announced on March 5, 2021 that it will cease to publish the overnight, one-month, three-month, six-month and 12-month USD LIBOR settings on July 1, 2023. The ARRC, the U.S. working group tasked with assisting in the industry wide transition away from LIBOR, has supported the FCA’s announcement of USD LIBOR cessation and has recommended the market adopt SOFR. To accelerate the transition away from LIBOR, the Federal Reserve Board, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency issued joint supervisory guidance to cease entering into new contracts referencing USD LIBOR after December 31, 2021 (note there are limited exceptions related to derivative product use). We, similar to the broader industry, are transitioning away from LIBOR to alternative risk-free rates, such as SOFR. We continue to actively monitor and adjust our LIBOR transition strategy and timeline as necessary. Switching existing financial instruments from LIBOR to SOFR requires calculations of a spread. There is no assurance that the calculated spread will be fair and accurate or that all financial instruments will use the same spread.
We have an investment in a commercial loan indexed to LIBOR that is scheduled to mature in 2022. In addition, our 7.75% Fixed-to-Floating Series B Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock and our 7.50% Fixed-to-Floating Series C Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock each begin to pay a USD LIBOR-based rate at the time the stock becomes callable. Our Series B and Series C Preferred Stock are governed by New York state law that provides for USD LIBOR-linked contracts to transition to an alternative reference rate for contracts. We do not currently intend to amend our 7.75% Fixed-to-Floating Series B Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock or our 7.50% Fixed-to-Floating Series C Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock to change the existing USD LIBOR cessation fallback language.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board has issued accounting guidance that provides optional expedients and exceptions to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions impacted by LIBOR transition if certain criteria are met. The guidance can be applied through December 31, 2022. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we transitioned our interest rate swaps that were indexed to LIBOR to interest rate swaps that are indexed to SOFR in a manner that allowed us to qualify for contract modification relief and maintain the same accounting for and presentation of interest rate swaps that was in place prior to modification.
Investment Activities
The table below shows the breakdown of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1)Our presentation of TBAs in the table above represents management's view of our investment portfolio and does not reflect how we record TBAs on our consolidated balance sheets under U.S. GAAP. Under U.S. GAAP, we record TBAs that we do not intend to physically settle on the contractual settlement date as derivative financial instruments. We value TBAs on our consolidated balance sheets at net carrying value, which represents the difference between the fair market value and the implied cost basis of the TBAs. For further details of our U.S GAAP accounting for TBAs, refer to Note 8 “Derivatives and Hedging Activities” in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report. Our TBA dollar roll transactions are a form of off-balance sheet financing. For further information on how management evaluates our at-risk leverage, see Non-GAAP Financial Measures below.
We sold $16.3 billion and purchased $17.1 billion of Agency RMBS during the year ended December 31, 2021. We rotated our Agency RMBS throughout the year into securities that have higher yields, in some cases to change coupon rate or the type of specified pool collateral. Purchases were funded with proceeds from the sales, paydowns of securities and by leveraging proceeds from the issuance of common stock.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 our holdings of 30 year fixed-rate Agency RMBS represented 81% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs. Our 30 year fixed-rate Agency RMBS holdings as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of specified pools with coupon distributions as shown in the table below.
Our purchases of Agency RMBS have been primarily focused on specified pools with prepayment protection, as low mortgage rates and a robust housing market have increased borrower incentives to prepay their mortgage loans. We seek to mitigate the negative impact of prepayments on our investment portfolio by purchasing specified pools with characteristics that diminish borrower incentive to prepay, such as a lower loan balance, higher loan-to-value (“LTV”) ratio, lower FICO score, higher percentage of non-owner occupied loans (investment and vacation properties) and newly originated loans. In addition, we focus a significant amount of purchases in specified pools that have higher geographic concentrations in states that exhibit slower prepayments such as New York, Florida and Texas.
We invest in TBAs as an alternative means of investing in and financing Agency RMBS. As of December 31, 2021, the implied cost basis of TBAs represented approximately 17% of our total investment portfolio, versus 18% as of December 31, 2020. Our investments consist of 30-year Agency RMBS TBAs with coupons that range from 2.5% to 3.0% in conventional collateral. We maintain a meaningful allocation to TBAs given attractive implied financing rates in the Agency RMBS TBA dollar roll market. Implied financing rates in the dollar roll market were below those available in the repurchase market due to
the magnitude and persistence of the Federal Reserve's MBS purchase program, which began to increase holdings in March 2020. The Federal Reserve began reducing net purchases of Agency RMBS in the fourth quarter of 2021, and net purchases are expected to end in March 2022. It is likely the Federal Reserve will continue to reinvest all or a portion of paydowns on their MBS portfolio in the subsequent quarters, which would continue to support the Agency RMBS TBA dollar roll market.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our holdings of non-Agency CMBS represented approximately 1% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs. Our non-Agency CMBS portfolio is comprised of fixed-rate securities that are rated single-A (or equivalent) or higher by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization as of December 31, 2021. Approximately 72.4% of non-Agency CMBS are rated double-A (or equivalent) or higher by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization as of December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our holdings of non-Agency RMBS represented less than 1% of our total investment portfolio, including TBAs. We historically held non-Agency RMBS securities collateralized by prime and Alt-A loans and invested in re-securitizations of real estate mortgage investment conduit (“Re-REMIC”) RMBS and securitizations of reperforming mortgage loans.
As of December 31, 2021, we held an investment in one commercial real estate mezzanine loan that is due in February 2022 and has a LTV ratio of approximately 68.0%. In February 2022, we received a request from the borrower to extend the contractual maturity of the commercial loan investment to May 29, 2022. Refer to Note 15 - “Subsequent Events” of our consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this Report for additional information.
As of December 31, 2021, we held investments in two unconsolidated ventures that are managed by an affiliate of our Manager. Both of the unconsolidated ventures are in liquidation and plan to sell or settle their remaining investments as expeditiously as possible. Until the ventures complete their liquidation, we are committed to fund $6.5 million in additional capital to cover future expenses should they occur.
Financing and Other Liabilities
We have historically used repurchase agreements to finance the majority of our target assets and expect to continue to use repurchase agreements to finance Agency investments in the future. Repurchase agreements are generally settled on a short-term basis, usually from one to six months, and bear interest at rates that are expected to move in close relationship to SOFR.
We also used secured loans from the FHLBI to finance a portion of our investment portfolio. We repaid our secured loans during 2020 with proceeds from sales of assets that collateralized the secured loans. We terminated our membership in FHLBI in the third quarter of 2020.
The following table presents the amount of collateralized borrowings outstanding under repurchase agreements and secured loans as of the end of each quarter, the average amount outstanding during the quarter and the maximum balance outstanding during the quarter:
(1)Average quarterly balance for each period is based on month-end balances.
(2)Amount represents the maximum borrowings at month-end during each of the respective periods.
Hedging Instruments
We generally hedge as much of our interest rate and foreign exchange risk as we deem prudent because of market conditions. No assurance can be given that our hedging activities will have the desired beneficial impact on our results of operations or financial condition. Our investment policies do not contain specific requirements as to the percentages or amount of risk that we are required to hedge.
Hedging may fail to protect or could adversely affect us because, among other things:
•available interest rate hedging may not correspond directly with the interest rate risk for which protection is sought;
•the duration of the hedges may not match the duration of the related liabilities;
•our counterparty in the hedging transaction may default on its obligation to pay;
•the credit quality of our counterparty on the hedge may be downgraded to such an extent that it impairs our ability to sell or assign our side of the hedging transaction; and
•the value of derivatives used for hedging may be adjusted from time-to-time in accordance with accounting rules to reflect changes in fair value.
We enter into interest rate swap agreements that are designed to mitigate the effects of increases in interest rates for a portion of our borrowings. Under these swap agreements, we generally pay fixed interest rates and receive floating interest rates indexed to SOFR. To a lesser extent, we also enter into interest rate swap agreements whereby we make floating interest rate payments indexed to SOFR and receive fixed interest rate payments as part of our overall risk management strategy. Prior to the transition of our swap portfolio to swaps that are indexed to SOFR in the fourth quarter of 2021, our interest rate swaps were generally indexed to one- or three-month LIBOR.
We actively manage our swap portfolio by terminating and entering into new swaps as the size and composition of our investment portfolio changes. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we terminated existing swaps with a notional amount of $2.5 billion and entered into new swaps with a notional amount of $4.3 billion as part of our overall risk management strategy. These amounts exclude $7.3 billion of terminations and additions related to the transition of our swap portfolio from swaps that were indexed to LIBOR to swaps that are indexed to SOFR in the fourth quarter of 2021, as well as terminations and additions of forward starting swaps. Daily variation margin payment for interest rate swaps is characterized as settlement of the derivative itself rather than collateral and is recorded as a realized gain or loss in our consolidated statement of operations. We realized a net gain of $185.2 million on interest rate swaps during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to rising interest rates.
We enter into currency forward contracts to help mitigate the potential impact of changes in foreign currency exchange rates on investments denominated in foreign currencies. As of December 31, 2021, we had €11.7 million or $13.6 million (2020: €27.8 million or $33.1 million) of notional amount of forward contracts related to our investment in an unconsolidated venture. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we settled currency forward contracts of €70.8 million or $84.8 million (2020: €83.4 million or $93.4 million) in notional amount and realized a net gain of $209,000 (2020: $1.3 million net loss).
Capital Activities
In February 2021, we completed a public offering of 27,600,000 shares of common stock at the price of $3.75 per share. Total net proceeds were approximately $103.1 million after deducting estimated offering costs.
In June 2021, we completed a public offering of 43,125,000 shares of common stock at the price of $3.39 per share. Total net proceeds were approximately $145.9 million after deducting offering expenses.
On June 16, 2021, we redeemed all issued and outstanding shares of our Series A Preferred Stock for $140.0 million plus accrued and unpaid dividends. The cash redemption price for each share of Series A Preferred Stock was 25.00. The excess of the consideration transferred over carrying value was accounted for as a deemed dividend and resulted in a reduction of $4.7 million in net income (loss) attributable to common stockholders during the year ended December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we may sell up to 56,865,980 shares of our common stock and 5,500,000 shares of our preferred stock from time to time in at-the-market or privately negotiated transactions under our equity distribution agreement with placement agents. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 55,744,020 shares of common stock for proceeds of $180.5 million, net of approximately $2.6 million in commissions and fees, under our equity distribution agreements. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 21,849,740 shares of common stock for proceeds of $73.7 million, net of approximately $1.2 million in commissions and fees, under our equity distribution agreements.
For information on dividends declared and paid during the year ended December 31, 2021, see Note 12 - “Stockholders' Equity” of our consolidated financial statements in Part IV, Item 15 of this report on Form 10-K.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not repurchase any shares of our common stock.
Book Value per Common Share
We calculate book value per common share as follows:
Our book value per common share decreased 24.6% as of December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020. The increase in interest rate volatility and prepayment speeds, combined with reduced investor demand for prepayment protection and the potential for an earlier than expected taper of MBS purchases from the Federal Reserve resulted in Agency RMBS sharply underperforming interest rate swap hedges during the first half of 2021. Book value per common share further decreased in the second half of 2021 as the Federal Reserve's announced tapering and subsequent acceleration of the pace of tapering in December 2021 negatively impacted Agency RMBS valuations.
Our book value per common share decreased 76.3% as of December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019 primarily due to realized and unrealized losses on investments and derivatives during the year ended December 31, 2020 resulting from the unprecedented market disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Refer to