Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
The statements contained in the following MD&A and elsewhere throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including any documents incorporated by reference, that are not historical facts, including statements about our beliefs and expectations, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the U.S. Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements include statements preceded by, followed by or that include the words “may,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “plan,” “estimate,” “target,” “project,” “intend” and similar words or expressions. In addition, any statements that refer to expectations, projections, or other characterizations of future events or circumstances are forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements, which reflect our management’s beliefs, objectives, and expectations as of the date hereof, are based on the best judgement of our management. All forward-looking statements speak only as of the date on which they are made. Such forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions relating to factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in such statements, including, without limitation, the following: economic, social and political conditions, global economic downturns resulting from extraordinary events such as the COVID-19 pandemic and other securities industry risks; interest rate risks; liquidity risks; credit risk with clients and counterparties; risk of liability for errors in clearing functions; systemic risk; systems failures, delays and capacity constraints; network security risks; competition; reliance on external service providers; new laws and regulations affecting our business; net capital requirements; extensive regulation, regulatory uncertainties and legal matters; failure to maintain relationships with employees, customers, business partners or governmental entities; the inability to achieve synergies or to implement integration plans and other consequences associated with risks and uncertainties detailed in our filings with the SEC, including our most recent filings on Forms 10 and 10-Q.
We caution that the foregoing list of factors is not exclusive, and new factors may emerge, or changes to the foregoing factors may occur, that could impact our business. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise these statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except to the extent required by the federal securities laws.
Certain information contained in this discussion and elsewhere in this report may include “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and is subject to the safe harbor created by that act. The safe harbor created by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act will not apply to certain “forward looking statements” because we issued “penny stock” (as defined in Section 3(a)(51) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 3(a)(51-1) under the Exchange Act) during the three year period preceding the date(s) on which those forward looking statements were first made, except to the extent otherwise
specifically provided by rule, regulation or order of the Securities and Exchange Commission. We caution readers that certain important factors may affect our actual results and could cause such results to differ materially from any forward-looking statements which may be deemed to have been made in this Report or which are otherwise made by or on our behalf. For this purpose, any statements contained in this report that are not statements of historical fact may be deemed to be forward-looking statements. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “explore,” “consider,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” “plan,” or “propose” or the negative variations of those words or comparable terminology are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Factors that may affect our results include, but are not limited to, the risks and uncertainties associated with:
·Our ability to raise capital necessary to sustain our anticipated operations and implement our business plan,
·Our ability to implement our business plan,
·Our ability to generate sufficient cash to survive,
·The degree and nature of our competition,
·The lack of diversification of our business plan,
·The general volatility of the capital markets and the establishment of a market for our shares, and
·Disruption in the economic and financial conditions primarily from the impact of past terrorist attacks in the United States, threats of future attacks, police and military activities overseas and other disruptive worldwide political and economic events and environmental weather conditions.
We are also subject to other risks detailed from time to time in our other filings with Securities and Exchange Commission and elsewhere in this report. Any one or more of these uncertainties, risks and other influences could materially affect our results of operations and whether forward-looking statements made by us ultimately prove to be accurate. Our actual results, performance and achievements could differ materially from those expressed or implied in these forward-looking statements. We undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether from new information, future events or otherwise.
Plan of Operation
The Company is currently focused on designing and developing biometric locking wallets and related physical, personal security products, and providing consulting services in connection with protective wallets and other personal security products.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
We had $69,400 and $0 of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cost of Sales
We had $27,450 and $0 of cost of sales for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as a percentage of revenue, it was 39.6% and 0%, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $245,731 and $10,007, respectively. The increase in expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 were comprised primarily of cost of getting the Company’s filings with the SEC current.
Other Income (Expenses)
Other expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $143,045 and $60,151, respectively. The loss on settlement of accounts payable of $78,050 was the difference between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Net Loss
Net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $346,826 and $70,158, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We had a cash balance of $49,658 and negative working capital of $801,814 at December 31, 2021.
The Company’s anticipated capital requirements for the next 12 months will consist of expenses of being a public company and general and administrative expenses all of which we currently estimate will cost $250,000, excluding revenue related expenses and salaries. In the event there are unanticipated expenses and we need additional funds, we may seek to raise additional funding that we require in the form of equity financing from the sale of our common stock. However, we cannot provide investors with any assurance that we will be able to raise sufficient funding from the sale of our common stock to fund such additional expenses. We currently do not have any agreements, arrangements or understandings with any person or entity to obtain funds through bank loans, lines of credit or any other sources.
Sources and Uses of Cash
Operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 provided $37,668 of net cash. Net cash used in investing activities was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Operating activities during the period ended December 31, 2020 used $8,078 of net cash. Net cash used in investing activities was $0 for the period ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities was $0 for the period ended December 31, 2020.
The Company has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and some of its earlier plans to further diversify its operations and expand its operating subsidiaries have been paused due to the economic uncertainty.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues, or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and the Company’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and operating results require the Company’s management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in its financial statements and accompanying notes. Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Financial Statements on the audited financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020included in this Form 10-K, describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and such differences may be material.
Management believes the Company’s critical accounting policies and estimates are those related to revenue recognition, intangible assets, and income taxes. Management considers these policies critical because they are both important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and operating results, and they require management to make judgments and estimates about inherently uncertain matters. The Company’s management has reviewed these critical accounting policies and related disclosures.
Revenue Recognition
The Company plans to derive revenue primarily from the sale of its wallets. The Company also will derive an insignificant amount of revenue from providing engraving of the wallets. Engraving revenues will be recognized concurrent with the revenues for the related wallet. The Company also will earn revenue from consulting contracts with others desiring to operate in the smart wallet sector. Revenue is recognized in accordance with ASC 606. The Company performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the
performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. The Company applies the five-step model to arrangements that meet the definition of a contract under Topic 606, including when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, the Company evaluates the goods or services promised within each contract related performance obligation and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct. The Company recognizes as revenue, the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
Intangible Assets
Patents and trademarks are measured at cost. Legal fees associated with patents and trademarks, which are expected to be issued, are recorded as patents and trademarks on the balance sheets. Upon approval by the relevant patent office, the patents and trademarks are amortized over their respective expected lives. Patent and trademark costs associated with patents or trademarks which are not approved or are abandoned, are expensed in the period in which such patents are not approved.
The Company expects to maintain patents for up to 20 years from the effective date and the trademark registrations for as long as the trademarks remain in use and the required filings are made to keep them in use. However, based on the Company’s assessment of potential innovation or other competing technological developments a useful life of ten years has been assessed for both the patents and the trademarks.
Software consists of costs relating to the development of the software behind the biometric scanning and the other security programs involved in the wallets. Costs relating to the development of this software are capitalized and amortized over its estimated useful life of ten years.
Website development costs relating to website and mobile application and software development are also capitalized and amortized over its estimated useful life of three years.
Topic 350-20, Goodwill, and 350-30, General Intangibles Other than Goodwill, in the Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) requires intangible assets with a finite life be tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (or asset group) may not be recoverable. An impairment loss would be recognized when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the estimated discounted cash flow used in determining the fair value of the asset.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are computed in accordance with the provisions of ASC Topic 740, which requires, among other things, a liability approach to calculating deferred income taxes. The Company recognizes deferred tax liabilities and assets for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in its financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect in the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The Company is required to make certain estimates and judgments about the application of tax law, the expected resolution of uncertain tax positions and other matters. In the event that uncertain tax positions are resolved for amounts different than the Company’s estimates, or the related statutes of limitations expire without the assessment of additional income taxes, the Company will be required to adjust the amounts of the related assets and liabilities in the period in which such events occur. Such adjustments may have a material impact on the Company’s income tax provision and results of operations.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We do not expect the adoption of any recently issued accounting pronouncements to have a significant impact on our net results of operations, financial position, or cash flows.
Seasonality
We do not expect our sales to be impacted by seasonal demands for our products and services.