Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
In order to better understand the changes that occur to key elements of our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, a reader of this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be aware of the critical accounting policies we apply in preparing our consolidated financial statements.
The consolidated financial statements contained in this report were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and the financial statements of any business performing long-term professional services, engineering and construction-type contracts requires management to make certain estimates and judgments that affect both the entity’s results of operations and the carrying values of its assets and liabilities. Although our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2- Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following discussion is intended to highlight and describe those accounting policies that are especially critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Accounting for Contracts
The Company recognizes engineering, procurement, and construction contract revenue over time, as performance obligations are satisfied, due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Contracts that include engineering, procurement and construction services are generally accounted for as a single deliverable (a single performance obligation). In some instances, the Company’s services associated with a construction activity are limited only to specific tasks such as customer support, consulting or supervisory services. In these instances, the services are typically identified as separate performance obligations.
The Company recognizes revenue using the percentage-of-completion method, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs. Estimated contract costs include the Company’s latest estimates using judgments with respect to labor hours and costs, materials, and subcontractor costs. The percentage-of-completion method (an input method) is the most representative depiction of the Company’s performance because it directly measures the value of the services transferred to the customer. Subcontractor materials, labor and equipment and, in certain cases, customer-furnished materials and labor and equipment are included in revenue and cost of revenue when management believes that the company is acting as a principal rather than as an agent (e.g., the company integrates the materials, labor and equipment into the deliverables promised to the customer or is otherwise primarily responsible for fulfillment and acceptability of the materials, labor and/or equipment). Under the typical payment terms of our engineering, procurement and construction contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms at periodic intervals (e.g., biweekly or monthly) and customer payments are typically due within 30 to 60 days of billing, depending on the contract.
For service contracts, the Company recognizes revenue over time using the cost-to-cost percentage-of-completion method. In some instances where the Company is standing ready to provide services, the Company recognizes revenue ratably over the service period. Under the typical payment terms of our service contracts, amounts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, and customer payments are typically due within 30 to 60 days of billing, depending on the contract.
Direct costs of contracts include all costs incurred in connection with and directly for the benefit of client contracts, including depreciation and amortization relating to assets used in providing the services required by the related projects. The level of direct costs of contracts may fluctuate between reporting periods due to a variety of factors, including the amount of pass through costs we incur during a period. On those projects where we are acting as principal for subcontract labor or third-party materials and equipment, we reflect the amounts of such items in both revenues and costs (and we refer to such costs as “pass through costs”).
Accounting for Pension Plans
The accounting for pension plans requires the use of assumptions and estimates in order to calculate periodic pension cost and the value of the plans’ assets and liabilities. These assumptions include discount rates, investment returns and projected salary increases, among others. The actuarial assumptions used in determining the funded statuses of the plans are provided in Note 13- Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
The expected rates of return on plan assets ranged from 2% to 7% for fiscal 2022 and range from 3.3% to 7.5% fiscal 2023. We believe the range of rates selected for fiscal 2023 reflects the long-term returns expected on the plans’ assets, considering recent market conditions, projected rates of inflation, the diversification of the plans’ assets, and the expected real rates of market returns. The discount rates used to compute plan liabilities ranged from 2.4% to 7.4% in fiscal 2022 and range from 2.4% to 7.4% in fiscal 2023. These assumptions represent the Company’s best estimate of the rates at which its pension obligations could be effectively settled.
Changes in the actuarial assumptions often have a material effect on the values assigned to plan assets and liabilities, and the associated pension expense. For example, if the discount rate used to value the net pension benefit obligation (“PBO”) at September 30, 2022 was lower or higher by 1.0%, the PBO would have been higher or lower, respectively, at that date by approximately $156.8 million for non-U.S. plans, and by approximately $23.7 million for U.S. plans. If the expected return on plan assets was lower or higher by 1.0%, the net periodic pension cost for fiscal 2022 would be higher or lower, respectively, by approximately $21.2 million for non-U.S. plans, and by approximately $3.4 million for U.S. plans. Differences between actuarial assumptions and actual performance (i.e., actuarial gains and losses) that are not recognized as a component of net periodic pension cost in the period in which such differences arise are recorded to accumulated other comprehensive income (loss) and are recognized as part of net periodic pension cost in future periods in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Management monitors trends in the marketplace within which our pension plans operate in an effort to assure the reasonableness of the actuarial assumptions used.
Redeemable Noncontrolling Interests
In connection with the PA Consulting investment, the Company recorded redeemable noncontrolling interests, representing the interest holders' 35% equity interest in the form of preferred and common shares of PA Consulting. The preferred shares are entitled to a cumulative annual compounding 12% dividend based on the outstanding preferred share subscription price. These interest holders have certain option rights to put the preferred and common share interests back to the Company at a value based on the fair value of PA Consulting (the redemption values). The primary inputs and assumptions impacting the fair value of PA Consulting include projections of revenue and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization and discount rates applied thereto. Additionally, the Company has an option to call the interests for certain individual shareholders in certain circumstances. Because the interests are redeemable at the option of the holders and not solely within the control of the Company, the Company classified the interests in redeemable noncontrolling interests within its Consolidated Balance Sheet at their redemption values. The optional redemption features may become exercisable no earlier than five years from the March 2, 2021 closing date, or upon the occurrence of certain other events.
The Company has deemed these interests probable of becoming redeemable in the future and requiring their measurement at the greater of (i) the redemption amount that would be paid if settlement occurred at the balance sheet date, or (ii) the historical value resulting from the original acquisition date fair value plus the impact of any earnings or loss attribution amounts, including dividends. The fair value of the PA Consulting redeemable noncontrolling interest is determined using a combination of the income and market approaches. Under the income approach, fair value is determined by using the projected discounted cash flows of PA Consulting. Under the market approach, the fair value is determined by reference to guideline companies that are reasonably comparable to PA Consulting; the fair value is estimated based on the valuation multiples of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.
Litigation, Investigations, and Insurance
In the normal course of business, we make contractual commitments, and on occasion we are a party in litigation or arbitration proceedings. The litigation in which we are involved primarily includes personal injury claims, professional liability claims, and breach of contract claims. We are also routinely subject to investigations and audits.
We maintain insurance coverage for most insurable aspects of our business and operations. Our insurance programs have varying coverage limits depending upon the type of insurance, and include certain conditions and exclusions which insurance companies may raise in response to any claim that the Company brings. We have also elected to retain a portion of certain losses, claims and liabilities that occur through the use of various deductibles, limits, and retentions under our insurance programs and utilize a number of internal financing mechanisms for these self insurance arrangements including the operation of certain captive insurance entities. As a result, we may be subject to a future liability for which we are only partially insured or completely uninsured. We intend to mitigate any such future liability by continuing to exercise prudent business judgment in negotiating the terms and conditions of the contracts which the Company enters with its clients. Our insurers are also subject to business risk and, as a result, one or more of them may be unable to fulfill their insurance obligations due to insolvency or otherwise.
Our Consolidated Balance Sheets include amounts representing our probable estimated liability relating to such claims, litigation, audits, and investigations. Our estimates of probable liabilities require us to make assumptions related to potential losses regarding our determination of amounts considered probable and estimable.
The Company believes, after consultation with counsel, that such litigation, U.S. government contract-related audits, investigations and claims, and income tax audits and investigations should not have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements, beyond amounts currently accrued.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the fair value of consideration transferred, plus the fair value of any non-controlling interests in the acquiree, over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. We recognize purchased intangible assets in connection with our business acquisitions at fair value on the acquisition date.
The goodwill carried on our Consolidated Balance Sheets is tested annually for possible impairment, and on an interim basis if indicators of possible impairment exist. For purposes of impairment testing, goodwill is assigned to the applicable reporting units based on the current reporting structure. In performing the annual impairment test, we evaluate our goodwill at the reporting unit level. The Company performs the annual goodwill impairment test for the reporting units at the beginning of the fourth quarter of its fiscal year.
We evaluate impairment of goodwill either by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or by performing a quantitative assessment. Qualitative factors include industry and market considerations, overall financial performance, and other relevant events and circumstances affecting the reporting unit. If we choose to perform a qualitative assessment and after considering the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we would perform a quantitative fair value test.
U.S. GAAP does not prescribe a specific valuation method for estimating the fair value of reporting units. Any valuation technique used to estimate the fair value of a reporting unit requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, operating margins, discount rates and future market conditions, among others.
We use income and market approaches to test our goodwill for possible impairment which requires us to make estimates and judgments. Under the income approach, fair value is determined by using the discounted cash flows of our reporting units. The Company’s discount rate reflects a weighted average cost of capital (“WACC”) for a peer group of companies representative of the Company’s respective reporting units. Under the market approach, the fair values of our reporting units are determined by reference to guideline companies that are reasonably comparable to our reporting units; the fair values are estimated based on the valuation multiples of the invested capital associated with the guideline companies. In assessing whether there is an indication that the carrying value of goodwill has been impaired, we utilize the results of both valuation techniques and consider the range of fair values indicated.
It is possible that changes in facts and circumstances, judgments and assumptions used in estimating the fair value, including with respect to market conditions and the economy, could change, resulting in possible impairment of goodwill in the future. The fair values resulting from the valuation techniques used are not necessarily representative of the values we might obtain in a sale of the reporting units to willing third parties.
For the 2022 fiscal year, we have determined that the fair value of our reporting units substantially exceeded their respective carrying values for the Consolidated Balance Sheets presented and any analysis beyond the qualitative level was not considered necessary.
Intangible assets with finite lives that arise from business acquisitions are amortized based on the period over which the contractual or economic benefit of the intangible assets are expected to be realized or on a straight-line basis over the useful lives of the underlying assets. These primarily consist of customer relationships, contracts and backlog, developed technology and trade names. We assess the recoverability of the unamortized balance of our intangible assets when indicators of impairment are present based on expected future profitability and undiscounted expected cash flows and their contribution to overall operations. Should the review indicate that the carrying value is not fully recoverable, the excess of the carrying value over the fair value of the intangible assets would be recognized as an impairment loss.
JACOBS SOLUTIONS INC. AND SUBSIDIARIES
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF EARNINGS
For the Fiscal Years Ended September 30, 2022, October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020
(In thousands, except per share information)
2022 Overview
Net earnings attributable to the Company from continuing operations for fiscal 2022 were $644.1 million (or $4.98 per diluted share), an increase of $177.0 million, or 37.9%, from $467.0 million (or $3.12 per diluted share) for the prior year. The current year results reflected higher year-over-year operating profit of $229.8 million, which benefited from the full-year operating results impact of the Company's PA Consulting investment acquired on March 2, 2021, the absence of one-time deal and related other charges in the 2021 fiscal period associated with this investment of approximately $297 million, including one-time compensation charges of $261 million and favorable year over year operating results for the remaining Jacobs businesses, primarily in P&PS, as discussed below in the Segment Financial Information section. These favorable operating profit impacts were offset in part by higher year-over-year Restructuring and other charges and transaction costs (excluding the above mentioned one-time deal and related PA Consulting investment costs) in the current year, including pre-tax settlement charges associated with the Legacy CH2M Matter (as defined in Note 19 - Contractual Guarantees, Litigation, Investigations and Insurance) of $91.3 million, approximately $27 million in third party recoveries was recorded as receivables reducing selling, general & administrative expense (SG&A), $78.4 million associated with the Company's transformation initiatives relating to real estate rescaling (see Note 17 - Restructuring and Other Charges) and year-over-year increases in intangibles amortization costs of $48.8 million which was due mainly to full year impacts of acquired intangible assets from the PA Consulting investment.
Other income (expense), net was unfavorable $(49.0) million for the current year compared to corresponding fiscal 2021 amounts, due mainly to pre-tax fair value gains associated with our former investments in Worley stock (net of Worley stock dividend and related foreign exchange items) which was sold in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, and C3 (as defined in Note 8- Joint ventures, VIEs and other investments) of $34.7 million and $49.6 million, respectively, as well as higher interest expense of $27.5 million in the current year compared to the prior year due to higher outstanding levels of debt outstanding and higher interest rates. Additionally, current year fiscal 2022 other income (expense) benefited from the absence of the prior year $38.6 million impairment charges of our investment in AWE Management Ltd. ("AWE ML") as well as a $13.9 million gain on sale of a cost investment and other favorable items during the current fiscal 2022 year-to-date period.
Income taxes were lower in the current year by $(113.9) million due primarily to the absence of fiscal 2021 income taxes attributable to certain nondeductible compensation related charges associated with the Company's PA Consulting investment, and fiscal 2021 $25.6 million in tax law changes enacted in the United Kingdom and the prior year change in valuation allowance of $38.9 million and other miscellaneous favorable tax items combined with current year-to-date tax benefits of $33.1 million for a change in the realizability of foreign tax credits due to a change in the U.S. foreign tax credit regulations and $26.0 million for a change in judgment on the realizability of domestic deferred tax assets which are capital in nature.
Finally, unfavorable year-over-year net earnings impacts associated with redeemable noncontrolling interests of $120.0 million were attributable mainly to the absence of the 2021 period redeemable noncontrolling interests in connection with the non-controlling interest portion of the one-time compensation charges incurred in the PA Consulting investment mentioned above of approximately $91 million, as well as the impact of the full year-to-date effects of the redeemable noncontrolling interests share of PA Consulting's operating results in fiscal 2022. Fiscal 2021 earnings per share was impacted by the $(0.44) per share impact of the value allocation update between preferred and common shares for the PA Consulting investment.
For discussion of discontinued operations, see Note 17 - Sale of Energy, Chemicals and Resources ("ECR") Business.
On February 4, 2022, the Company acquired StreetLight Data, Inc. ("StreetLight") and on November 19, 2021, a subsidiary of Jacobs acquired BlackLynx ("BlackLynx"). For further discussion, see Note 15- Other Business Combinations.
Backlog at September 30, 2022 was $27.9 billion, up $1.2 billion, from $26.6 billion for the prior year. New prospects and new sales remain strong, and the Company continues to have a positive outlook for many of the industry groups and sectors in which our clients operate.
The Company continues to evaluate its leased office space for possible abandonment or sublease options and believes that further programs associated with these activities may be entered into in fiscal 2023, which could result in future significant right of use asset impairment charges and lease related property, equipment & improvements.
Results of Operations
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Revenues for the year ended September 30, 2022 were $14.92 billion, an increase of $830.2 million, or 5.9%, from $14.09 billion for the prior year. The increase in revenues was due mainly to fiscal 2022 incremental revenues from the PA Consulting investment completed in March 2021, the Buffalo Group acquisition in November 2020, and the StreetLight and BlackLynx acquisitions in fiscal year 2022, as well as revenue benefits from increased spending in our U.S. government business sector client base. These increases in revenues for the current year were partially offset by declines in pass through revenues in our P&PS advanced facilities business. Additionally, the current fiscal year was unfavorably impacted by (1) certain large contract wind downs in the U.S and (2) foreign currency translation of $346.3 million in our international businesses, as compared to favorable impacts of $238.6 million for the corresponding period last year.
Pass through costs included in revenues for the year ended September 30, 2022 were $2.32 billion, in comparison to $2.38 billion in the prior year. In general, pass through costs are more significant on projects that have a higher content of field services activities. Pass through costs are generally incurred at specific points during the life cycle of a project and are highly dependent on the needs of our individual clients and the nature of the clients’ projects. However, because we have hundreds of projects that start at various times within a fiscal year, the effect of pass through costs on the level of direct costs of contracts can vary between fiscal years without there being a fundamental or significant change to the underlying business.
Gross profit for the year ended September 30, 2022 was $3.33 billion, up $283.3 million, or 9.3%, from $3.04 billion for the prior year. Our gross profit margins were 22.3% and 21.6% for the years ended September 30, 2022 and October 1, 2021, respectively. The increase in our gross profit and gross profit margins were mainly attributable to the current year impacts of the recent business acquisitions mentioned above and favorable impacts from the business results of our PA Consulting investment on a year-to-date basis along with revenue benefits from increased spending in the U.S. government business sector noted above. The increases in gross profit during the current year were partially offset by the impacts from the recent large contract wind downs in the U.S. mentioned above, as well as increases in labor costs associated with moderation of COVID-19 mitigation efforts and a competitive labor market along with inflation impacts and incremental investments to support projected top-line growth.
See Segment Financial Information discussion for further information on the Company’s results of operations at the operating segment level.
Selling, general & administrative expenses for the year ended September 30, 2022 were $2.41 billion, an increase of $53.5 million, or 2.3%, from $2.36 billion for the prior year. The current year's results were impacted by incremental SG&A expenses from the business acquisitions mentioned above (mainly PA Consulting) of $150.0 million (including $48.9 million in additional amortization expense for acquired intangibles and excluding the compensation related charge discussed below) due to the prior comparable period including activity related to the acquired businesses and investment in PA Consulting only for the partial periods subsequent to the applicable acquisition date. Additionally, Restructuring and other charges for fiscal 2022 included $91.3 million pre-tax attributable to the final settlement of the Legacy CH2M Matter, approximately $27 million in third party recoveries was recorded as receivables reducing SG&A, which is further discussed in Note 19- Contractual Guarantees, Litigation, Investigations and Insurance) and $78.3 million in costs associated in part with the Company's transformation initiatives relating to real estate. Also, fiscal 2022 SG&A expenses were impacted by higher personnel costs associated with investments in advance of expected growth anticipated in late 2022 and 2023. As noted above, the prior year included Restructuring and other charges of $261 million for pre-tax costs incurred in connection with the investment in PA Consulting, in part classified as compensation costs reported in selling, general and administrative expenses. Lastly, SG&A expenses benefited from favorable foreign exchange impacts of $76.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to unfavorable impacts of $75.9 million for fiscal 2021.
Net interest expense for the year ended September 30, 2022 was $95.8 million, an increase of $26.5 million from $69.2 million for the prior year. The increase in net interest expense year over year is primarily due to the higher levels of debt outstanding due to the funding of the StreetLight and BlackLynx acquisitions and increased borrowings associated with the payment of the Legacy CH2M Matter settlement in the current year, in addition to higher interest rates. Additionally, the increase is also impacted by higher levels of average debt outstanding related to the funding of the PA Consulting investment in March of fiscal 2021.
Miscellaneous income (expense), net for the year ended September 30, 2022 was income of $54.3 million, a decrease of $22.5 million as compared to $76.7 million in income for the prior year. The $22.5 million decrease from fiscal 2021 was due primarily to impacts in the prior year periods of pre-tax unrealized gains of $34.7 million associated with our former investment in Worley stock (including the Worley stock dividend) and certain foreign currency revaluations relating to the ECR sale, which was sold during fiscal year 2021 and $49.6 million in the Company's investment holding in C3, as further discussed in Note 11 - Joint Ventures, VIEs and Other Investments, respectively. Offsetting these favorable items in the prior year was an other-than-temporary impairment charge on our investment in AWE ML of $38.6 million. Fiscal 2022 benefited primarily from a $13.9 million pre-tax gain related to a cost method investment sold during the period.
The following table reconciles total income tax expense on continuing operations using the statutory U.S. federal income tax rate to the consolidated income tax expense on continuing operations shown in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Earnings for the years ended September 30, 2022, October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020 (dollars in thousands):
The Company’s consolidated effective income tax rate for the year ended September 30, 2022 decreased to 18.4% from 39.5% for fiscal 2021. Key drivers for the year-over-year decrease in the effective tax rate include current year benefits of $33.1 million for a change in the realizability of foreign tax credits due to a change in the U.S. foreign tax credit regulations and $26.0 million for a change in judgment on the realizability of domestic deferred tax assets which are capital in nature, as compared to prior year unfavorable impacts from valuation allowances of $38.9 million. The prior year effective tax rate was also impacted by $261 million in nondeductible compensation relating to the PA investment post-completion compensation expense and $25.6 million related to tax rate changes in the United Kingdom.
Segment Financial Information
The following tables present total revenues and segment operating profit for each reportable segment (in thousands) and includes a reconciliation of segment operating profit to total U.S. GAAP operating profit by including certain corporate-level expenses and expenses relating to the Restructuring other charges (as defined in Note 17- Restructuring and Other Charges) and transaction costs (in thousands).
(1) Includes $19.5 million, net, in charges related to a legal settlement for the year ended October 1, 2021.
(2) Other corporate expenses include intangibles amortization of $198.6 million, $149.8 million and $90.6 million for the years ended September 30, 2022, October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020, respectively, with the comparative increase mainly attributable to higher amortization from the PA Consulting investment.
(3) Included in the year ended September 30, 2022 is $91.3 million pre-tax related to the final settlement of the Legacy CH2M Matter, net of previously recorded reserves, approximately $27 million in third party recoveries was recorded as receivables reducing SG&A and $78.3 million of real estate impairment charges. Included in the year ended October 1, 2021 is $297.8 million of costs incurred in connection with the investment in PA Consulting, in part classified as compensation costs. Included in the years ended October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020 were $2.4 million and $161.4 million in charges associated mainly with real estate impairments.
(4) The year ended September 30, 2022 included a $13.9 million gain related to a cost method investment sold during the period and a gain of $8.7 million related to lease terminations. The years ended October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020 include $34.7 million and $(74.3) million in fair value adjustments related to our investment in Worley stock (net of Worley stock dividends) and certain foreign currency revaluations relating to ECR sale proceeds, respectively. The year ended October 1, 2021 includes $(38.5) million related to impairment of our AWE Management Ltd. investment and $49.6 million in fair value adjustments related to our investment in C3 stock. The investments in Worley and C3 were sold in fiscal 2021 and therefore there are no comparable amounts in the current fiscal year. Additionally, the increase in net interest expense year over year is primarily due to the higher levels of debt outstanding due to the funding of the StreetLight and BlackLynx acquisitions and increased borrowings associated with the payment of the Legacy CH2M Matter settlement in the current year, in addition to higher interest rates.
In evaluating the Company’s performance by operating segment, the CODM reviews various metrics and statistical data for each Line of Business ("LOB") and PA Consulting, but focuses primarily on revenues and operating profit. As discussed above, segment operating profit includes not only local SG&A expenses but the SG&A expenses of the Company’s support groups that have been allocated to the segments. In addition, the Company attributes each segment's specific incentive compensation plan costs to the segments. The revenues of the People & Places Solutions LOB are more affected by pass through revenues than the Critical Mission Solutions LOB or the PA Consulting segment. The methods for recognizing revenue, incentive fees, project losses and change orders are consistent among the segments.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2023, the Company will begin reporting an additional operating segment, Divergent Solutions (DVS), in addition to the current operating segments.
Critical Mission Solutions
Critical Mission Solutions (CMS) segment revenues for the year ended September 30, 2022 were $5.23 billion, up $146.6 million, or 2.9%, from $5.09 billion for the prior year. Our increase in revenue was primarily attributable to recent acquisitions in addition to recent contract awards including the Department of Energy Nuclear remediation program, offset in part by several large U.S. Cyber and Intelligence contracts winding down in the U.S. Impacts on revenues from unfavorable foreign currency translation were approximately $69.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to $61.8 million in favorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
Operating profit for the segment was $424.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, down $22.8 million, or 5.1%, from $447.2 million for the prior year. The year-over-year decrease in operating profit was unfavorably impacted by the larger contract wind downs mentioned above, which carried higher profit margins. This is partly offset by new business and U.S. government contract awards during fiscal year 2022. Impacts on operating profit from unfavorable foreign currency translation were approximately $8.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to $9.7 million in favorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
People & Places Solutions
Revenues for the People & Places Solutions (P&PS) segment for the year ended September 30, 2022 were $8.57 billion, up $191.7 million, or 2.3%, from $8.38 billion for the prior year. The increase in revenues from fiscal 2021 was primarily due to higher fee-based revenue from our advanced facilities and international businesses offset in part by lower pass through revenues across the business as compared to the prior year corresponding period. Foreign currency translation had an unfavorable impact of $195.0 million on our international business for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to $176.8 million in favorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
Operating profit for the segment for the year ended September 30, 2022 was $823.6 million, an increase of $43.2 million, or 5.5%, from $780.4 million for the comparative period in fiscal 2021. The year-over-year increase was driven by the revenue growth mentioned above but partially offset by higher personnel costs associated with investments in advance of expected growth anticipated in 2023. In addition, fiscal 2021 operating profit was impacted by $19.5 million in net charges related to a legal settlement. Impacts on operating profit from unfavorable foreign currency translation were approximately $33.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to $30.9 million in favorable impacts in the corresponding prior year.
PA Consulting
Revenues for the PA Consulting segment for the year ended September 30, 2022 were $1.12 billion, up $491.9 million, or 78.4%, from $627.4 million for the prior year. The increase in revenue was due primarily to the full year-to-date impact of revenues from our March 2, 2021 investment in PA Consulting and was also due to growth in the U.K. business. Foreign currency translation had a $82.2 million unfavorable impact on revenues in our international businesses for the year ended September 30, 2022, compared to a favorable impact of $50.9 million for the corresponding prior year.
Operating profit for the segment for the year ended September 30, 2022 was $232.2 million, an increase of $81.2 million, or 53.7%, from $151.1 million, for the prior year. The increase in operating profit from the prior year was due mainly to the full year-to-date impact of operating profit from our March 2, 2021 investment in PA Consulting, offset in part by PA Consulting normalization of utilization rates during the second half of fiscal year 2022. Foreign currency translation had a $17.1 million unfavorable impact on operating profit in our international businesses for the year ended September 30, 2022 and a favorable impact of $11.8 million for the corresponding prior year.
Other Corporate Expenses
Other corporate expenses were $364.4 million, $340.1 million and $249.4 million for the years ended September 30, 2022, October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020, respectively. The increase from fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2022 was due primarily to higher intangible amortization expense from the StreetLight and BlackLynx acquisitions and the PA Consulting investment, as well as impacts from higher Company benefit program costs, partially offset by lower legal costs and reduced employee related expenses in the fourth quarter.
Included in other corporate expenses in the above table are costs and expenses that relate to general corporate activities as well as corporate-managed benefit and insurance programs. Such costs and expenses include: (i) those elements of SG&A expenses relating to the business as a whole; (ii) those elements of our incentive compensation plans relating to corporate personnel whose other compensation costs are not allocated to the LOBs; (iii) the amortization of intangible assets acquired as part of business combinations; (iv) the quarterly variances between the Company’s actual costs of certain of its self-insured integrated risk and employee benefit programs and amounts charged to the LOBs; and (v) certain adjustments relating to costs associated with the Company’s international defined benefit pension plans. In addition, other corporate expenses may also include from time to time certain adjustments to contract margins (both positive and negative) associated with projects, as well as other items, where it has been determined that such adjustments are not indicative of the performance of the related LOB.
Restructuring and Other Charges
For discussion regarding Restructuring and other charges, see Note 17- Restructuring and Other Charges to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Backlog Information
We include in backlog the total dollar amount of revenues we expect to record in the future as a result of performing work under contracts that have been awarded to us. Our policy with respect to Operations & Maintenance ("O&M") contracts, however, is to include in backlog the amount of revenues we expect to receive for one succeeding year, regardless of the remaining life of the contract. For national government programs (other than national government O&M contracts, which are subject to the same policy applicable to all other O&M contracts), our policy is to include in backlog the full contract award, whether funded or unfunded, excluding option periods. Because of variations in the nature, size, expected duration, funding commitments and the scope of services required by our contracts, the timing of when backlog will be recognized as revenues can vary greatly between individual contracts.
Consistent with industry practice, substantially all of our contracts are subject to cancellation or termination at the option of the client, including our U.S. government work. While management uses all information available to it to determine backlog, at any given time our backlog is subject to changes in the scope of services to be provided as well as increases or decreases in costs relating to the contracts included therein. Backlog is not necessarily an indicator of future revenues.
Because certain contracts (e.g., contracts relating to large Engineering, Procurement & Construction ("EPC") projects as well as national government programs) can cause large increases to backlog in the fiscal period in which we recognize the award, and because many of our contracts require us to provide services that span over several fiscal quarters (and sometimes over fiscal years), we evaluate our backlog generally on a year-over-year basis, but also on a sequential, quarter-over-quarter basis, where appropriate.
Please refer to Item 1A - Risk Factors, above, for a discussion of other factors that may cause backlog to ultimately convert into revenues at different amounts.
The following table summarizes our backlog for the years ended September 30, 2022, October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020 (in millions):
Critical Mission Solutions backlog was generally consistent and in line with the prior year comparable period backlog. Critical Mission Solutions has been awarded a number of key opportunities in the U.S. government space for the years presented.
The increase in backlog in People & Places Solutions for the years presented was primarily driven by new business awards in our advanced facilities business.
The PA Consulting backlog was unfavorably impacted by the weakening British pound throughout the second half fiscal year 2022. Excluding foreign currency impacts, PA Consulting backlog benefited from modest growth.
Backlog relating to work to be performed either directly or indirectly for the U.S. federal government and its agencies totaled approximately $10.9 billion (or 39.1% of total backlog), $10.8 billion (or 40.5% of total backlog) and $8.5 billion (or 35.7% of total backlog) at September 30, 2022, October 1, 2021 and October 2, 2020, respectively. Most of our federal government contracts require that services be provided beyond one year. In general, these contracts must be funded annually (i.e., the amounts to be spent under the contract must be appropriated by the U.S. Congress to the procuring agency, and then the agency must allot these sums to the specific contracts).
We estimate that approximately $9.40 billion, or 33.7%, of total backlog at September 30, 2022 will be realized as revenues within the next fiscal year.
Consolidated backlog differs from the Company’s remaining performance obligations as defined by ASC 606 primarily because of our national government contracts (other than national government O&M contracts). Our policy is to include in backlog the full contract award, whether funded or unfunded excluding the option periods while our remaining performance obligations represent a measure of the total dollar value of work to be performed on contracts awarded and in progress. Additionally, the Company includes our proportionate share of backlog related to unconsolidated joint ventures which is not included in our remaining performance obligations.
For a discussion on the year ended October 1, 2021 compared to the year ended October 2, 2020, please refer to Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended October 1, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At September 30, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of $1.14 billion in cash and cash equivalents and $1.14 billion of available borrowing capacity under our $2.25 billion revolving credit agreement (the "Revolving Credit Facility"). We finance much of our operations and growth through cash generated by our operations.
The amount of cash and cash equivalents at September 30, 2022 represented an increase of $126.2 million from $1.01 billion at October 1, 2021, the reasons for which are described below.
Our cash flow provided by operations of $474.7 million during fiscal 2022 was comparatively lower than the $726.3 million in cash flow provided by operations for the prior year. This change was due primarily to the Legacy CH2M Matter cash settlement paid in the current fiscal year and the impact of the PA Consulting post-completion compensation payments made during the prior fiscal year, with the absence of these two items resulting in near-flat year-over-year cash flow from operations.
Our cash used for investing activities for fiscal 2022 of $538.42 million was comparatively lower than the $1.38 billion cash used for investing activities for the prior year. The decrease was due primarily to the acquisitions of StreetLight and BlackLynx in the current year compared to the considerably larger prior year investment in PA Consulting and the Buffalo Group acquisition, partially offset by proceeds received from the Company's disposal of the Worley and C3 investments and the final ECR sale working capital settlement in fiscal 2021.
Our cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended 2022 of $320.2 million resulted mainly from net proceeds from borrowings of $719.0 million primarily in connection with the StreetLight and BlackLynx acquisitions and funding of the Legacy CH2M Matter cash settlement, offset by cash used for share repurchases of $281.9 million and $115.9 million in dividends to shareholders. Cash provided by financing activities was $799.0 million in fiscal 2021 and resulted mainly from net proceeds from borrowings of $1.22 billion, partially offset by common stock repurchases of $274.9 million and dividend payments to shareholders of $107.2 million.
At September 30, 2022, the Company had approximately $230.5 million in cash and cash equivalents held in the U.S. and $909.9 million held outside of the U.S. (primarily in the U.K., the Eurozone, Australia, India, Japan, Israel, Canada and the United Arab Emirates), which is used primarily for funding operations in those regions. Other than the tax cost of repatriating funds to the U.S. (see Note 7- Income Taxes of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements beginning on page of this Annual Report on Form 10-K), there are no material impediments to repatriating these funds to the U.S.
In connection with the Company's implementation of a new holding company structure, which was completed in August 2022, the Company launched an offer to repurchase its outstanding Senior Notes, as defined in Note 9, Borrowings, at par plus accrued and unpaid interest, and without any make-whole premium. On October 7, 2022, the Company repaid $481 million of Senior Notes held by holders who accepted the offer with proceeds from our long-term Revolving Credit Facility.
On April 12, 2022, the Company paid cash of AUD640 million, or approximately $475 million using mid-April 2022 exchange rates, which represented the final settlement of Legacy CH2M Matter. For more information, refer to Note 19- Contractual Guarantees, Litigation, Investigations and Insurance.
On February 4, 2022, the Company acquired StreetLight Data, Inc. ("StreetLight"). StreetLight is a pioneer of mobility analytics who uses its data and machine learning resources to shed light on mobility and enable users to solve complex transportation problems. The Company paid total base consideration of approximately $190.7 million in cash, and issued $0.9 million in equity and $5.2 million in in-the-money stock options to the former owners of StreetLight. The Company also paid off StreetLight's debt of approximately $1.0 million simultaneously with the consummation of the acquisition.
On November 19, 2021, Jacobs acquired BlackLynx, a provider of high-performance software, to complement Jacobs' portfolio of cyber, intelligence and digital solutions. The Company paid total base consideration of approximately $235.4 million in cash to the former owners of BlackLynx. In conjunction with the acquisition, the Company also paid off BlackLynx's debt of approximately $5.3 million simultaneously with the consummation of the acquisition.
On March 2, 2021, Jacobs completed the strategic investment of a 65% interest in PA Consulting, a UK-based leading innovation and transformation consulting firm. The total consideration paid by the Company was$1.7 billion, funded through cash on hand, a new term loan and draws on the Company's existing revolver. The remaining 35% interest is held by PA Consulting employees. See Note 14- PA Consulting Business Combination for more discussion on the investment and Note 9- Borrowings for more discussion on the financing for the transaction.
On January 20, 2021, the Company entered into an unsecured delayed draw term loan facility (the “2021 Term Loan Facility”) with a syndicate of financial institutions as lenders. Under the 2021 Term Loan Facility, the Company borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $200.0 million and £650.0 million. The proceeds of the term loans were used primarily to fund the investment in PA Consulting. The 2021 Term Loan Facility contains affirmative and negative covenants and events of default customary for financings of this type that are consistent with those included in the Revolving Credit Facility and the Company’s unsecured term loan facility dated March 25, 2020 (the “2020 Term Loan Facility”). The 2020 Term Loan Facility and the 2021 Term Loan Facility are together referred to as the "Term Loan Facilities".
On November 24, 2020, a subsidiary of Jacobs completed the acquisition of Buffalo Group, a leader in advanced cyber and intelligence solutions which allows Jacobs to further expand its cyber and intelligence solutions offerings to government clients. The Company paid total consideration of $190.1 million, which was comprised of approximately $182.4 million in cash to the former owners of Buffalo Group and contingent consideration of $7.7 million which was expected to be settled in fiscal 2022. See Note 15- Other Business Combinations for further discussion.
The Company had $280.5 million in letters of credit outstanding at September 30, 2022. Of this amount, $1.3 million was issued under the Revolving Credit Facility and $279.2 million was issued under separate, committed and uncommitted letter-of-credit facilities.
We believe we have adequate liquidity and capital resources to fund our projected cash requirements for the next twelve months based on the liquidity provided by our cash and cash equivalents on hand, our borrowing capacity and our continuing cash from operations.
We were in compliance with all of our debt covenants at September 30, 2022.
New Accounting Pronouncements
ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform, (Topic 848): Facilitation of the Effects of Reference Rate Reform on Financial Reporting is intended to provide relief for entities impacted by reference rate reform and contains provisions and optional expedients designed to simplify requirements around designation of hedging relationships, probability assessments of hedged forecasted transactions and accounting for modifications of contracts that refer to LIBOR or other rates affected by reference rate reform. The guidance is elective and is effective on the date of issuance. ASU 2020-04 is applied prospectively to contract modifications and as of the effective date for existing and new eligible hedging relationships. The guidance is temporary and will generally not be applicable to contract modifications which occur after December 31, 2022. The adoption of the new guidance in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 allowed the Company to continue its British pound denominated interest rate hedge relationships which previously defined LIBOR as the benchmark interest rate and in December 2021 were amended to replace LIBOR with the Sterling Overnight Index Average rate ("SONIA").
ASU No. 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers, is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, with early adoption permitted. ASU 2021-08 requires contract assets and contract liabilities (i.e., deferred revenue) acquired in a business combination to be recognized and measured by the acquirer on the acquisition date in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Generally, this new guidance will result in the acquirer recognizing contract assets and contract liabilities at the same amounts recorded by the acquiree. The Company adopted the new guidance in the first quarter of fiscal 2022 and the adoption had no impact on the Company's financial position, results of operations or cash flows.