ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
GENERAL
For an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the fiscal year, we believe our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this annual report as indexed on page.
Comparisons under this heading refer to the 52-week period ended October 2, 2022 for the fiscal year 2022 and 53-week period ended October 3, 2021 for the fiscal year 2021. A comparison of our results of operations and cash flows for fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 can be found under Part II, “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended October 3, 2021.
Our MD&A consists of the following sections:
•Overview - a general description of our business.
•Results of Operations - an analysis of our consolidated statements of earnings for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources - an analysis of our cash flows, including capital expenditures, share repurchase activity, dividends, and known trends that may impact liquidity.
•Critical Accounting Estimates - a discussion of accounting policies that require critical judgments and estimates.
We have included in our MD&A certain performance metrics that management uses to assess company performance and which we believe will be useful in analyzing and understanding our results of operations. These metrics include:
•Changes in sales at restaurants open more than one year (“same-store sales”), system restaurant sales, franchised restaurant sales, and average unit volumes (“AUVs”). Same-store sales, restaurant sales, and AUVs are presented for franchised restaurants. Franchise sales represent sales at franchise restaurants and are revenues of our franchisees. We do not record franchise sales as revenues; however, our royalty revenues and percentage rent revenues are calculated based on a percentage of franchise sales. We believe franchise and system same-store sales, franchised and system-wide sales, and AUV information are useful to investors as they have a direct effect on the Company’s profitability.
•Adjusted EBITDA represents net earnings on a generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) basis excluding income taxes, interest expense, net, gains on the sale of company-operated restaurants, other operating expense (income), net, depreciation and amortization, amortization of favorable and unfavorable leases and subleases, net, and amortization of franchise tenant improvement allowances and incentives. We are presenting Adjusted EBITDA because we believe that it provides a meaningful supplement to net earnings of the Company's core business operating results, as well as a comparison to those of other similar companies. Management believes that Adjusted EBITDA, when viewed with the Company's results of operations in accordance with GAAP and the accompanying reconciliations within MD&A, provides useful information about operating performance and period-over-period change, and provides additional information that is useful for evaluating the operating performance of the Company's core business without regard to potential distortions. Additionally, management believes that Adjusted EBITDA permits investors to gain an understanding of the factors and trends affecting our ongoing cash earnings, from which capital investments are made and debt is serviced.
Same-store sales, system restaurant sales, franchised restaurant sales, AUVs, and Adjusted EBITDA are not measurements determined in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation, or as an alternative to earnings from operations, or other similarly titled measures of other companies.
OVERVIEW
Our Business
Founded in 1951, Jack in the Box Inc. (the “Company”) operates and franchises Jack in the Box® quick-service restaurants. As of October 2, 2022, we operated and franchised 2,181 Jack in the Box quick-service restaurants, primarily in the western and southern United States, including two in Guam. On March 8, 2022, we completed the acquisition of Del Taco Restaurants, Inc. (“Del Taco”), the nation’s second largest Mexican quick service restaurant chain by number of restaurants and as of October 2, 2022 has 591 restaurants across 15 states, including one in Guam.
We derive revenue from retail sales at company-operated restaurants and rental revenue, royalties (based upon a percent of sales), franchise fees and contributions for advertising and other services from franchisees.
Impact of COVID-19
The COVID-19 pandemic has continued to have varying degrees of disruption on our business. Our business has continued to be challenged by availability and cost of labor resulting in occasional temporarily closed restaurants and reduced operating hours. We have continued to have limited shortages in our supply chain; however, inflationary pressures have continued to have a significant impact on our business.
We expect these operating margin pressures due to labor and supply chain challenges to continue in fiscal 2023.
Other Developments
As previously announced, a franchisee that operated 68 restaurants in Missouri and Illinois filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy in February 2021. On July 18, 2022, the Court approved the franchisee’s plan of reorganization with the same terms we previously agreed to in May 2022. The reorganization plan includes a waiver of a portion of damages associated with the rejected locations, reduced royalties following plan confirmation, and the settlement of the remaining cure costs via a secured note upon emergence from bankruptcy, in addition to deferring all amounts owed under the franchise agreements starting in February through the bankruptcy resolution date. The secured note provides for repayment based on a calculation of net free cash flows generated from the franchisee’s restaurants. To the extent future net free cash flows are insufficient to satisfy the secured note at a future specified date, then we agreed to waive any remaining balance due to the Company.
Based on the events above, we concluded that the collectability of the deferrals starting in February 2022 were doubtful and therefore no revenue has been recognized. Furthermore, we increased our bad debt reserve related to this matter to fully reserve the $3.8 million owed to the Company.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR FISCAL 2022 AND 2021
The following table summarizes changes in same-store sales for Jack in the Box company-operated, franchised, and system restaurants:
The following table summarizes changes in the number and mix of Jack in the Box company and franchise restaurants:
The following table summarizes restaurant sales for Jack in the Box company-operated, franchised, and systemwide sales (in thousands):
________________________
(1)Franchised restaurant sales represent sales at franchised restaurants and are revenues of our franchisees. System sales include company and franchised restaurant sales. We do not record franchised sales as revenues; however, our royalty revenues, marketing fees and percentage rent revenues are calculated based on a percentage of franchised sales. We believe franchised and system restaurant sales information is useful to investors as they have a direct effect on the Company's profitability.
Below is a reconciliation of Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, net earnings (in thousands):
Jack in the Box Brand
Company Restaurant Operations
The following table presents company restaurant sales and costs as a percentage of the related sales (dollars in thousands):
Company restaurant sales increased $26.5 million, or 6.8%, in 2022 as compared with the prior year. In 2022, the increase was primarily menu price increases and an increase in the average number of restaurants, partially offset by the impact of the 53rd week and a decline in traffic and average check. The following table presents the approximate impact of these items on company restaurant sales in 2022 (in millions):
Same-store sales at company-operated restaurants increased 3.7% in 2022 compared to a year ago. The following table summarizes the increases (decreases) in company-operated same-store sales:
________________________
(1)Includes price increases of 8.4% in 2022.
Food and packaging costs as a percentage of company restaurant sales increased by 3.2% to 32.3% in 2022 from 29.1% a year ago, primarily due to an increase in commodities of 3.5% and unfavorable sales mix of 2.2%; partially offset by a 2.5% menu price increase.
Commodity costs increased in the current fiscal year by approximately 14.4%. The inflation we have experienced is across all categories with the greatest impact seen in proteins, sauces, and oils. For fiscal 2023, we expect annual commodity cost inflation on a company-wide basis to be up 9% to 11% compared with fiscal 2022.
Payroll and employee benefit costs as a percentage of company restaurant sales increased to 33.3% in 2022 compared with 30.7% a year ago primarily due to labor inflation and a change in the mix of restaurants due to franchisee acquisitions. Labor inflation was approximately 12.3% in the current fiscal year. For fiscal 2023, we expect annual wage inflation on a company-wide basis to be up 3% to 6% compared with fiscal 2022.
Occupancy and other costs as a percentage of company restaurant sales increased to 17.9% in 2022 from 15.9% a year ago primarily due to the acquisition of 13 restaurants since a year ago with lower than average sales volumes, and higher costs for maintenance and repair and utilities.
Jack in the Box Franchise Operations
The following table presents franchise revenues and costs in each fiscal year and other information we believe is useful in analyzing the change in franchise operating results (dollars in thousands):
________________________
(1) 2021 AUV is adjusted to exclude the 53rd week for comparison purposes.
Franchise rental revenues decreased $10.7 million, or 3.1%, in 2022 compared to the prior year, primarily due to additional rent revenue of approximately $6.5 million from a 53rd week in the prior year as well as a decrease of $3.3 million in connection with a franchisee in bankruptcy proceedings for which revenue will be recognized upon payment.
Franchise royalties and other decreased $1.5 million, or 0.7%, primarily due to additional royalties in the prior year of approximately $3.6 million from a 53rd week and a deferral of $1.0 million in connection with a franchisee bankruptcy matter; partially offset by higher termination fees of $3.9 million in the current year.
Franchise contributions for advertising and other services decreased $6.7 million, or 3.3%, primarily due to higher contributions in the prior year of approximately $3.5 million from a 53rd week, a decrease in the number of franchise restaurants and deferrals in connection with the franchisee bankruptcy matter.
Franchise occupancy expenses, primarily rent, decreased $3.7 million, or 1.7% in 2022, primarily due to higher costs of $4.0 million in the prior year from the 53rd week; partially offset by higher property taxes in the current year.
Franchise support and other costs increased $2.6 million, or 19.7% in 2022, primarily due to an increase in franchise bad debt expense of $4.1 million as a result of two specific franchise matters; partially offset by lower costs for outside services in the current year.
Franchise advertising and other service expenses decreased $4.1 million, or 2.0% in 2022 primarily due to marketing contributions of $4.0 million from the 53rd week in the prior year.
Del Taco Brand
As of October 2, 2022, there were 290 company-operated and 301 franchise-operated Del Taco restaurants. For the periods subsequent to the acquisition that are included in our 2022 results, system same-store sales increased 3.7% and total revenues and segment operating profit were $316.9 million and $28.0 million, respectively.
Company-Wide Results
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization increased $9.6 million in 2022 as compared with the prior year, primarily due to the acquisition of Del Taco, contributing an additional $16.2 million of depreciation in the year; partially offset by lower Jack in the Box depreciation as a result of certain franchise buildings becoming fully depreciated.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses
The following table presents the increase (decrease) in SG&A expenses in 2022 compared with the prior year (in thousands):
Advertising costs represent company contributions to our marketing funds and are generally determined as a percentage of company-operated restaurant sales. Advertising costs, on a comparable 52-week basis, increased $12.4 million primarily due to the acquisition of Del Taco which resulted in higher advertising costs of $11.6 million during the year.
Incentive compensation decreased by $2.0 million in 2022 primarily due to a $5.1 million decrease from lower achievement levels compared to the prior year for the Company’s annual incentive plan; partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation of $3.1 million due to a higher number of executive stock awards outstanding compared to the prior year.
The cash surrender value of our Company-owned life insurance (“COLI”) policies, net of changes in our non-qualified deferred compensation obligation supported by these policies, are subject to market fluctuations. The changes in market values had a negative impact of $19.1 million versus the prior year.
Litigation matters decreased by $4.9 million in 2022 primarily due to a $2.6 million favorable settlement received in the current year as well as lower costs on certain employee and other litigation matters compared to the prior year. Refer to Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Insurance costs increased $2.0 million in 2022 versus the prior year primarily due to more favorable trends in the prior year related to expected losses associated with workers’ compensation claims.
The increase in other is primarily due to the acquisition of Del Taco in the second quarter which resulted in an increase of additional general and administrative costs of $21.4 million in 2022 compared to the prior year.
Other Operating Expense (Income), Net
Other operating expense (income), net is comprised of the following (in thousands):
Other operating expense (income), net increased $4.3 million in 2022 versus the prior year primarily due to $20.1 million of costs incurred during the year relating to the acquisition and integration of Del Taco, higher restaurant impairment charges of $5.9 million primarily due to closures of certain Jack in the Box company and franchise restaurants; partially offset by higher gains on the disposition of property and equipment of $23.6 million from the sale of Jack in the Box restaurant properties to franchisees. Refer to Note 9, Other Operating Expense (Income), Net, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Gains on the Sale of Company-Operated Restaurants
In 2022, gains on the sale of company-operated restaurants included additional proceeds of $1.4 million related to Jack in the Box restaurants sold in prior year, in addition to gains of $2.5 million on the sale of 15 Jack in the Box restaurants during the year. In 2021, gains recognized pertained to Jack in the Box restaurants sold in a prior year. Refer to Note 4, Summary of Refranchisings and Franchise Acquisitions, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, is comprised of the following (in thousands):
Interest expense, net, increased $18.6 million in 2022 primarily due to a loss on early extinguishment of debt of $7.7 million recognized during the current year as well as higher average borrowings resulting in higher interest expense of $14.1 million; partially offset by a lower average borrowing rate in the current year resulting in a $3.0 million decrease.
Income Taxes
The income tax provisions reflect effective tax rates of 28.5% and 25.2%, in fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively. The major components of the year-over-year change in tax rates were non-deductibles losses in the current year versus non-taxable gains in the prior year from the market performance of insurance products used to fund certain non-qualified retirement plans, a decrease in the impact of excess tax benefit on stock compensation, and an increase in non-deductible transaction costs resulting from the Del Taco acquisition, partially offset by an adjustment related to state taxes recorded in the second quarter of fiscal year 2021.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
General
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash flows from operations and borrowings available under our securitized financing facility. Our cash requirements consist principally of working capital, general corporate needs, capital expenditures, income tax payments, debt service requirements, franchise tenant improvement allowance and incentive distributions, dividend payments, and obligations related to our benefit plans. We generally reinvest available cash flows from operations to invest in our business, service our debt obligations, pay dividends and repurchase shares of our common stock.
Our primary sources of short-term and long-term liquidity are expected to be cash flows from operations and available borrowings under our credit facilities. As of October 2, 2022, the Company had $136.0 million of cash and restricted cash on its consolidated balance sheet and available borrowings of $117.9 million under our $150.0 million Variable Funding Notes and our $75.0 million revolving credit facility.
The Company continually assesses the optimal sources and uses of cash for our business. Since closing the Del Taco acquisition, we have undertaken a process to review our balance sheet for any undervalued assets, and to pursue opportunities for capital sources, including sales of Jack in the Box real estate assets identified in its portfolio, and refranchising, primarily for Del Taco in the near term. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from these transactions to pay down debt, provide additional liquidity and, when market conditions normalize, for other corporate purposes including investments in growth initiatives and potential share repurchases.
Based upon current levels of operations and anticipated growth, we expect that cash flows from operations, combined with our securitized financing facility, will be sufficient to meet our capital expenditure, working capital and debt service requirements for at least the next twelve months and the foreseeable future.
Cash Flows
The table below summarizes our cash flows from continuing operations activities for each of the last two fiscal years (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Operating cash flows decreased $38.2 million compared with a year ago, primarily due to lower net income adjusted for non-cash items of $20.7 million and an unfavorable change in working capital of $17.5 million, primarily due to favorable collections in the prior year from the repayment of franchise marketing and rent payment deferrals provided in 2020 in response to the economic burden associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.
Pension and Postretirement Contributions - Our policy is to fund our pension plans at or above the minimum required by law. As of the date of our last actuarial funding valuation for our qualified pension plan, there was no minimum contribution funding requirement. In 2022 and 2021, we contributed $6.7 million and $6.1 million, respectively, to our pension and postretirement plans. We do not anticipate making any contributions to our qualified defined benefit pension plan in fiscal 2023. For additional information, refer to Note 12, Retirement Plans, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Investing Activities. Cash flows used in investing activities increased $557.7 million in 2022 compared to 2021, primarily due to $580.8 million paid for the acquisition of Del Taco, partially offset by $19.4 million higher proceeds received on the sale of property and equipment, primarily due to the sale of restaurant properties to franchisees in 2022.
Capital Expenditures - The composition of capital expenditures in each fiscal year is summarized in the table below (in thousands):
In 2022, capital expenditures increased by $5.5 million compared to a year ago, primarily due to Del Taco capital expenditures of $14.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in purchases of assets intended for sale and leaseback of $13.6 million.
Sale and Sale-leaseback Transactions - To optimize our balance sheet and capital structure, we use sales and leaseback financing and provide our franchisees the opportunity to purchase the property that we currently lease to them. In 2022, we completed sales-leaseback transactions involving four restaurant properties with proceeds of $10.8 million and completed the sale of properties to franchisees and other third parties during the year with proceeds of $31.2 million.
Financing Activities. Cash flows provided by financing activities increased by $821.7 million compared with a year ago, primarily as a result of an increase in net borrowings of $650.0 million, driven by the issuance of the 2022 Notes, and lower share repurchases of $175.0 million compared to prior year.
Repurchases of Common Stock - In fiscal 2022, the Company purchased 0.3 million shares of its common stock for an aggregate cost of $25.0 million. As of October 2, 2022, there was $175.0 million remaining under share repurchase programs authorized by the Board of Directors.
Dividends - In fiscal 2022, the Board of Directors declared four quarterly cash dividends of $0.44 per share, totaling $37.2 million. Future dividends are subject to approval by our Board of Directors.
Securitized Refinancing Transaction - On February 11, 2022, the Company completed the sale of $550.0 million of its Series 2022-1 3.445% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-I (the “Class A-2-I Notes”) and $550.0 million of its Series 2022-1 4.136% Fixed Rate Senior Secured Notes, Class A-2-II (the “Class A-2-II” and, together with the Class A-2-I Notes, the “2022 Notes”). Interest payments on the 2022 Notes are payable on a quarterly basis. The anticipated repayment dates of the Class A-2-I Notes and the Class A-2-II Notes will be February 2027 and February 2032, respectively, unless earlier prepaid to the extent permitted under the indenture that will govern the 2022 Notes.
The Company also entered into a revolving financing facility of Series 2022-1 Variable Funding Senior Secured Notes (the “Variable Funding Notes”), which permits borrowings up to a maximum of $150.0 million, subject to certain borrowing conditions, a portion of which may be used to issue letters of credit. The Company’s existing revolving financing facility of Series 2019-1 Class A-1 Notes was terminated in connection with the transaction. As of October 2, 2022, we had outstanding borrowings of $50.0 million and available borrowing capacity of $58.0 million under our 2022 Variable Funding Notes, net of letters of credits issued of $42.0 million.
The net proceeds from the sale of the 2022 Notes were used to repay in full $570.7 million in aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Company’s Series 2019-1 Class A-2-I Notes, together with the applicable make-whole premium and unpaid interest, and was used to fund a portion of the Company’s acquisition of Del Taco Restaurants, Inc.
The 2022 Notes were issued in a privately placed securitization transaction pursuant to which certain of the Company’s revenue-generating assets, consisting principally of franchise-related agreements, real estate assets, and intellectual property and license agreements for the use of intellectual property, are held by the Master Issuer and certain other limited-purpose, bankruptcy remote, wholly owned indirect subsidiaries of the Company that act as Guarantors of the Notes and that have pledged substantially all of their assets, excluding certain real estate assets and subject to certain limitations, to secure the Notes. The 2022 Notes are subject to the same covenants and restrictions as the Series 2019-1 Notes.
The quarterly principal payment on the Class A-2 Notes may be suspended when the specified leverage ratio, which is a measure of outstanding debt to earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization, adjusted for certain items (as defined in the Indenture), is less than or equal to 5.0x. Exceeding the leverage ratio of 5.0x does not violate any covenant related to the Class A-2 Notes. Subsequent to closing the issuance of the 2022 Notes, the Company has had a leverage ratio of greater than 5.0x and, accordingly, the Company resumed making the scheduled principal payments on its 2022 Notes and Series 2019-1 Notes beginning in the second quarter of 2022.
Restricted Cash - In accordance with the terms of the Indenture, certain cash accounts have been established with the Indenture trustee for the benefit of the note holders and are restricted in their use. As of October 2, 2022, the Master Issuer had restricted cash of $27.2 million, which primarily represented cash collections and cash reserves held by the trustee to be used for payments of interest and commitment fees required for the Class A-2 Notes and Variable Funding Notes.
Covenants and Restrictions - The Notes are subject to a series of covenants and restrictions customary for transactions of this type, including (i) that the Master Issuer maintains specified reserve accounts to be used to make required payments in respect of the Notes, (ii) provisions relating to optional and mandatory prepayments and the related payment of specified amounts, including specified make-whole payments in the case of the Class A-2 Notes under certain circumstances, (iii) certain indemnification payments in the event, among other things, the assets pledged as collateral for the Notes are in stated ways defective or ineffective and (iv) covenants relating to recordkeeping, access to information and similar matters. The Notes are also subject to customary rapid amortization events provided for in the Indenture, including events tied to failure to maintain stated debt service coverage ratios, the sum of gross sales for specified restaurants being below certain levels on certain measurement dates, certain manager termination events, an event of default, and the failure to repay or refinance the Class A-2 Notes on the applicable scheduled maturity date. The Notes are also subject to certain customary events of default, including events relating to non-payment of required interest, principal, or other amounts due on or with respect to the Notes, failure to comply with covenants within certain time frames, certain bankruptcy events, breaches of specified representations and warranties, failure of security interests to be effective, and certain judgments. As of October 2, 2022, we were in compliance with all of our debt covenant requirements and were not subject to any rapid amortization events.
Contractual Obligations
Our cash requirements greater than twelve months from contractual obligations and commitments include:
Debt Obligations and Interest Payments - Refer to Note 7, Indebtedness, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information of our obligations and the timing of expected payments.
Operating and Finance Leases - Refer to Note 8, Leases, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information of our obligations and the timing of expected payments.
Purchase Commitments - Purchase obligations includes non-cancelable purchase commitments related to information technology agreements and volume commitments for beverage products. Refer to Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, for further detail of our obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
Benefit Obligations - Refer to Note 12, Retirement Plans, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for further information regarding our obligations and the timing of expected payments under our non-qualified defined benefit plan and postretirement healthcare plans.
DISCUSSION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We have identified the following as our most critical accounting estimates, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of the Company’s financial condition and results, and that require management’s most subjective and complex judgments. Information regarding our other significant accounting estimates and policies are disclosed in Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements.
Long-lived Assets - We review our long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and operating lease right-of-use assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets are grouped for recognition and measurement of impairment at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets. The impairment test for long-lived assets requires us to assess the recoverability of long-lived asset groups by comparing their net carrying value to the sum of undiscounted estimated future cash flows expected to be generated through leases and/or subleases or by our individual company-operated restaurants. If the carrying amount of a long-lived asset group exceeds the sum of related undiscounted future cash flows, we recognize an impairment loss by the amount that the carrying value of the assets exceeds fair value. Our estimates of cash flows used to assess impairment are subject to a high degree of judgment and may differ from actual cash flows due to, among other things, changes in our business plans, operating performance, and economic conditions.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets - We evaluate goodwill and indefinite-lived intangibles for impairment in the fourth quarter, or more frequently, if indicators of impairment are present. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment by determining whether the fair value of our reporting units exceed their carrying values. Our reporting units are our two restaurant brands, Jack in the Box and Del Taco.
Our impairment analyses first include a qualitative assessment to determine whether events or circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Significant factors considered in this assessment include, but are not limited to, macro-economic conditions, market and industry conditions, cost considerations, the competitive environment, share price fluctuations, overall financial performance, and results of past impairment tests. If the qualitative factors indicate that it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than the carrying value, we perform a quantitative impairment test.
In performing a quantitative test for impairment of goodwill, we primarily use the income approach method of valuation that includes the discounted cash flow method and the market approach that includes the guideline public company method to determine the fair value of the reporting unit. Significant assumptions made by management to estimate fair value under the discounted cash flow method include future cash flow assumptions, which may differ from actual cash flows due to, among other things, economic conditions, or changes in operating performance. The discount rate is our estimate of the required rate of return that a third-party buyer would expect to receive when purchasing a business from us that constitutes a reporting unit. We believe the discount rate is commensurate with the risk and uncertainty inherent in the forecasted cash flows. Significant assumptions used to determine fair value under the guideline public company method include the selection of guideline companies and the valuation multiples applied.
In the process of a quantitative test, if necessary, of the Del Taco trademark intangible asset, we primarily use the relief from royalty method under the income approach method of valuation. Significant assumptions used to determine fair value under the relief from royalty method include future trends in sales, a royalty rate, an estimated income tax rate, and a discount rate to be applied to the forecast revenue stream.
In the fourth quarter of 2022, we performed quantitative tests using the approaches described above. The fair value of our Jack in the Box reporting unit was substantially in excess of its respective carrying value as of the testing date. The fair value of our Del Taco reporting unit and indefinite-lived trademarks were in excess of their carrying values by approximately 8% and 7%, respectively, as of the testing date.
Self-Insurance - We are self-insured for a portion of our losses related to workers’ compensation, general liability and other legal claims, and health benefits. In estimating our self-insurance accruals, we utilize independent actuarial estimates of expected losses and assumptions related to the loss development factors, which are based on statistical analysis of historical data. These assumptions are closely monitored and adjusted when warranted by changing circumstances. Should a greater number of claims occur compared to what was estimated, or should medical costs increase beyond what was expected, accruals might not be sufficient, and additional expense may be recorded.
Legal Accruals - The Company is subject to claims and lawsuits in the ordinary course of its business. A determination of the amount accrued, if any, for these contingencies is made after analysis of each matter. We continually evaluate such accruals and may increase or decrease accrued amounts as we deem appropriate. Because lawsuits are inherently unpredictable, and unfavorable resolutions could occur, assessing contingencies is highly subjective and requires judgment about future events. As a result, the amount of ultimate loss may differ from those estimates.
Business Combinations - The Del Taco acquisition was accounted for using the acquisition method of accounting, or acquisition accounting, in accordance with ASC Topic 805, Business Combinations. The acquisition method of accounting involved the allocation of the purchase price to the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. This allocation process involves the use of estimates and assumptions made in connection with estimating the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed including cash flows expected to be derived from the use of the asset, the timing of such cash flows, the remaining useful life of assets and applicable discount rates.
In the event that actual results vary from the estimates or assumptions used in the valuation or allocation process, we may be required to record an impairment charge or an increase in depreciation or amortization in future periods, or both. Refer to Note 3, Business Combination, to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for additional information about accounting for the Del Taco acquisition.
NEW ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of new accounting pronouncements on our consolidated financial statements.