Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows of our company as of and for the periods presented below. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The discussion contains forward-looking statements that are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements.”
Overview
We are the standard in Apple Enterprise Management, and our cloud software platform is the only vertically-focused Apple infrastructure and security platform of scale in the world. We help IT and security teams confidently protect the devices, data, and applications used by their workforce, while providing employees with consumer-simple, privacy-protecting technology. With Jamf’s software, devices can be deployed to employees brand new in the shrink-wrapped box, set up automatically and personalized at first power-on and administered continuously throughout the lifecycle of the device.
Jamf was founded in 2002, around the same time that Apple was leading an industry transformation. Apple transformed the way people access and utilize technology through its focus on creating a superior consumer experience. With the release of revolutionary products like the Mac, iPod, iPhone, and iPad, Apple built the world’s most valuable brand and became ubiquitous in everyday life.
We have built our company through a primary focus on being the leading solution for Apple in the enterprise because we believe that due to Apple’s broad range of devices, combined with the changing demographics of today’s workforce and their strong preference for Apple, that Apple will become the number one device ecosystem in the enterprise by the end of this decade. We believe that the enterprise management provider that is best at Apple will one day be the enterprise leader, and that Jamf is best positioned for that leadership. Through our long-standing relationship with Apple, we have accumulated significant Apple technical experience and expertise that give us the ability to fully and quickly leverage and extend the capabilities of Apple products, operating systems, and services. This expertise enables us to fully support new innovations and operating system releases the moment they are made available by Apple. This focus has allowed us to create a best-in-class user experience in the enterprise.
We sell our SaaS solutions via a subscription model, through a direct sales force, online, and indirectly via our channel partners, including Apple. Our multi-dimensional go-to-market model and cloud-deployed offering enable us to reach all organizations around the world, large and small, with our software solutions. As a result, we continue to see rapid growth and expansion of our customer base as Apple continues to gain momentum in the enterprise.
On July 1, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Wandera, a leader in zero trust cloud security and access for mobile devices, extending our leadership in Apple Enterprise Management. The acquisition uniquely positions us to help IT and security teams protect devices, data, and applications while extending the intended Apple experience through the most robust and scalable Apple Enterprise Management platform in the market. We initially financed the acquisition with a combination of cash on hand and borrowings under the 2021 Term Loan Facility (which borrowings were repaid in September 2021 with the proceeds from the 2026 Notes). See “Note 5 - Acquisitions” and “Note 9 - Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on the acquisition and debt financing.
Response to COVID-19
Our COVID-19 approach is focused on promoting employee choice, health and safety, serving our customers, and ensuring business continuity. We carefully assess, and reassess, safe working conditions for our offices on a case-by-case basis to ensure that we implement appropriate protective measures, such as capacity restrictions, based on local government and health organization guidance. We believe that we have the opportunity to be a leader in a new approach to work, which is rooted in a flexible and hybrid model enabled by a digital-first mindset that puts employee choice, health, and safety first. We believe our internal cloud-first technology platforms have allowed for a seamless transition to a hybrid working environment without any material impacts to our business thus far, highlighting the resilience of our business model. Our product portfolio and platform has enabled our commercial customers to continue with their efforts to work in a hybrid environment, our K-12 and higher-education customers to deliver distance learning, and our health-care customers to provide quality care via a
telehealth model, a solution that was conceptualized and released during the current pandemic. We believe that a business like ours is well-suited to navigate the shift to hybrid work environments, while the underlying demand for our core products remains relatively unchanged.
Although to date we have not suffered an adverse effect from the COVID-19 pandemic, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately affects our business continues to depend on future developments in the United States and around the world, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning virus variants and the actions required to contain and treat the virus, vaccine effectiveness, and macro-economic effects, such as supply and labor shortages and inflationary pressures. Although the ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and financial results remains uncertain, a continued and prolonged public health crisis such as the COVID-19 pandemic could have a material negative impact on our business, operating results and financial condition. See “Risk Factors - Risks Associated with Our Business, Operations, and Industry - The COVID-19 pandemic could materially adversely affect our business, operating results, financial condition, and prospects” for additional information.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our historical financial performance has been, and we expect our financial performance in the future to be, driven by our ability to:
Attract new customers. Our ability to attract new customers is dependent upon a number of factors, including the effectiveness of our pricing and solutions, the features and pricing of our competitors’ offerings, the effectiveness of our marketing efforts, the effectiveness of our channel partners in selling, marketing and deploying our software solutions, and the growth of the market for devices and services for SMBs and enterprises. Sustaining our growth requires continued adoption of our platform by new customers. We intend to continue to invest in building brand awareness as we further penetrate our addressable markets. We intend to expand our customer base by continuing to make significant and targeted investments in our direct sales and marketing to attract new customers and to drive broader awareness of our software solutions.
Expand within our customer base. Our ability to increase revenue within our existing customer base is dependent upon a number of factors, including their satisfaction with our software solutions and support, the features and pricing of our competitors’ offerings, and our ability to effectively enhance our platform by developing new products and features and addressing additional use cases. Often our customers will begin with a small deployment and then later expand their usage more broadly within the enterprise as they realize the benefits of our platform. We believe that our “land and expand” business model allows us to efficiently increase revenue from our existing customer base. We intend to continue to invest in enhancing awareness of our software solutions, creating additional use cases, and developing more products, features, and functionality, which we believe are important factors to expand usage of our software solutions by our existing customer base. We believe our ability to retain and expand usage of our software solutions by our existing customer base is evidenced by our dollar-based net retention rate.
Sustain product innovation and technology leadership. Our success is dependent on our ability to sustain product innovation and technology leadership in order to maintain our competitive advantage. We believe that we have built a highly differentiated platform and we intend to further extend the adoption of our platform through additional innovation. While sales of subscriptions to our Jamf Pro product account for most of our revenue, we intend to continue to invest in building additional products, features and functionality that expand our capabilities and facilitate the extension of our platform to new use cases. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market and sell additional products to both new and existing customers. For example, in 2018, we introduced Jamf Connect to provide users with a seamless connection to corporate resources using a single identity and in 2019 we introduced Jamf Protect to extend Apple's security and privacy model to enterprise teams by creating unprecedented visibility into MacOS fleets through customized remote monitoring and threat detection and prevention. In July 2021, we completed our acquisition of Wandera, which enhances our Apple Enterprise Management Platform and strengthens our position in security and mobile with expansion opportunities. Wandera solutions include Jamf Threat Defense, Jamf Data Policy and Jamf Private Access, which uniquely position us to address trends in digital transformation, remote work and ZTNA.
Continue investment in growth. Our ability to effectively invest for growth is dependent upon a number of factors, including our ability to offset anticipated increases in operating expenses with revenue growth, our ability to spend our research and development budget efficiently or effectively on compelling innovation and technologies, our ability to accurately predict costs and our ability to maintain our corporate culture as our headcount expands. We plan to continue investing in our business so we can capitalize on our market opportunity. We intend to grow our sales team to target expansion within our midmarket and enterprise customers and to attract new customers. We expect to continue to make focused investments in marketing to drive
brand awareness and enhance the effectiveness of our customer acquisition model. We also intend to continue to add headcount to our research and development team to develop new and improved products, features, and functionality. Although these investments may increase our operating expenses and, as a result, adversely affect our operating results in the near term, we believe they will contribute to our long-term growth.
Continue international expansion. Our international growth in any region will depend on our ability to effectively implement our business processes and go-to-market strategy, our ability to adapt to market or cultural differences, the general competitive landscape, our ability to invest in our sales and marketing channels, the maturity and growth trajectory of devices and services by region and our brand awareness and perception. We plan to continue making investments in our international sales and marketing channels to take advantage of this market opportunity while refining our go-to-market approach based on local market dynamics. While we believe global demand for our platform will increase as international market awareness of Jamf grows, our ability to conduct our operations internationally will require considerable management attention and resources and is subject to the particular challenges of supporting a growing business in an environment of multiple languages, cultures, customs, legal and regulatory systems (including with respect to data transfer and privacy), alternative dispute systems, and commercial markets. In addition, global demand for our platform and the growth of our international operations is dependent upon the rate of market adoption of Apple products in international markets. Our acquisition of Wandera, a global company with key offices in London, Brno and San Francisco, further expands our international presence.
Enhance our offerings via our partner network. Our success is dependent not only on our independent efforts to innovate, scale, and reach more customers directly but also on the success of our partners to continue to gain share in the enterprise. With a focus on the user and being the bridge between critical technologies - with Apple and Microsoft as two examples - we feel we can help other market participants deliver more to enterprise users with the power of Jamf. We will continue to invest in the relationships with our existing, critical partners, nurture and develop new relationships and do so globally. We will continue to invest in developing “plus one” solutions and workflows that help tie our software solutions together with those delivered by others.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our GAAP financial information, we review several operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Number of Devices
We believe our ability to grow the number of devices on our software platform provides a key indicator of the growth of our business and our future business opportunities. We define a device at the end of any particular period as a device owned by a customer, which device has at least one Jamf product pursuant to an active subscription or support and maintenance agreement or that has a reasonable probability of renewal. We define a customer at the end of any particular period as an entity with at least one active subscription or support and maintenance agreement as of the measurement date or that has a reasonable probability of renewal. A single organization with separate subsidiaries, segments or divisions that use our platform may represent multiple customers as we treat each entity, subsidiary, segment or division that is invoiced separately as a single customer. In cases where customers subscribe to our platform through our channel partners, each end customer is counted separately. A single customer may have multiple Jamf products on a single device, but we still would only count that as one device.
The number of devices on our software platform was 26.6 million and 20.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a 30% year-over-year growth rate. The increase in number of devices reflects our growth across industries, products, and geographies, as well as the Wandera acquisition in the third quarter of 2021.
Annual Recurring Revenue
ARR represents the annualized value of all subscription and support and maintenance contracts as of the end of the period. ARR mitigates fluctuations due to seasonality, contract term and the sales mix of subscriptions for term-based licenses and SaaS. ARR does not have any standardized meaning and is therefore unlikely to be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue and deferred revenue and is not intended to be combined with or to replace either of those items. ARR is not a forecast and the active contracts at the end of a reporting period used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended or renewed by our customers.
Our ARR was $412.5 million and $285.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, which is an increase of 45% year-over-year. The growth in our ARR is primarily driven by our high device expansion rates, our new logo acquisition, the upselling and cross selling of products into our installed base, and the acquisition of Wandera.
Dollar-Based Net Retention Rate
To further illustrate the “land and expand” economics of our customer relationships, we examine the rate at which our customers increase their subscriptions for our software solutions. Our dollar-based net retention rate measures our ability to increase revenue across our existing customer base through expanded use of our software solutions, offset by customers whose subscription contracts with us are not renewed or renew at a lower amount.
We calculate dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the ARR from the cohort of all customers as of 12 months prior to such period end (“Prior Period ARR”). We then calculate the ARR from these same customers as of the current period end (“Current Period ARR”). Current Period ARR includes any expansion and is net of contraction or attrition over the last 12 months but excludes ARR from new customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period ARR by the total Prior Period ARR to arrive at the dollar-based net retention rate.
Our dollar-based net retention rates were 120% and 117% for the trailing twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our dollar-based net retention rates are based on our Jamf legacy business and do not include Wandera since they have not been a part of our business for the full trailing twelve months. Our high dollar-based net retention rates are primarily attributable to an expansion of devices and our ability to cross-sell our new solutions to our installed base, particularly Jamf Connect and Jamf Protect.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We recognize revenue under ASC 606 when or as performance obligations are satisfied. We derive revenue primarily from sales of SaaS subscriptions and support and maintenance contracts, and to a lesser extent, sales of on-premise subscriptions and perpetual licenses and services.
Subscription. Subscription revenue consists of sales of SaaS subscriptions and support and maintenance contracts. We sell our software solutions primarily with a one-year contract term. We typically invoice SaaS subscription fees and support and maintenance fees annually in advance and recognize revenue ratably over the term of the applicable agreement, provided that all other revenue recognition criteria have been satisfied. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we reclassified the license portion of on-premise subscription revenue from license revenue to subscription revenue in the consolidated statements of operations on a retroactive basis. See additional information in “Note 1 - Basis of presentation and description of business” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The license portion of on-premise subscription revenue is recognized upfront, assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. See “Critical Accounting Policies” for more information. In addition, beginning in the third quarter 2021, we have updated how we deliver our Jamf Connect product resulting in a change in revenue recognition, with less revenue recognized upfront as on-premise subscription revenue. This revenue will now be recognized ratably over the term of the subscription, in line with the majority of our revenue. We expect subscription revenue to increase over time as we expand our customer base because sales to new customers are expected to be primarily SaaS subscriptions.
License. License revenue consists of revenue from on-premise perpetual licenses of our Jamf Pro product sold primarily to existing customers. We recognize license revenue upfront, assuming all revenue recognition criteria are satisfied. We expect license revenue to decrease because sales to new customers are primarily cloud-based subscription arrangements and therefore reflected in subscription revenue.
Services. Services revenues consist primarily of professional services provided to our customers to configure and optimize the use of our software solutions, as well as training services related to the operation of our software solutions. Our services are priced on a fixed fee basis and generally invoiced in advance of the service being delivered. Revenue is recognized as the services are performed. We expect services revenues to decrease as a percentage of total revenue as the demand for our services is not expected to grow at the same rate as the demand for our subscription solutions.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of subscription. Cost of subscription revenue consists primarily of employee compensation costs for employees associated with supporting our subscription and support and maintenance arrangements, our customer success function, and third-party hosting fees related to our cloud services. Employee compensation and related costs include cash compensation and benefits to employees and associated overhead costs. We expect cost of subscription revenue to increase in absolute dollars, but to remain relatively consistent as a percentage of subscription revenue, relative to the extent of the growth of our business.
Cost of services. Cost of services revenue consists primarily of employee compensation costs directly associated with delivery of professional services and training, costs of third-party integrators, and other associated overhead costs. We expect cost of services revenue to decrease in absolute dollars relative to the decrease of our services business.
Gross Profit
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the mix of cloud-based subscription customers, the costs associated with supporting our cloud solution, the extent to which we expand our customer support team and the extent to which we can increase the efficiency of our technology and infrastructure though technological improvements. We expect our gross profit to increase in absolute dollars.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs, sales commissions, costs of general marketing and promotional activities, travel-related expenses, and allocated overhead. Sales commissions as well as associated payroll taxes and retirement plan contributions that are incremental to the acquisition of customer contracts are deferred and amortized over the period of benefit, which is estimated to be generally 5 years. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we expand our sales personnel and marketing efforts. Sales commissions as well as associated payroll taxes and retirement plan contributions (together, contract costs) that are incremental to the acquisition of customer contracts are capitalized.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and allocated overhead. We will continue to invest in innovation so that we can offer our customers new solutions and enhance our existing solutions. See “Business - Research and Development” for more information. We expect such investment to increase on an absolute dollar basis as our business grows.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee compensation costs for corporate personnel, such as those in our executive, human resource, facilities, accounting and finance, legal and compliance, and information technology departments. In addition, general and administrative expenses include acquisition-related expenses which primarily consist of third-party expenses, such as legal and accounting fees, and adjustments to contingent consideration. General and administrative expenses also include costs incurred in secondary offerings. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase on a dollar basis as our business grows, particularly as we continue to invest in technology infrastructure and expand our operations globally. Also, we incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and accounting expenses.
Amortization. Amortization expense consists of amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net primarily consists of interest charges on our outstanding debt and amortization of capitalized debt issuance costs, as well as interest income earned on our cash and cash equivalents. In the third quarter of 2021, we reclassified the unused commitment fee on our line of credit from general and administrative expenses to interest expense, net on a prospective basis. The impact to prior period financial statements was not material.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Upon closing of the IPO, we repaid $205.0 million of the principal amount of the 2017 Term Loan Facility and recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.2 million for the prepayment penalty and write off of debt issuance costs. In the
third quarter of 2021, we repaid the principal amount of the 2021 Term Loan Facility and recorded debt extinguishment costs of $0.4 million for the write-off of remaining debt issuance costs.
Foreign Currency Transaction Gain (Loss)
Foreign currency transaction gains (losses) includes gains and losses from transactions denominated in a currency other than the Company’s functional currency.
Income Tax (Provision) Benefit
Income tax (provision) benefit consists primarily of income taxes related to U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business.
Other Income
Other income consists primarily of sublease rental income. The sublease was terminated in the second quarter of 2020.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for the periods indicated:
(1) Includes stock-based compensation as follows:
(2) Includes payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation as follows:
(3) Includes depreciation expense as follows:
(4) Includes acquisition-related expense as follows:
General and administrative also includes acquisition-related earnout of $6.0 million, $(1.0) million, and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The acquisition-related earnout was an expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflecting the change in fair value
of the Digita Security LLC (“Digita”) acquisition contingent liability due to growth in sales of our Jamf Protect product. General and administrative also includes the full settlement of a $5.0 million legal-related matter for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
A discussion regarding our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in Exhibit 99.1 titled, “Updates to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the Year Ended December 31, 2020”, of our Form 8-K, filed with the SEC on August 27, 2021, which is available free of charge on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our investor relations website at ir.jamf.com.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $97.3 million, or 36%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Overall revenue increased primarily as a result of higher subscription revenue, as well as higher services revenue. Subscription revenue accounted for 94% of total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 93% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in subscription revenue was driven by device expansion, the addition of new customers and cross-selling, as well as the contribution of approximately $10.6 million of revenue from Wandera in the second half of 2021, partially offset by the impact from a change in revenue recognition related to our Jamf Connect product resulting from updates to how we deliver the product. Services revenue increased $1.6 million, or 11%, as a result of higher revenue from training courses, which was impacted by COVID-19 in the prior year period.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue increased by $29.3 million, or 48%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 driven by an increase in cost of subscription revenue and amortization expense. Cost of subscription revenue increased $23.9 million primarily due to an increase of $9.4 million in employee compensation costs related to higher headcount to support the growth in our subscription customer base and the Wandera acquisition, an increase of $9.9 million in third party hosting fees as we increased capacity to support our growth and the Wandera acquisition, a $3.1 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes, and an increase of $0.4 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business. Amortization expense increased $5.3 million primarily reflecting the increase in intangible assets due to the Wandera acquisition.
Total gross margin was 75% and 77% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decline in total gross margin was due to the increase in total cost of revenue described above as well as an impact to revenue due to a change in revenue recognition related to our Jamf Connect product resulting from updates to how we deliver the product.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses increased by $49.3 million, or 50%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase of $31.8 million in employee compensation costs driven by higher headcount due to growth in the business and the Wandera acquisition, a $3.2 million increase in marketing costs, an increase of $2.0 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business, a $9.6 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes, and a $1.3 million increase in facilities expense. Marketing costs increased primarily due to increases in demand generation programs, advertising, and brand awareness campaigns focused on new customer acquisition.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses increased by $30.0 million, or 57%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to an increase of $15.7 million in employee compensation costs driven by higher headcount due to growth in the business and the Wandera acquisition, an increase of $3.3 million in outside services, an increase of $1.0 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business, a $1.1 million increase in acquisition-related expenses, and a $9.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses increased by $44.6 million, or 86%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $14.2 million in employee compensation costs driven by higher headcount to support our continued growth and the Wandera acquisition, $3.7 million in additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, an increase of $2.7 million in computer hardware and software costs to support the growth of the business, a $8.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense and related payroll taxes, an increase of $3.2 million in outside services, an increase of $5.0 million for the settlement of a legal-related matter, and a $7.0 million increase in acquisition-related earnout.
Amortization Expense. Amortization expense increased by $2.7 million, or 12%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflecting the increase in intangible assets due to the Wandera acquisition.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net decreased by $8.3 million, or 77%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 reflecting the repayment of the 2017 Term Loan Facility in the third quarter of 2020, partially offset by interest expense related to borrowings under the 2021 Term Loan Facility and interest charges on the 2026 Notes.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consists of the write off of debt issuance costs upon the early repayment of the 2021 Term Loan Facility. Loss on extinguishment of debt of $5.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of a prepayment penalty of $2.0 million and write off of debt issuance costs of $3.2 million in connection with the early repayment of the 2017 Term Loan Facility.
Foreign Currency Transaction Loss
Foreign currency transaction loss increased by $0.1 million, or 18%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income, Net
The decrease in Other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the termination of our sublease in the second quarter of 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
Income tax benefit was $4.8 million and $10.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The effective tax rates for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were 6.0% and 29.2%, respectively. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was lower than the prior year period due to the domestic valuation allowance, the application of Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, and stock option activity. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was impacted by $1.7 million of discrete income tax benefit.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the non-GAAP measures of Non-GAAP Gross Profit, Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin, Non-GAAP Operating Income, Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin, Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss), and Adjusted EBITDA are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP information to supplement their GAAP results. The non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures. In 2021, we began excluding payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation from our non-GAAP measures as these expenses are tied to the exercise or vesting of underlying equity awards and the price of our common stock at the time of vesting or exercise. As a result, these taxes may vary in any particular period independent of the financial and operating performance of our business. Payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation were not material prior to 2021.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that do not represent, and should not be considered as, alternatives to gross profit or gross profit margin, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Non-GAAP Gross Profit as gross profit, adjusted for amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expense, and payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation. We define Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin as Non-GAAP Gross Profit as a percentage of total revenue.
We use Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends and to prepare and approve our annual budget. We believe Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin are useful measures to us and to our investors to assist in evaluating our core operating performance because it provides consistency and direct comparability with our past financial performance and between fiscal periods, as the metric eliminates the effects of variability of stock-based compensation expense and amortization of acquired intangible assets, which are non-cash expenses that may fluctuate for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. While the amortization expense of acquired intangible assets is excluded from Non-GAAP Gross Profit, the revenue related to acquired intangible a is reflected in Non-GAAP Gross Profit as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Non-GAAP Gross Profit and Non-GAAP Gross Profit Margin should not be considered as replacements for gross profit or gross profit margin, as determined by GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Gross Profit to gross profit, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Non-GAAP Operating Income
Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin are supplemental measures of operating performance that are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that do not represent, and should not be considered as, alternatives to operating loss or operating loss margin, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Non-GAAP Operating Income as operating loss, adjusted for amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related earnout, costs associated with our secondary offerings, payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation, and legal settlement. We define Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin as Non-GAAP Operating Income as a percentage of total revenue.
We use Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin facilitate comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, help provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense of acquired intangible assets is excluded from Non-GAAP Operating Income, the revenue related to acquired intangible assets is reflected in Non-GAAP Operating Income as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider them in isolation, or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Non-GAAP Operating Income and Non-GAAP Operating Income Margin should not be considered as replacements for operating loss or operating loss margin, as determined by GAAP, or as measures of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Operating Income to operating loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss)
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) is a supplemental measure of operating performance that is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net loss, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) as net loss, adjusted for amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, foreign currency transaction loss, loss on extinguishment of debt, amortization of debt issuance costs, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related earnout, costs associated with our secondary offerings, payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation, legal settlement, discrete tax items, and benefit for income taxes.
We use Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, helps provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations. While the amortization expense of acquired intangible assets is excluded from Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss), the revenue related to acquired intangible assets is reflected in Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) as these assets contribute to our revenue generation.
Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) should not be considered as a replacement for net loss, as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Non-GAAP Net Income (Loss) to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
(1) For the year ended December 31, 2021, our annual effective tax rate was materially different from our statutory rate due to changes in the domestic valuation allowance. Therefore, we used a tax rate of 6.2% for the fourth quarter of 2021, which reflects the annual effective tax rate catch-up for the first through third quarters due to the impact of the Wandera acquisition, resulting in a tax rate of 6.0% for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we used our annual effective tax rates, which were not materially different from the statutory rates.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a supplemental measure of operating performance that is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and that does not represent, and should not be considered as, an alternative to net loss, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted for interest expense, net, benefit for income taxes, depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation expense, foreign currency transaction loss, loss on extinguishment of debt, acquisition-related expense, acquisition-related earnout, costs associated with our secondary offerings, payroll taxes related to stock-based compensation, and legal settlement.
We use Adjusted EBITDA to understand and evaluate our core operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short-term and long-term operating plans. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA facilitates comparison of our operating performance on a consistent basis between periods, and when viewed in combination with our results prepared in accordance with GAAP, helps provide a broader picture of factors and trends affecting our results of operations.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Because of these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a replacement for net loss, as determined by GAAP, or as a measure of our profitability. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using non-GAAP measures only for supplemental purposes.
A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, is as follows:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $177.2 million, which were held for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, and potential acquisitions and strategic transactions, as well as the available balance of the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility, described in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our cash equivalents are comprised of money market funds and/or U.S. Treasuries with original or remaining maturities at the time of purchase of three months or less. Our positive cash flows from operations enable us to make continued investments in supporting the growth of our business. We expect that our operating cash flows, in addition to our cash and cash equivalents, will enable us to continue to make such investments in the future.
We are a holding company, and we derive all of our operating income from our subsidiaries. As a result, our cash flow is dependent on the performance of our subsidiaries and the ability of those entities to distribute funds to us. See Item 5, “Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities - Dividend Policy ” for a discussion of our dividend policy, including restrictions on our ability to pay dividends and distributions to us.
A majority of our customers pay in advance for subscriptions and support and maintenance contracts, a portion of which is recorded as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which is later recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $282.1 million, of which $223.0 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
On July 1, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Wandera for total consideration of $409.3 million. The total consideration consisted of an initial payment of $359.3 million at close and deferred consideration of $50.0 million that was paid in $25.0 million increments on October 1, 2021 and December 15, 2021. We initially financed the acquisition with cash on hand and proceeds from the Company’s $250.0 million 2021 Term Loan Facility. On July 1, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement Amendment, which amended our existing 2020 Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement Amendment provided for a new 364-day term loan facility in an aggregate principal amount of $250.0 million on substantially the same terms and conditions as our existing 2020 Credit Agreement. The Company repaid the principal amount of the 2021 Term Loan Facility on September 23, 2021 with proceeds from the issuance and sale of the 2026 Notes. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under the 2020 Credit Agreement, other than $1.0 million in outstanding letters of credit.
On September 17, 2021, we completed our private offering of the 2026 Notes and received net proceeds of approximately $361.4 million after deducting the initial purchasers’ discounts and commissions and the offering expenses paid by us. The 2026 Notes bear interest at a rate of 0.125% per year, payable semiannually in arrears on March 1st and September 1st of each year, beginning on March 1, 2022. We used (i) approximately $250.0 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2026 Notes to repay the Company’s 2021 Term Loan Facility and to pay any associated prepayment penalties and accrued and unpaid interest to the date of repayment and (ii) approximately $36.0 million of the net proceeds from the offering of the 2026 Notes to fund the cost of entering into the Capped Calls, and will use the remainder of the net proceeds for general corporate purposes, which may include working capital, capital expenditures, and potential acquisitions and strategic transactions.
Future Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
We believe our cash and cash equivalents, the 2020 Revolving Credit Facility, and cash provided by sales of our software solutions and services will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs as well as our debt service requirements for at least the next 12 months and meet our known long-term cash requirements. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced products and services offerings, and the continuing market acceptance of our products. In the future, we may use cash to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services, and technologies, including intellectual property rights.
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our 2026 Notes, contractual agreements for hosting services and other support software and operating leases for office space. Our obligations under our 2026 Notes are discussed above, as well as in “Note 9 - Debt” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As of December 31, 2021, future interest payments on our 2026 Notes are $0.4 million for 2022 and a total of $1.9 million for 2023 through 2026. As of December 31, 2021, we have a total of $25.9 million of purchase and lease commitments due in 2022. Additionally, we have a total of $20.4 million of purchase and lease commitments for the years ending December 31, 2023 through 2026. See “Note 7 - Leases” and “Note 8 - Commitments and contingencies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our purchase and lease commitments.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $65.2 million reflecting our net loss of $75.2 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $104.0 million and net cash inflows of $36.4 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and intangible assets, share-based compensation, amortization of deferred contract costs, non-cash lease expense, and a $6.0 million adjustment to contingent consideration, partially offset by deferred taxes. The primary drivers of net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities included an increase of $71.2 million in deferred revenue due to growth in subscription revenues and an increase of $6.4 million in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to growth of the
business. These changes were partially offset by an increase of $24.8 million in deferred contract costs due to an increase in capitalized costs, an increase of $9.3 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, and an increase of $6.5 million in trade accounts receivable.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $52.8 million reflecting our net loss of $24.1 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $48.4 million and net cash inflows of $28.5 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and intangible assets, amortization of deferred contract costs, amortization of debt issuance costs, provision for bad debt expense and returns, loss on extinguishment of debt, and share-based compensation, partially offset by deferred taxes and a $1.0 million adjustment to our Digita earnout. The primary drivers of net cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities included a $64.9 million increase in deferred revenue, an increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $9.5 million, and an increase in other liabilities of $1.9 million, partially offset by a $20.4 million increase in deferred contract costs, a $23.1 million increase in accounts receivable, and a $3.6 million increase in prepaid expenses and other assets.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $387.4 million primarily driven by the acquisition of Wandera for $349.7 million, net of cash acquired, $25.0 million paid for the deferred consideration associated with the Wandera acquisition, and purchases of $9.8 million in equipment and leasehold improvements for updates to office space and hardware and software.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $6.9 million driven by purchases of $4.4 million in equipment and leasehold improvements to support our higher headcount with additional office space and hardware and software and our acquisition of Mondada in 2020 for $2.5 million, net of cash acquired.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $305.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to proceeds of $373.8 million from the issuance and sale of the 2026 Notes and proceeds of $10.7 million from the exercise of stock options, partially offset by $36.0 million paid for the purchase of the Capped Calls, $25.0 million paid for the deferred consideration associated with the Wandera acquisition, $13.1 million paid for debt issuance costs, and $4.2 million paid for the contingent consideration associated with the Digita acquisition.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $116.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to proceeds of $326.3 million from the IPO after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions, $3.0 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options, and $2.2 million of proceeds from the private placement, partially offset by the repayment of $205.0 million principal amount of our 2017 Term Loan Facility, the payment of debt extinguishment costs of $2.0 million, the payment of offering costs of $7.3 million, and the payment of debt issuance costs of $1.3 million related to the 2020 Credit Agreement.
Indemnification Agreements
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into agreements of varying scope and terms pursuant to which we agree to indemnify customers, channel partners, vendors, lessors, business partners and other parties with respect to certain matters, including, but not limited to, losses arising out of the breach of such agreements, services to be provided by us or from intellectual property infringement, misappropriation or other violation claims made by third parties. See “Risk Factors - We have indemnity provisions under our contracts with our customers, channel partners, and other third parties, which could have a material adverse effect on our business.” In addition, we have entered into indemnification agreements with our directors and certain officers that will require us, among other things, to indemnify them against certain liabilities that may arise by reason of their status or service as directors, officers or employees. No demands have been made upon us to provide indemnification under such agreements and there are no claims that we are aware of that could have a material effect on our consolidated balance sheets, consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, or consolidated statements of cash flows.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) permits an emerging growth company to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. On June 30, 2021, the last day of our second fiscal quarter in 2021, the market value of our common stock held by non-affiliates
exceeded $700.0 million. Accordingly, the Company was deemed a large accelerated filer as of December 31, 2021, and, therefore, we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company and can no longer take advantage of the extended timeline to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies beginning with this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements. The preparation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, and expenses. We base our estimates on experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from those estimates, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
Our critical accounting policies are those that materially affect our consolidated financial statements and involve difficult, subjective, or complex judgments by management. A thorough understanding of these critical accounting policies is essential when reviewing our consolidated financial statements. We believe that the critical accounting policies listed below are the most difficult management decisions as they involve the use of significant estimates and assumptions as described above. Refer to “Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more detailed information regarding our critical accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
We derive revenue from the sales of software licenses and maintenance, hosted software, and related professional services. We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, which provides a five-step model for recognizing revenue from contracts with customers as follows:
•Identify the contract with a customer
•Identify the performance obligations in the contract
•Determine the transaction price
•Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
•Recognize revenue when or as performance obligations are satisfied
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment.
When our contracts with customers contain multiple performance obligations, the contract transaction price is allocated on a relative stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) basis to each performance obligation. The Company typically determines SSP based on observable selling prices of its products and services. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as with software licenses that are never sold on a stand-alone basis, SSP is determined using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs. In addition, for software products where the pricing is also determined to be highly variable or highly uncertain, SSP is established using the residual approach. However, the Company does not currently use the residual approach for any of its performance obligations, as pricing was not determined to be highly variable or highly uncertain. SSP is typically established as ranges and the Company typically has more than one SSP range for individual products and services due to the stratification of those products and services by customer class, channel type, and purchase quantity, among other circumstances. The SSP is reassessed periodically or when facts and circumstances change.
Deferred contract costs
Sales commissions, as well as associated payroll taxes and retirement plan contributions (together, contract costs), that are incremental to the acquisition of customer contracts are capitalized using a portfolio approach as deferred contract costs in the consolidated balance sheets when the period of benefit is determined to be greater than one year.
The Company has elected to apply the practical expedient to expense contract costs as incurred when the expected amortization period is one year or less. The judgments made in determining the amount of costs incurred include the portion of the commissions that are expensed in the current period versus the portion of the commissions that are recognized over the expected period of benefit, which often extends beyond the contract term as we do not pay a commission upon renewal of the service contracts. Contract costs are allocated to each performance obligation within the contract and amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected benefit period of the related performance obligations. We have determined that the expected period of benefit is generally 5 years based on evaluation of a number of factors, including customer attrition rates, weighted-average useful lives of our customer relationship and developed technology intangible assets, and market factors, including overall competitive environment and technology life of competitors.
Stock-based compensation
The Company applies the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”) in its accounting and reporting for stock-based compensation. In accordance with ASC 718, the Company recognizes compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to our employees and non-employee directors in the consolidated statements of operations based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to estimate the fair value of service-based options and purchase rights granted under the Jamf Holding Corp. 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (the “2021 ESPP”). We use the fair market value of our common stock on the date of grant to estimate the fair value of restricted stock units (“RSUs”). We recognize compensation expense for service-based options and RSUs on a straight-line basis over the applicable vesting period. We recognize compensation expense for the purchase rights granted under the 2021 ESPP on a straight-line basis over the offering period. Forfeitures are accounted for as they occur.
The Company also grants performance-based awards (also referred to as return target options) to certain executives that vest and become exercisable when Vista’s realized cash return on its investment in the Company equals or exceeds $1.515 billion upon a change in control of the Company (the “Termination Event”). The terms of the agreement do not specify a performance period for the occurrence of the Termination Event. The contractual term of the awards is 10 years. The Company uses a Modified Black-Scholes option pricing model, which uses Level 3 inputs for fair value measurement, to estimate the fair value.
In conjunction with the IPO, the vesting conditions of the performance-based awards were modified to also vest following an IPO and registration and sale of shares by Vista provided that Vista achieves a cash return on its equity investment in the Company equaling or exceeding $1.515 billion. In accordance with ASC 718, we calculated the fair value of these options on the modification date. The value of these options on the date of modification as of June 30, 2020 was $33.0 million. As the awards are not currently considered probable of meeting the vesting requirements, no expense has been recognized, and the timing of any future expense recognition is unknown.
Application of these approaches involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, including those regarding our future expected revenue, expenses, cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable public companies, and the probability of future events.
Income taxes
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized principally for the expected tax consequences of temporary differences between the tax basis of assets and liabilities and their reported amounts, using currently enacted tax rates. The measurement of a deferred tax asset is reduced, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. Significant judgment is required in evaluating the need for and magnitude of appropriate valuation allowances. The realization of our deferred tax assets is dependent on generating future taxable income and the reversal of existing temporary differences. Changes in tax laws and assumptions with respect to future taxable income could result in adjustment to these allowances.
The Company recognizes a tax benefit for uncertain tax positions only if the Company believes it is more likely than not that the position will be upheld on audit based solely on the technical merits of the tax position. The Company evaluates uncertain tax positions after the consideration of all available information.
Business combinations
When the Company acquires a business, the purchase price is allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values as of the date of acquisition. The allocation of the purchase price requires management to
make significant estimates in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, especially with respect to intangible assets. These estimates are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. During the measurement period, which may be up to one year from the acquisition date, adjustments to the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed may be recorded with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of the assets acquired or liabilities assumed, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to the consolidated statements of operations. Acquisition-related costs are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired in business combinations. The Company evaluates goodwill for impairment in accordance with ASC Topic 350, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets (“ASC 350”), which requires goodwill to be either qualitatively or quantitatively assessed for impairment annually (or more frequently if impairment indicators arise) for each reporting unit. The Company has one reporting unit. The Company performs its annual impairment testing of goodwill as of October 1st of each year and in interim periods if events occur that would indicate that it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is less than carrying value. If the Company’s reporting unit carrying amount exceeds its fair value an impairment charge will be recorded based on that difference. The impairment charge will be limited to the amount of goodwill currently recognized in the Company’s single reporting unit. There is inherent subjectivity involved in estimating future cash flows, which can have a material impact on the amount of any potential impairment. Changes in estimates of future cash flows could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
Other intangibles, net
Intangible assets with finite lives include trademarks, customer relationships, developed technology, non-competes, and order backlog. These assets are amortized over their estimated useful lives, which range from two to twelve years, on a straight-line basis. Intangible assets with finite lives are tested for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset (asset group) may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount of an asset exceeds the estimated undiscounted cash flows generated by the asset. The amount of the impairment loss recorded is calculated by the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value. There is inherent subjectivity involved in estimating future cash flows, which can have a material impact on the amount of any potential impairment. Changes in estimates of future cash flows could result in a write-down of the asset in a future period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of our recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting standards not yet adopted, see “Note 2 - Summary of significant accounting policies” to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.