ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For a description of our significant accounting policies and an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the year ended January 1, 2022, this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (hereafter referred to as “MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022.
Note about Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K includes statements that constitute “forward-looking statements.” These forward-looking statements are often characterized by the terms “may,” “believes,” “projects,” “intends,” “plans,” “expects,” or “anticipates,” and do not reflect historical facts. Specific forward-looking statements contained in this portion of the Form 10-K include, but are not limited to: (i) statements relating to our initial product candidate, JAN101, including statements relating to the commencement of Phase IIb clinical trials for the treatment of PAD in 2021 and the results of those trials, (ii) statements that are based on current projections and expectations about the markets in which we operate, (iii) statements relating to the prospective sale of our Recycling business, (iv) statements about current projections and expectations of general economic conditions, (v) statements about specific industry projections and expectations of economic activity, (vi) statements relating to our future operations and prospects, (vii) statements about future results and future performance, (viii) statements that the cash on hand and additional cash generated from operations, together with potential sources of cash through issuance of debt or equity, will provide the Company with sufficient liquidity for the next 12 months, and (ix) statements that the outcome of pending legal proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on business, financial position and results of operations, cash flow, or liquidity.
Forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties, and other factors, which may cause our actual results, performance, or achievements to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors and risks that could affect our results, future performance, and capital requirements and cause them to differ materially from those contained in the forward-looking statements include those identified in this Form 10-K under Item 1A “Risk Factors”, as well as other factors that we are currently unable to identify or quantify, but that may exist in the future.
In addition, the foregoing factors may generally affect our business, results of operations and financial position. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date the statements were made. We do not undertake and specifically decline any obligation to update any forward-looking statements. Any information contained on our website www.janone.com or any other websites referenced in this Form 10-K are not part of this Form 10-K.
Our Company
We are focused on finding treatments for conditions that cause severe pain and bringing to market drugs with non-addictive pain-relieving properties. In addition, through our subsidiaries ARCA Recycling, Connexx, and ARCA Canada, we are engaged in the business of recycling major household appliances in North America by providing turnkey appliance recycling and replacement services for utilities and other sponsors of energy efficiency programs. Also, through our GeoTraq Inc. subsidiary, we have been engaged in the development, design of wireless transceiver modules with technology that provides LBS directly from global Mobile IoT networks. However, Our GeoTraq subsidiary has not generated any revenue to date, including in the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022. Consequently, during the year ended January 1, 2022, the Company took a full write-down of the unamortized portion of the GeoTraq intangible asset of approximately $9.8 million (see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements below).
We operate three reportable segments:
•Biotechnology: Our biotechnology segment is focused on finding treatments for conditions that cause severe pain and bringing to market drugs with non-addictive pain-relieving properties.
•Recycling: Our recycling segment is a turnkey appliance recycling program. We receive fees charged for recycling, replacement and additional services for utility energy efficiency programs and have established 20 Regional Processing Centers (“RPCs”) for this segment throughout the United States and Canada
•Technology: GeoTraq is currently in the process of suspending all operations.
Reporting Period. We report on a 52-or 53-week fiscal year. Our 2021 fiscal year ended on January 1, 2022 (“fiscal 2021”). Our 2020 fiscal year ended on January 2, 2021 (“fiscal 2020”).
Application of Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion of the financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of any contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Management regularly reviews its estimates and assumptions, which are based on historical factors and other factors believed to be relevant under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions, estimates or conditions.
Critical accounting policies are defined as those that are reflective of significant judgments and uncertainties and potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. ARCA Recycling’s critical accounting policies include intangible impairment under ASC 350, revenue recognition under ASC 606, and going concern under ASC 205.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain statement of operations items from continuing operations and as a percentage of revenue, for the periods indicated (in $000's):
The following tables set forth revenues for key product and service categories, percentages of total revenue and gross profits earned by key product and service categories and gross profit percent as compared to revenues for each key product category indicated (in $000's):
Revenue
Revenue increased by approximately $6.2 million, or 18.2%, for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021. Recycling and Byproducts revenue increased by approximately $3.3 million, or 18.3%, primarily due to increases in scrap revenues due to stronger commodity markets. Replacement Appliances revenue increased by approximately $2.9 million or 18.0%, primarily due to increased sales volume.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by approximately $6.1 million, or 24.4% for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021. Recycling and Byproducts cost of revenue increased by approximately $2.4 million, or 15.1%, which generally aligns with increases in revenue. Replacement Appliances cost of revenue increased by approximately $3.7 million or 41.7%, primarily due to a change in business mix during the year ended January 1, 2022 as opposed to the prior period.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense decreased by approximately $2.0 million or 11.1%, for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, primarily due to decreases in legal expenses, research and development costs, advertising expenses, share-based compensation expense, and professional fees, offset by increases in travel and software expenses.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net, increased by approximately $269,000 or 53.4%, for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 primarily due to an increase in equipment-related borrowing.
Impairment Charges
Impairment charges of approximately $9.8 million were recorded for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 due to the full impairment of our GeoTraq intangible. See Note 8 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of this matter.
Gain (Loss) on Litigation Settlement
For the year ended January 1, 2022, the Company recorded a loss on litigation settlement of approximately $2.0 million due to payments made under the terms of a settlement agreement with Gregg Sullivan. See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of this matter.
For the year ended January 2, 2021, the Company recorded a net gain on litigation settlement of approximately $418,000, comprised of an $800,000 gain on settlement of litigation with a former service provider (discussed below), partially offset by a loss on settlement of outstanding payables of approximately $382,000. See Note 15 of the Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of this matter.
Other Income
Other income was approximately $60,000 for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to income of approximately $15,000 the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
Segment Performance
We report our business in the following segments: Biotechnology, Recycling, and Technology. We identified these segments based on a combination of business type, customers serviced, and how we divide management responsibility. Our revenues and profits are driven through our recycling centers, e-commerce, individual sales representatives, and our internet services for our recycling and technology segment. We expect revenues and profits for our biotechnology segment to be driven by the development of pharmaceuticals that treat the root cause of pain but are non-opioid painkillers. We include Corporate expenses within the Recycling segment.
Operating loss by operating segment, is defined as loss before net interest expense, other income and expense, provision for income taxes.
Biotechnology Segment
For the fiscal years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021, respectively, our biotechnology segment incurred expenses of approximately $1.4 million and $1.7 million, related to employee costs and professional services related to research.
Recycling Segment
Our recycling segment consists of ARCA Recycling, Connexx, and ARCA Canada. Revenue increased by approximately $6.2 million, or 18.2%, for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021. Recycling and Byproducts revenue increased by approximately $3.3 million, or 18.3%, primarily due to increases in scrap revenues as a result of stronger commodity markets. Replacement Appliances revenue increased by approximately $2.8 million or 18.0%, primarily due to increased sales volume.
Cost of revenue increased by approximately $6.1 million, or 24.4%, for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021, primarily due to a change in business mix during the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the prior period.
Operating loss for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, decreased approximately $1.3 million, or 41.0%, as compared to the prior year period. The decrease in operating loss was due to decreases in selling, general and administrative expenses. The decrease in selling, general and administrative expense is primarily due to decreases in selling,
professional fees, research and development, and share-based compensation expenses, offset by increases in travel and software expenses.
Technology Segment
Our technology segment consists of GeoTraq. Operating loss for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 increased by approximately $9.5 million, as compared to the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021. The increase in operating loss is primarily due to the full impairment of the GeoTraq intangible, in the amount of approximately $9.8 million (see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements below), offset by general decreases in payroll, professional fees, and other operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of January 1, 2022, we had total cash on hand of approximately $705,000. As we continue to prepare to begin late-stage clinical development with our pharmaceutical product, JAN101, and potentially pursue strategic transactions to expand and grow our business, we regularly monitor capital market conditions and may raise additional funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities. The amount, nature and timing of any borrowings or sales of debt or equity securities will depend on our operating performance and other circumstances; our then-current commitments and obligations; the amount, nature, and timing of our capital requirements; any limitations imposed by our current credit arrangements; and overall market conditions.
In December 2019, the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) surfaced in Wuhan, China. The World Health Organization declared a global emergency on January 30, 2020, and most countries initiated travel restrictions limiting travel to other countries and lock-downs within their borders. While various vaccines have recently been introduced into the marketplace, the impacts of variant strains of the COVID-19 virus is still unknown. The widespread health crisis has adversely affected the global economy, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact demand for our products. To date, the outbreak had a material adverse impact on our operations. For example, several customers in our appliance recycling and appliance replacement business have previously suspended our ability to pick up and or replace their customers’ appliances resulting in decreased revenues for both recycling and replacement business. The future impact of the outbreak is highly uncertain and cannot be predicted and there is no assurance that the outbreak will not have another material adverse impact on the future results of the Company. The extent of the impact, if any, will depend on future developments, including actions taken to contain the coronavirus. A key task for the Company in 2021 was to begin late-stage clinical development with its pharmaceutical product, JAN101. However, the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted clinical trials in 2020, delaying recruitment in most non-COVID-19 clinical trials and even eliminating recruitment in some trials. While clinical sites have largely resumed conducting non-COVID-19 clinical trials, the backlog of subjects may adversely affect our ability to recruit for its trial, leading to longer and more expensive trials. In addition, the unknown effectiveness of the COVID-19 vaccines, particularly concerning variant strains of COVID-19, could lead to clinical sites terminating patient recruitment again during the course of the study.
On May 1, 2020, the Company entered into a promissory note (the “PPP Promissory Note”) with Texas Capital Bank, N.A. that provides for a loan in the amount of approximately $1.9 million (the “PPP Loan”) pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The PPP Loan was to mature on April 27, 2022 and bore interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum. Monthly amortized principal and interest payments were deferred for six months after the date of disbursement. The PPP Promissory Note contained events of default and other provisions customary for a loan of this type. The Paycheck Protection Program provides that the use of PPP Loan amount is limited to certain qualifying expenses and may be partially or wholly forgiven in accordance with the requirements set forth in the CARES Act. The Company has applied for forgiveness of the PPP loan in accordance with the terms of the CARES Act to the extent applicable. The full amount of the PPP Loan was forgiven during the first quarter of fiscal 2021, and, consequently, we recorded a gain due to debt forgiveness.
As of the period ending September 26, 2020, the Company received advance payments authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission and processed through two California utilities for the purposes of sustaining the workforce during the COVID 19 pandemic shutdown. The use of these funds was limited to labor and labor benefits
for impacted employees. Portions of these advances are forgivable if certain conditions are met the specifics that have not been finalized. Advance payments that are not forgiven will need to be repaid in full by December 31, 2021. Total funding received under this program, as of September 26, 2020, amounted to approximately $1.2 million. As of January 1, 2022, approximately $1.1 million had been forgiven, and approximately $74,000 had been repaid.
On January 29, 2021, the Company entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with certain institutional investors for the sale by the Company in a registered direct offering (the “S-3 Offering”) of 571,428 shares of the Company’s common stock at a pre-share purchase price of $10.50. On February 2, 2021, the S-3 Offering closed and the Company received gross proceeds of approximately $6.0 million, before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses. The Company is utilizing the net proceeds for general working capital.
Based on our current operating plans, we believe that available cash balances, funds available under our factoring agreement with Prestige Capital Finance, LLC (“Prestige Capital”), availability under our revolving related party loan, and/or other refinancing of existing indebtedness will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
During the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, cash used in operations was approximately $5.3 million, compared to cash used in operations of approximately $617,000 during the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021. The increase in cash used in operations was primarily due to the increase in net loss, as discussed above, changes in assets and liabilities, as well as noncash increases in PPP debt forgiveness and settlement of vendor advanced payments, offset by a noncash increase in impairment charges (see Note 8 to the Consolidated Financial Statements below).
Cash used in investing activities was approximately $1.7 million for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022, and was primarily due to purchases of property and equipment and intangibles. Cash used in investing activities of approximately $834,000 for fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was primarily due to purchases of property and equipment and intangibles.
Cash provided by financing activities was approximately $7.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 1, 2022 was primarily due to net proceeds of approximately $5.5 million from an equity financing, and approximately $1.8 million in proceeds from notes payable, net of repayments. Cash provided by financing activities was approximately $1.4 million for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021 was related to proceeds from short term debt of approximately $3.5 million primarily associated with the Payroll Protection Program and advances from certain customers for future services and payment of $1.5 million on its related party note.
Sources of Liquidity
We utilize cash on hand and on occasion factor certain accounts receivable invoices to cover normal and seasonal fluctuations in cash flow and to support our various growth initiatives. Our cash and cash equivalents are carried at cost and consist primarily of demand deposits with commercial banks. On March 26, 2018, the Company entered into a purchase and sale agreement with Prestige Capital, whereby from time to time the Company can factor certain accounts receivable to Prestige Capital up to a maximum advance and outstanding balance of $11.0 million. Discount fees ultimately paid depend upon how long an invoice and related amount is outstanding from ARCA Recycling’s customer. Prestige Capital has been granted a security interest in all of ARCA Recycling’s accounts receivable. The current purchase and sale agreement with Prestige Capital automatically renews every six months unless terminated by the parties.
We acknowledge that we continue to face a challenging competitive environment as we continue to focus on our overall profitability, including managing expenses. We reported a net loss of approximately $16.9 million and approximately $8.5 million in fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. Additionally, the Company has total current assets of approximately $7.6 million and total current liabilities approximately $19.4 million resulting in a net negative working capital of approximately $11.8 million.
In Item 1A. Risk Factors, management has addressed and evaluated the risk factors that could materially and adversely affect the entity’s business, financial condition and results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity. The Company has
determined that the risk factors do not materially affect the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued.
Based on the above, management has concluded that the Company is not aware and did not identify any other conditions or events that would cause the Company to not be able to continue business as a going concern for the next 12 months.
Future Sources of Cash; New Acquisitions, Products and Services
We may require additional debt financing and/or capital to finance new acquisitions, refinance existing indebtedness or consummate other strategic investments in our business. Any financing obtained may further dilute or otherwise impair the ownership interest of our existing stockholders.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
At January 1, 2022, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements, commitments or guarantees that require additional disclosure or measurement.