Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on June 17, 2020, formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to as our initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of our initial public offering, including the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, and the private placements of the private placement units, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from June 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and, subsequent to our initial public offering, identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $1,017,839 which consists of changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,272,103 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $32,313, transaction cost associated with our initial public offering of $524,859, and unrealized loss on marketable securities held in the trust account of $3,332, offset by operating and formation cost of $758,385.
For the period from June 17, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,000, which consisted of operating and formation cost of $1,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of our initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of founder shares by our sponsor and our independent directors and loans from our sponsor.
On August 17, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 15,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating total gross proceeds of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 580,000 private placement units at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit to our sponsor and certain of the underwriters of our initial public offering and certain of the underwriters’ employees, generating total gross proceeds of $5,800,000.
On August 23, 2021, the underwriters of our initial public offering notified us of their exercise of the over-allotment option in part and concurrent forfeiture of the remaining portion of such option. As such, on August 25, 2021, the underwriters purchased 761,850 additional units at $10.00 per additional unit upon the closing of the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, generating total gross proceeds of $7,618,500. Simultaneously with the closing of the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, we consummated the private placement of 15,237 additional private placement units at $10.00 per additional private placement unit to our sponsor and certain of the underwriters of our initial public offering and certain of the underwriters’ employees, generating total gross proceeds of $152,370.
Of the aggregate 15,761,850 units sold in our initial public offering, 13,365,000 units were purchased by our anchor investors. In connection with the closing of our initial public offering, the anchor investors each acquired from our sponsor an indirect economic interest in 100,000 founder shares (or an aggregate of 900,000 founder shares) at the original purchase price that our sponsor paid for the founder shares. Our sponsor has agreed to distribute such founder shares to the anchor investors after the completion of our initial business combination.
Following our initial public offering, including the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the private placements, a total of $157,618,500 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $9,292,595 in initial public offering related costs, including $3,152,370 of underwriting fees, $5,516,648 of deferred underwriting fees and $623,577 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $858,929. Net income of $1,017,839 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $32,313, unrealized loss on marketable securities held in the trust account of $3,332, changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,272,103, offering costs charged directly to operations of $19,659 and transaction costs associated with our initial public offering of $524,859. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $120,202 of cash for operating activities.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,351,816 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete our initial business combination, and to pay for directors and officers liability insurance premiums.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor, an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from the trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private placement units.
Nomura, an underwriter of our initial public offering, has indicated its intent, if so requested by us, to use its commercially reasonable efforts to underwrite, arrange and/or syndicate up to $400 million of additional financing for us in the form of equity or debt (or a combination thereof) in connection with our initial business combination, subject to market conditions and on terms and conditions satisfactory in all respects to Nomura in its sole judgment and determination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placements, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we do not complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of our sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on August 12, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial business combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters of our initial public offering are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit sold in our initial public offering, or $5,516,648 in the aggregate. Subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement, the deferred fee (i) will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete our initial business combination and (ii) will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete our initial business combination.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating net income per common share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from net income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. We adopted ASU 2020-06 effective as of January 15, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.