Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis provides information which Janus’s management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read the following discussion and analysis of Janus’s financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual report filing and 10-K, including information with respect to plans and strategy for Janus’s business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the section entitled “Risk Factors,” Janus’s actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, capital expenditures, economic and competitive conditions, regulatory changes and other uncertainties, as well as those factors discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual report filing and 10-K. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Unless otherwise indicated or the context otherwise requires, references in this Janus’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section to “Midco” “Janus,” “we,” “us,” “our,” and other similar terms refer to Midco and its subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination and to Janus International Group Inc. (Parent) and its consolidated subsidiaries after giving effect to the Business Combination.
Percentage amounts included in this 10-K have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures, but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this 10-K may vary from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual report filing and 10-K. Certain other amounts that appear in this Annual report filing and 10-K may not sum due to rounding.
Introduction
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is a supplement to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and provides additional information on our business, recent developments, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources, cash flows and results of operations. MD&A is organized as follows:
•Business Overview: This section provides a general description of our business, and a discussion of management’s general outlook regarding market demand, our competitive position and product innovation, as well as recent developments we believe are important to understanding our results of operations and financial condition or in understanding anticipated future trends.
•Basis of Presentation: This section provides a discussion of the basis on which our consolidated financial statements were prepared.
•Results of Operations: This section provides an analysis of our results of operations for the years ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020, respectively.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources: This section provides a discussion of our financial condition and an analysis of our cash flows for the years ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020, respectively. This section also provides a discussion of our contractual obligations, other purchase commitments and customer credit risk that existed at January 1, 2022, as well as a discussion of our ability to fund our future commitments and ongoing operating activities through internal and external sources of capital.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates: This section identifies and summarizes those accounting policies that significantly impact our reported results of operations and financial condition and require significant judgment or estimates on the part of management in their application.
Business Overview
Janus is a leading global manufacturer and supplier of turn-key self-storage, commercial and industrial building solutions including: roll up and swing doors, hallway systems, relocatable storage units, and facility and door automation technologies with manufacturing operations in Georgia, Texas, Arizona, Indiana, North Carolina, United Kingdom, Australia, and Singapore. The Company focuses on two primary markets, providing building solutions to the self-storage industry and the broader commercial industrial market. The self-storage industry is comprised of institutional and non-institutional facilities. Institutional facilities typically include multi-story, climate controlled facilities located in prime locations owned and/or managed by large REITs or returns-driven operators of scale and are primarily located in the top 50 MSAs, whereas the vast majority of non-institutional facilities are single-story, non-climate controlled facilities located outside of city centers owned and/or managed by smaller private operators that are mostly located outside of the top 50 U.S. MSAs. Janus is highly integrated with customers at every phase of a project, including facility planning/design, construction, access control and restore, rebuild, replace of damaged or end-of-life products.
Our business is operated through two geographic regions that comprise our two reportable segments: Janus North America and Janus International. The Janus International segment is comprised of Janus International Europe Holdings Ltd. (UK), whose production and sales are largely in Europe and Australia. The Janus North America segment is comprised of all the other entities including Janus Core, BETCO, NOKE, ASTA, DBCI, ACT, Janus Door, and Steel Door Depot.com.
Furthermore, our business is comprised of three primary sales channels: New Construction-Self-storage, R3-Self-storage (R3), and Commercial and Other. The Commercial and Other category is primarily comprised of roll-up sheet and rolling steel door sales into the commercial marketplace.
New construction consists of engineering and project management work pertaining to the design, building, and logistics of a greenfield new self-storage facility tailored to customer specifications while being compliant with ADA regulations. Any Nokē Smart Entry System revenue associated with a new construction project also rolls up into this sales channel.
The concept of Janus R3 is to replace storage unit doors, optimizing unit mix and idle land, and adding a more robust security solution to enable customers to (1) charge higher rental rates and (2) compete with modern self-storage facilities and large operators. In addition, the R3 sales channel also includes new self-storage capacity being brought online through conversions and expansions. R3 transforms facilities through door replacement, facility upgrades, Nokē Smart Entry Systems, and relocatable storage MASS.
Commercial light duty steel roll-up doors are designed for applications that require less frequent and less demanding operations. Janus offers heavy duty commercial grade steel doors (minimized dead-load, or constant weight of the curtain itself) perfect for warehouses, commercial buildings, and terminals, designed with a higher gauge and deeper guides, which combats the heavy scale of use with superior strength and durability. Janus also offers rolling steel doors known for minimal maintenance and easy installation with, but not limited to, the following options, commercial slat doors, heavy duty service doors, fire doors, fire rated counter shutters, insulated service doors, counter shutters and grilles.
Executive Overview
Janus’s financials reflect the result of the execution of our operational and corporate strategy to penetrate the fast-growing commercial storage market, expanding its self-storage market share, as well as capitalizing on the aging self-storage facilities, while continuing to diversify our products and solutions. We believe Janus is a bespoke provider of not only products, but solutions that generate a favorable financial outcome for our clients.
During the last two years, we have acquired Steel Storage Australia and Asia, PTI Australasia Pty Ltd., G&M, DBCI, and ACT to expand geographically. Our M&A activity has collectively enhanced our growth trajectory, technology and global footprint, while providing us access to highly attractive adjacent categories.
Total revenue was $750.1 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, representing an increase of 36.6% from $549.0 million for the year ended December 26, 2020.
Revenues increased in 2021 as compared to 2020 largely due to continued strong performance within both the R3 and Commercial and Other sales channels and $36.6 million of inorganic growth as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions coupled with the COVID-19 pandemic impacting prior year revenue in 2020. The same trends were generally present in both the Janus North America segment as well as the Janus International segment, indicative of a worldwide continued recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Adjusted EBITDA was $148.2 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, representing a 17.2% increase from $126.4 million for the year ended December 26, 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue was 19.8% for the year ended January 1, 2022, representing a decrease of 3.3% from 23.0% for the year ended December 26, 2020. The reduction in Adjusted EBITDA margins is a direct result of the inflationary increases in raw material, labor and logistics costs impacting the business in advance of price increases taking effect. In addition to the inflationary cost pressures, Janus also experienced incremental costs as a public company and incremental headcount costs associated with strategic investments in both our Facilitate division coupled with our continued build out of our Nokē Smart entry ground game and customer service department.
Information regarding use of Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP measure, and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, the most comparable GAAP measure, is included in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
On August 18, 2021, the Company completed a refinancing of its First Lien Amendment No. 3, in which the principal terms of the amendment were new borrowings of $155.0 million which were used to fund the DBCI acquisition. In addition, the Company increased the available line of credit from $50.0 million to $80.0 million and extended the maturity date. (See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section).
In an effort to accelerate the plant consolidation efforts as a result of the recent DBCI acquisition, the Company purchased a property in Houston, Texas with the intent of entering into a sale and leaseback transaction with a third party. On December 30, 2021, the Company entered into a sale and 15 year leaseback of the land, building, and building improvements with Jandoor Multi, LLC for a fixed sales price of approximately $9.6 million which was exchanged in cash at closing. This transaction was accounted for under ASC 840 and due to the timing of the transaction there was no gain or loss recorded as a result of this transaction.
The Business Combination
On June 7, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), Juniper Industrial Holdings, Inc. (“Juniper”) consummated a business combination with Midco pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination”). Pursuant to ASC 805, for financial accounting and reporting purposes, Midco was deemed the accounting acquirer and Juniper was treated as the accounting acquiree, and the Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. At the Closing Date of the business combination, each outstanding unit of Midco’s Class A Preferred and Class B Common converted into our common stock at the then-effective conversion rate. Immediately upon the completion of the Business Combination, Juniper and Midco became wholly-owned subsidiaries of Janus International Group, Inc. The shares of common stock and warrants of the Company are currently traded on the NYSE under the symbols “JBI” and “JBI WS”, respectively.
As a result of the Business Combination, equityholders of Midco received aggregate consideration with a value equal to $1.2 billion which consisted of (i) $541.7 million in cash and (ii) $702.7 million in shares of our Common Stock, or 70,270,400 shares based on an assumed stock price of $10.00 per share. In connection with the closing of the Business Combination, the Sponsor received 2,000,000 shares of our Common Stock (pro rata among the Sponsor shares and shares held by certain affiliates) (the “Earnout Shares”) contingent upon
achieving certain market share price milestone as outlined in the Business Combination Agreement. The vesting of the Earnout Shares occurred as of the close of the trading on June 21, 2021.
Part of the proceeds from the merger were used to pay a non-liquidating cash distribution to Janus Midco unitholders’ in the amount of $541.7 million and partial payment to Note Payable in the amount of $61.6 million. (See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section).
Business Segment Information
Our business is operated through two geographic regions that comprise our two reportable segments: Janus North America and Janus International.
Janus North America is comprised of eight operating segments including Janus Core, Janus Door, Steel Door Depot, ASTA, NOKE, BETCO, DBCI, and ACT. Janus North America produces and provides various fabricated components such as commercial and self-storage doors, walls, hallway systems and building components used primarily by owners or builders of self-storage facilities and also offers installation services along with the products. Janus North America represented 90.9% and 91.7% of Janus’s revenue for the years ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020, respectively.
Janus International is comprised solely of one operating segment, Janus International Europe Holdings Ltd (UK). The Janus International segment produces and provides similar products and services as Janus North America but largely in Europe as well as Australia. Janus International represented 9.1% and 8.3% of Janus’s revenue for the years ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020, respectively.
Acquisitions
Our highly accretive M&A strategy focuses on (i) portfolio diversification into attractive and logical adjacencies, (ii) geographic expansion, and (iii) technological innovation.
Inorganic growth, through acquisitions, serves to increase Janus’s strategic growth. Since 2020, Janus has completed five acquisitions which contributed a combined $46.1 million inorganic revenue increase from December 29, 2019 through January 1, 2022. Refer to Item 1A. Risk Factors within this Form 10-K section further information on the risks associated with integration of these acquisitions. Janus acquired the following seven companies to fuel the inorganic growth of its manufacturing capabilities, product offerings, and technology solutions provided to customers.
On January 2, 2020, Janus’s wholly-owned subsidiary, JIE purchased 100% of the outstanding shares of Steel Storage Asia Pte Ltd. and Steel Storage Australia Pty Ltd. (collectively “Steel Storage” or “SSA”) for $6.5 million. The rationale for the Steel Storage acquisition was geographic expansion. The Steel Storage acquisition specifically expanded Janus’s global presence.
On March 31, 2020, Janus’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Steel Storage Australia Pty Ltd. purchased 100% of the assets of PTI Australasia Pty Ltd., a provider of access control security in the self-storage design and commercial industries in Australia, New Zealand and surrounding regions, for $0.032 million. The PTI Australasia Pty Ltd. acquisition specifically bolstered the adoption of Nokē Smart Entry Systems in Australia and New Zealand.
On January 18, 2021, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary Steel Storage Australia Pty Ltd. acquired 100% of the net assets of G & M Stor-More Pty Ltd. for approximately $1.74 million. G & M Stor-More Pty Ltd. has over 23 years’ experience in self-storage building, design, construction and consultation. As a result of the acquisition, the Company will have an opportunity to increase its customer base of the self-storage industry and expand its product offerings in the Australian market.
On August 18, 2021, the Group, through its wholly owned subsidiary Janus Core acquired 100% of the equity interests of DBCI, a company incorporated in Delaware, for approximately $169.2 million. DBCI is a manufacturer of exterior building products in North America, with over 25 years’ servicing commercial, residential and repair markets. As a result of the acquisition, the Company will have an opportunity to increase its customer base of both the commercial and self-storage industries and expand its product offerings in the North American market.
On August 31, 2021, the Group, through its wholly owned subsidiary Janus Core acquired 100% of the equity of ACT, a company incorporated in North Carolina, for approximately $10.3 million. Through this acquisition, the Group also acquired all assets and certain liabilities of Phoenix, a company incorporated in North Carolina. ACT has specialized in protecting critical assets in the self-storage and industrial building industries for over 7 years. The ACT team is comprised of security industry experts who continually train to be at the forefront of emerging industry trends, technological advancements, and new security vulnerabilities or hazards that threaten their clients. As a result of the acquisition, the Company will have an opportunity to expand its Nokē Smart Entry ground game.
Impact of Brexit
The U.K. exit from the European Union on January 31, 2020, commonly referred to as Brexit, has caused, and may continue to cause, uncertainty in the global markets. Political and regulatory responses to the withdrawal are still developing, and we are in the process of
assessing the impact that the withdrawal may have on our business as more information becomes available. Any impact from Brexit on our business and operations over the long term will depend, in part, on the outcome of tariff, tax treaties, trade, regulatory, and other negotiations the U.K. conducts.
Impact of COVID-19 and the CARES Act
In early 2020, the Coronavirus (COVID-19) swiftly began to spread globally, and the World Health Organization (WHO) subsequently declared COVID-19 to be a public health emergency of international concern on March 11, 2020. The COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in travel restrictions and in some cases, prohibitions of non-essential activities, disruption and shutdown of certain businesses and greater uncertainty in global financial markets. The full extent to which COVID-19 impacts Janus’s business, results of operations and financial condition are dependent on the further duration and spread of the outbreak mainly within the United States, Europe, and Australia.
To aid in combating the negative business impacts of COVID-19, the federal government enacted the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act” on March 27, 2020. Under the CARES Act, Janus deferred $2.6 million in payroll taxes of which half of the balance was paid on December 31, 2021 and the remaining balance, or $1.3 million is due December 31, 2022.
As a result of COVID-19 and in support of continuing its manufacturing efforts, Janus has undertaken a number of steps to protect its employees, suppliers and customers, as their safety and well-being is one of our top priorities. Janus has taken several safety measures including implementing social distancing practices and requiring employees to wear masks. There was $1.3 million in COVID-19 related expenses in the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily related to COVID-19 PPE supplies and COVID tests.
Notwithstanding our continued operations and performance, the COVID-19 pandemic may continue to have negative impacts on our operations, supply chain, transportation networks and customers, which may compress our margins as a result of preventative and precautionary measures that Janus, other businesses, and governments are taking. Any resulting economic downturn could adversely affect demand for our products and contribute to volatile supply and demand conditions affecting prices and volumes in the markets for our products, services and raw materials. The progression of this matter could also negatively impact our business or results of operations through the temporary closure of our operating locations or those of our customers or suppliers, among others. In addition, the ability of our employees and our suppliers’ and customers’ employees to work may be significantly impacted by individuals contracting or being exposed to COVID-19, or as a result of the control measures noted above, which may significantly hamper our production throughout the supply chain and constrict sales channels. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may adversely impact our business depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and unpredictable, including new information concerning the severity of the pandemic and the effectiveness of actions globally to contain or mitigate its effects.
Our consolidated financial statements and discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations reflect estimates and assumptions made by management as of January 1, 2022. Events and changes in circumstances arising after January 1, 2022, including those resulting from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, will be reflected in management’s estimates for future periods.
Management continues to monitor the impact of the global situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce.
Key Performance Measures
Management evaluates the performance of its reportable segments based on the revenue of services and products, gross profit, operating margins, and cash from business operations. We use Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial metric, as a supplemental measure of our performance in order to provide investors with an improved understanding of underlying performance trends. Please see the section “Non-GAAP Financial Measure” below for further discussion of this financial measure, including the reasons why we use such financial measures and reconciliations of such financial measures to the nearest GAAP financial measures.
Human capital is also one of the main cost drivers of the manufacturing, selling, and administrative processes of Janus. As a result, headcount is reflective of the health of Janus indicative of an expansion or contraction of the overall business. We expect to continue to increase headcount in the future as we grow our business. Moreover, we expect that we will continue to hire additional accounting, finance, and other personnel in connection with our becoming, and our efforts to comply with the requirement of being a public company.
The following table sets forth key performance measures for the years ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020
(dollar amounts in thousands)
As of January 1, 2022, and December 26, 2020, the headcount was 2,017 (including 440 temporary employees) and 1,607 (including 332 temporary employees), respectively.
Total revenue increased by $201.2 million or 36.6% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 primarily due to increased volumes and improved market conditions in 2021 as the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted revenue in the second and third quarters of 2020 coupled with a $36.6 million increase in inorganic revenue growth as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions. In addition, we began to see a more meaningful impact from our commercial actions in the second half of 2021. (See Results of Operations section).
Adjusted EBITDA increased by $21.8 million or 17.2% from the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 primarily due to increased revenue which was partially offset by increased cost of sales and general and administrative expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue decreased 3.3% for the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to inflationary increases to raw material, labor and logistics costs in advance of commercial and cost containment actions taking effect. In addition to the inflationary cost pressures, Janus also experienced incremental costs as a public company and incremental headcount costs associated with strategic investments in both our Facilitate division coupled with our continued build out of our Nokē Smart entry ground game and customer service department. (See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section)
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements have been derived from the accounts of Janus and its wholly owned subsidiaries. Janus’s fiscal year follows a 4-4-5 calendar which divides a year into four quarters of 13 weeks, grouped into two 4-week “months” and one 5-week “month.” As a result, some monthly comparisons are not comparable as one month is longer than the other two. The major advantage of a 4-4-5 calendar is that the end date of the period is always the same day of the week, making manufacturing planning easier as every period is the same length. Every fifth or sixth year will require a 53rd week and the year ended January 1, 2022 was a year in which we added a 53rd week.
We have presented results of operations, including the related discussion and analysis for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020.
Components of Results of Operations
Sales of products. Sale of products represents the revenue from the sale of products, including steel roll-up and swing doors, rolling steel doors, steel structures, as well as hallway systems and facility and door automation technologies for commercial and self-storage customers. Product revenue is recognized upon transfer of control to the customer, which generally takes place at the point of destination (Janus Core) and at the point of shipping (all other segments). We expect our product revenue may vary from period to period on, among other things, the timing and size of orders and delivery of products and the impact of significant transactions. Revenues are monitored and analyzed as a function of sales reporting within the following sales channels, Self-Storage New Construction, Self-Storage R3, and Commercial and Other.
Sales of services. Service revenue reflects installation services to customers for steel facilities, steel roll-up and swing doors, hallway systems, and relocatable storage units which is recognized over time based on the satisfaction of our performance obligation. Janus is highly integrated with customers at every phase of a project, including facility planning/design, construction, access control and R3 of damaged, or end-of-life products or rebranding of facilities due to market consolidation. Service obligations are primarily short term and completed within a one-year time period. We expect our service revenue to increase as we add new customers and our existing customers continue to add more and more content per square foot.
Cost of sales. Our cost of sales consists of the cost of products and cost of services. Cost of products includes the manufacturing cost of our steel roll-up and swing doors, rolling steel doors, steel structures, and hallway systems which primarily consists of amounts paid to our third-party contract suppliers and personnel-related costs directly associated with manufacturing operations as well as overhead and indirect costs. Cost of services includes third-party installation subcontractor costs directly associated with the installation of our products. Our cost of sales include purchase price variance, cost of spare or replacement parts, warranty costs, excess and obsolete inventory charges, shipping costs, and an allocated portion of overhead costs, including depreciation. We expect cost of sales to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we expect our revenues to continue to grow.
Selling and marketing expense. Selling expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits of employees engaged in selling activities as well as related travel, advertising, trade shows/conventions, meals and entertainment expenses. We expect selling expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we expect our revenues to continue to grow.
General and administrative expense. General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses are comprised primarily of expenses relating to employee compensation and benefits, travel, meals and entertainment expenses as well as depreciation, amortization, and public company costs. We expect general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we expect our revenues to continue to
grow. We also expect G&A expenses to increase in the near term as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses associated with compliance with the rules and regulations of the Commission, and an increase in legal, audit, insurance, investor relations, professional services and other administrative expenses.
Interest expense. Consists of interest expense on short-term and long-term debt and amortization on deferred financing fees (see “Long Term Debt” section).
Factors Affecting the Results of Operations
Key Factors Affecting the Business and Financial Statements
Janus’s management believes their performance and future growth depends on a number of factors that present significant opportunities but also pose risks and challenges.
Factors Affecting Revenues
Janus’s revenues from products sold are driven by economic conditions, which impacts new construction of self-storage facilities, R3 of self-storage facilities, and commercial revenue.
Janus periodically modifies sales prices of their products due to changes in costs for raw materials and energy, market conditions, labor and logistics costs and the competitive environment. In certain cases, realized price increases are less than the announced price increases because of project pricing, competitive reactions and changing market conditions. Janus also offers a wide assortment of products that are differentiated by style, design and performance attributes. Pricing and margins for products within the assortment vary. In addition, changes in the relative quantity of products purchased at different price points can impact year-to-year comparisons of net sales and operating income.
Service revenue is driven by the product revenue and the increase in value-added services, such as pre-work planning, site drawings, installation and general contracting, project management, and third-party security. Janus differentiates itself through on-time delivery, efficient installation, best in-class service, and a reputation for high quality products.
Factors Affecting Growth Through Acquisitions
Janus’s business strategy involves growth through, among other things, the acquisition of other companies. Janus tries to evaluate companies that it believes will strategically fit into its business and growth objectives. If Janus is unable to successfully integrate and develop acquired businesses, it could fail to achieve anticipated synergies and cost savings, including any expected increases in revenues and operating results, which could have a material adverse effect on its financial results.
Janus may not be able to identify suitable acquisition or strategic investment opportunities or may be unable to obtain the required consent of its lenders and, therefore, may not be able to complete such acquisitions or strategic investments. Janus may incur expenses associated with sourcing, evaluating and negotiating acquisitions (including those that do not get completed), and it may also pay fees and expenses associated with financing acquisitions to investment banks and other advisors. Any of these amounts may be substantial, and together with the size, timing and number of acquisitions Janus pursues, may negatively affect and cause significant volatility in its financial results.
In addition, Janus has assumed, and may in the future assume, liabilities of the company it is acquiring. While Janus retains third-party advisors to consult on potential liabilities related to these acquisitions, there can be no assurances that all potential liabilities will be identified or known to it. If there are unknown liabilities or other obligations, Janus’s business could be materially affected.
Seasonality
Generally, Janus’s sales tend to be the slowest in January due to more unfavorable weather conditions, customer business cycles and the timing of renovation and new construction project launches.
Factors Affecting Operating Costs
Janus’s operating expenses are comprised of direct production costs (principally raw materials, labor and energy), manufacturing overhead costs, freight, costs to purchase sourced products and selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses.
Janus’s largest individual raw material expenditure is steel coils. Fluctuations in the prices of steel coil are generally beyond Janus’s control and have a direct impact on the financial results. In 2020 and 2021, Janus entered into agreements with three of its largest suppliers in order to lock in steel coil prices for part of Janus’s production needs and partially mitigate the potential impacts of short-term steel coil price fluctuations. This arrangement allows Janus to purchase quantities of product within specified ranges as outlined in the contracts.
Freight costs are driven by Janus’s volume of sales of products and are subject to the freight market pricing environment.
Results of Operations - Consolidated
The period to period comparisons of our results of operations have been prepared using the historical periods included in our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this document. We have derived this data from our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual filing and 10-K. The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented in dollars and as a percentage of total revenue.
Results of Operations
(dollar amounts in thousands)
For the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020
Revenue
(dollar amounts in thousands)
The $201.2 million revenue increase for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 is primarily attributable to increased volumes as a result of favorable industry dynamics in both the commercial and R3 sales channels coupled with inorganic growth of $36.6 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions. In addition, we began to see a more meaningful impact from our commercial actions in the second half of the year. The inorganic growth as a result of the G&M Stor-More Pty Ltd. acquisition is not separately stated above as the amount is not significant.
The following table and discussion compares Janus’s sales by sales channel (dollar amounts in thousands).
New construction sales increased by $21.9 million or 8.3% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020, respectively. The increase in the year ended January 1, 2022 is primarily due to commercial initiatives and strong growth from the International segment partially offset by delays in greenfield projects caused by permitting delays associated with the COVID-19 global pandemic, coupled with the continued trend of new self-storage capacity being brought online through conversions and expansions, which roll up under R3.
R3 sales increased by $70.4 million or 46.6% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 due to the increase of conversions and expansions as more self-storage capacity continues to be brought online through R3 as opposed to greenfield sites coupled with the positive impacts from commercial actions.
Commercial and other sales increased by $108.9 million or 81.4% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 due to Janus Core and ASTA experiencing favorable market gains due to the continued e-commerce movement coupled with share gains in the commercial steel roll up door market from ASTA’s launch of the rolling steel product line in the fourth quarter of 2020. In addition, the commercial and other sales channel continued to benefit from the commercial actions instituted earlier in the year.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
(dollar amounts in thousands)
Gross margin decreased by 3.6% to 33.5% for the year ended January 1, 2022 from 37.1% for the year ended December 26, 2020 due primarily to increased raw material, labor and logistics costs in advance of commercial and cost containment initiatives taking effect.
The $153.6 million or 44.5% increase in cost of sales for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 is primarily attributable to increased revenue coupled with an increase in raw material, labor and logistics costs on a global basis. In addition, there was an inorganic increase of $26.3 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions.
Operating Expenses - Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expense increased $11.8 million or 34.1% from the year ended December 26, 2020 compared to the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to increased marketing, trade show and payroll related costs for additional headcount to support revenue growth coupled with limited travel, marketing and trade show costs in the prior year due to the pandemic. In addition, there was an increase in selling and marketing expenses of $1.4 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions.
Operating Expenses - General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $35.0 million or 45.5% from the year ended December 26, 2020 compared to the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to an increase in general liability and health insurance, professional fees and payroll related costs for additional headcount to support the continued top line revenue growth coupled with the transition to a public company and $6.9 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions. In addition, the Company incurred transaction related costs in conjunction with the June 2021 business combination of approximately $10.4 million which is further discussed in the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section.
Operating Expenses - Contingent consideration and earnout fair value adjustments
Contingent consideration and earnout fair value adjustments increased by $2.9 million or 131.6% from $(2.2) million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $0.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022. The increase for the year ended is due to a $0.7 million adjustment related to the change in fair value of the earnout of the 2,000,000 common stock shares that were issued and released on June 21,
2021 and a $(2.2) million contingent consideration fair value adjustment related to the acquisition of NOKE and BETCO for the year ended December 26, 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased $3.1 million or 8.7% from the year ended December 26, 2020 compared to the year ended January 1, 2022 due to a lower interest rate environment coupled with a $2.0 million debt prepayment in July 2020. In addition, the Company entered into a Debt Modification agreement in February 2021 which consolidated the prior two outstanding tranches into a single tranche and resulted in a reduction in the overall interest rate. In conjunction with the business combination on June 7, 2021, the Company made a $61.6 million prepayment on debt. On August 18, 2021, the Company completed a refinancing of its First Lien Amendment No. 3, in which the principal terms of the amendment were new borrowings of $155.0 million which partially offset the above decreases in the interest expense. (See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section).
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) decreased by $3.8 million or 853.7% from $0.4 million of other income for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $3.3 million of other (expense) for the year ended January 1, 2022. The increase in other (expense) for the year ended is primarily due to a $2.4 million loss on extinguishment of debt and a $0.8 million loss on abandonment included in the year ended January 1, 2022 but not present in the year ended December 26, 2020.
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities
Change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities decreased by $5.9 million or 100.0% from $- for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $(5.9) million for the year ended January 1, 2022. The decrease for the year ended is due to a $5.9 million fair value of warrant liabilities adjustment included in the year ended January 1, 2022 but not present in the year ended December 26, 2020. All warrants were redeemed in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense increased by $4.4 million or 206.6% from $2.1 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $6.5 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 due to a tax structure change from a limited liability company that was considered a disregarded entity for tax purposes to a Corporation as a result of the Business Combination that occurred on June 7, 2021.
Net Income
The $13.0 million or 22.9% decrease in net income for the year ended December 26, 2020 compared to the year ended January 1, 2022 is largely due to an increase in raw material, labor and logistics costs coupled with increased selling and general and administrative expenses and income taxes.
Segment Results of Operations
We operate in and report financial results for two segments: North America and International with the following sales channels, Self-Storage New Construction, Self-Storage R3, and Commercial and Other.
Segment operating income is the measure of profit and loss that our chief operating decision maker uses to evaluate the financial performance of the business and as the basis for resource allocation, performance reviews and compensation. For these reasons, we believe that Segment operating income represents the most relevant measure of Segment profit and loss. Our chief operating decision maker may exclude certain charges or gains, such as corporate charges and other special charges, to arrive at a Segment operating income that is a more meaningful measure of profit and loss upon which to base our operating decisions. We define Segment operating margin as Segment operating income as a percentage of the segment’s Net revenues.
The segment discussion that follows describes the significant factors contributing to the changes in results for each segment included in net earnings.
Results of Operations - Janus North America
(dollar amounts in thousands)
For the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020
Revenue
(dollar amounts in thousands)
The $194.8 million or 37.5% revenue increase is primarily attributable to increased volumes as a result of favorable industry dynamics in both the commercial and R3 sales channels coupled with inorganic growth of $36.6 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions. In addition, we began to see a more meaningful impact from our commercial actions in the second half of the year.
The following table and discussion compares Janus North America sales by sales channel (dollar amounts in thousands).
New Construction sales decreased by $0.1 million or -% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 due to continued delays in projects associated with the COVID-19 global pandemic, coupled with the continued trend of new self-storage capacity being brought online through conversions and expansions, which are included in R3 sales. These decreases were partially offset by some commercial actions flowing through in the second half of the year.
R3 sales increased by $77.9 million or 58.9% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 due primarily to the continued trend of new self-storage capacity being brought online through conversions and expansions coupled with the positive impacts from commercial actions.
Commercial and Other sales increased by $116.8 million or 82.7% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 due to increases in both Janus Core and ASTA commercial steel roll up door market, from strong momentum with the launch of the ASTA rolling steel product line in the fourth quarter of 2020 and commercial initiatives implemented to offset the inflationary increases of raw materials, labor, and logistics costs.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
(dollar amounts in thousands)
Gross Margin decreased by 3.8% to 32.6% for the year ended January 1, 2022 from 36.5% for the year ended December 26, 2020 due primarily to continued increased raw material, labor and logistics costs in advance of commercial and cost containment initiatives taking effect.
The $151.5 million or 45.9% increase in cost of sales for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020 is primarily due to increased revenue coupled with an increase in raw material, labor, and logistics costs. In addition, there was an inorganic increase of $24.3 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions.
Operating Expenses - Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expenses increased $10.7 million or 33.4% from $31.9 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $42.6 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to increased marketing and trade show and payroll related costs for additional headcount to support revenue growth coupled with lower spend on travel, marketing and trade shows in the prior year due to the pandemic. In addition, there was an increase in selling and marketing expenses of $1.4 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions.
Operating Expenses - General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $25.5 million or 37.2% from $68.5 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $94.0 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to an increase in general liability and health insurance, professional fees and payroll related costs for additional headcount to support the incremental revenue coupled with the transition to a public company and $6.9 million as a result of the DBCI and ACT acquisitions. In addition, the Company incurred transaction related costs in conjunction with the June 2021 business combination of approximately $10.4 million which is further discussed in the Non-GAAP Financial Measures section.
Operating Expenses - Contingent consideration and earnout fair value adjustments
Contingent consideration and earnout fair value adjustments increased by $2.9 million or 131.6% from $(2.2) million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $0.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022. The increase for the year ended is due to a $0.7 million adjustment related to the change in fair value of the earnout of the 2,000,000 common stock shares that were issued and released on June 21, 2021 and a $(2.2) million contingent consideration fair value adjustment related to the acquisition of NOKE and BETCO for the year ended December 26, 2020.
Income from Operations
Income from operations increased by $4.3 million or 4.7% from $91.7 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $95.9 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 due to an increase in revenue offset by an increase in cost of sales, selling and general and administrative expenses.
INTERNATIONAL
(dollar amounts in thousands)
Results of Operations - Janus International- For the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020
Revenue
(dollar amounts in thousands)
The $23.1 million revenue increase includes a 50.8% increase in organic growth driven by increased sales volumes due to improved market conditions in 2021 as compared to the pandemic impacted 2020 results. The inorganic growth as a result of the G&M Stor-More Pty Ltd. is not separately stated above as the amount is not significant.
The following table illustrates the sales by channel for the year ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020 (dollar amounts in thousands).
New Construction sales increased by $25.0 million or 93.7% to $51.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 from $26.7 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 due to increased volumes and improved market conditions as the international market continues to open up after the COVID-19 pandemic.
R3 sales decreased by $1.9 million or 10.0% to $16.9 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 from $18.7 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 due primarily to project mix fluctuations reflective of the pent up demand in new construction activity resulting from COVID-19 lockdowns in the prior year.
Cost of Sales and Gross Margin
(dollar amounts in thousands)
Gross Margin decreased by 4.0% to 26.4% for the year ended January 1, 2022 from 30.4% for the year ended December 26, 2020. The decline in the year ended January 1, 2022 is the result of higher raw material, labor and logistics costs and an increase in mezzanine product sales which have a lower margin profile than typical product offerings as these products are buy-resale, coupled with increased overhead costs as the business continues to add infrastructure to support the strategic growth plan.
Cost of sales increased by $18.8 million or 59.5% from $31.6 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $50.5 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 generally in line with a 50.8% increase in revenues coupled with an increase in raw material, labor and logistics costs and mezzanine product sales.
Operating Expenses - Selling and marketing
Selling and marketing expense increased by $1.1 million or 42.5% from $2.6 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $3.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to an increase in commission expense as a result of higher sales coupled with an increase in travel and marketing costs in 2021 compared to prior year as these expenses were significantly cut back due to the COVID-19 global pandemic.
Operating Expenses - General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $9.5 million or 113.0% from $8.4 million for the year ended December 26, 2020 to $18.0 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 primarily due to the continued investment in personnel and infrastructure to support the strategic growth objectives and public company requirements of the international business operations coupled with lower costs in 2020 associated with the pandemic.
Income from Operations
Income from operations decreased by $6.4 million or 227.0% from an $2.8 million income for the year ended December 26, 2020 to a $3.6 million loss for the year ended January 1, 2022. The decrease was primarily due to an increase in revenue which was offset by increased raw material, labor, logistics, selling and general and administrative expenses.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
(dollar amounts in thousands)
Janus uses measures of performance that are not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP in the United States. Non-GAAP financial performance measures are used to supplement the financial information presented on a GAAP basis. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the relevant GAAP measures and should be read in conjunction with information presented on a GAAP basis.
Janus presents Adjusted EBITDA which is a non-GAAP financial performance measure, which excludes from reported GAAP results, the impact of certain items consisting of acquisition events and other non-recurring charges. Janus believes such expenses, charges, and gains are not indicative of normal, ongoing operations, and their inclusion in results makes for more difficult comparisons between years and with peer group companies.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure used by Janus to evaluate its operating performance, generate future operating plans, and make strategic decisions, including those relating to operating expenses and the allocation of internal resources. Accordingly, Janus believes these measures provide useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating Janus’s operating results in the same manner as its management and board of directors. In addition, they provide useful measures for period-to-period comparisons of Janus’s business, as they remove the effect of certain non-cash items and certain variable charges. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income excluding interest expense, income taxes, depreciation expense, amortization, and other non-operational, non-recurring items.
Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net income (loss), which is the nearest GAAP equivalent of Adjusted EBITDA. These limitations include that the non-GAAP financial measures:
•exclude depreciation and amortization, and although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated may be replaced in the future;
•do not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest on debt, which reduces cash available;
•do not reflect the provision for or benefit from income tax that may result in payments that reduce cash available;
•exclude non-recurring items which are unlikely to occur again and have not occurred before (e.g., the extinguishment of debt); and
•may not be comparable to similar non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies, because the expenses and other items that Janus excludes in the calculation of these non-GAAP financial measures may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from these non-GAAP financial measures when they report their operating results.
Because of these limitations, these non-GAAP financial measures should be considered along with other operating and financial performance measures presented in accordance with GAAP.
The following table present a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods indicated:
(dollar amounts in thousands)
(1)Retainer fee paid to former BETCO owner, during the transition to a new President to run the business and related one-time-consulting fee.
(2)Adjustment for loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt regarding the write off of unamortized fees and third-party fees as a result of the debt modification completed in February 2021 and the prepayment of debt in the amount of $61.6 million that occurred on June 7, 2021 in conjunction with the Business Combination. In July 2020, Janus repurchased approximately $2.0 million of principal amount of the 1st Lien at an approximate $0.3 million discount, resulting in a gain on the extinguishment of debt. See Liquidity and Capital Resources section.
(3)Expenses which are one-time and non-recurring related to the COVID-19 pandemic. See Impact of COVID-19 section.
(4)Transaction related expenses incurred as a result of the Business Combination on June 7, 2021 which consist of employee bonuses and the transaction cost allocation.
(5)Expenses related to the facility relocation for Steel Storage and Janus Core.
(6)Share-based compensation expense associated with Midco, LLC Class B Common units that fully vested at the date of the Business Combination.
(7)Adjustment related to the change in fair value of the earnout of the 2,000,000 common stock shares that were issued and released on June 21, 2021. Contingent consideration adjustment related to the acquisition of NOKE and BETCO for the period ended December 26, 2020.
(8)Adjustment related to the change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities for the private placement warrants prior to the redemption of the warrants in Q4 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We assess our liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund our operating, investing and financing activities. In doing so, we review and analyze our current cash on hand, days sales outstanding, inventory turns, days payable outstanding, capital expenditure forecasts, interest and principal payments on debt and income tax payments.
Our primary sources of liquidity include cash balances on hand, cash flows from operations, proceeds from equity, debt offerings and borrowing availability under our existing credit facility. We believe our operating cash flows, along with funds available under the line of credit, provide sufficient liquidity to support Janus’s liquidity and financing needs, which are working capital requirements, capital expenditures, service of indebtedness, as well as to finance acquisitions.
Financial Policy
Our financial policy seeks to: (i) selectively invest in organic and inorganic growth to enhance our portfolio, including certain strategic capital investments and (ii) maintain appropriate leverage by using free cash flows to repay outstanding borrowings.
Liquidity Policy
We maintain a strong focus on liquidity and define our liquidity risk tolerance based on sources and uses to maintain a sufficient liquidity position to meet our obligations under both normal and stressed conditions. At Janus, we manage our liquidity to provide access to sufficient funding to meet our business needs and financial obligations, as well as capital allocation and growth objectives, throughout business cycles.
Cash Management
Janus manages its operating cash management activities through banking relationships for the domestic entities and international entities. Domestic subsidiaries monitor cash balances on a monthly basis and excess cash is transferred to Janus to pay down intercompany debt, interest on the intercompany debt and intercompany sales of products and materials and other services. International subsidiaries monitor excess cash balances on a periodic basis and transfer excess cash flow to Janus in the form of a dividend. Janus compiles a monthly standalone business unit and consolidated 13-week cash flow forecast to monitor various cash activities and forecast cash balances to fund operational activities.
Holding Company Status
Janus International Group, Inc. was formed to consummate the business combination and act as a holding company of the Group, as such owns no material assets and does not conduct any business operations of its own. As a result, Janus International Group, Inc. is largely dependent upon cash dividends and distributions and other transfers from its subsidiaries to meet obligations. The agreements governing the indebtedness of our subsidiaries impose restrictions on our subsidiaries’ ability to pay dividends or make other distributions to us.
Foreign Exchange
We have operations in various foreign countries, principally the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Australia, and Singapore. Therefore, changes in the value of the related currencies affect our financial statements when translated into U.S. dollars.
LIBOR Reform
In connection with the potential transition away from the use of the LIBOR as an interest rate benchmark, we are currently in the process of identifying and managing the potential impact to Janus. The majority of Janus’s exposure to LIBOR relates to the Amendment No. 4 1st Lien note payable which is discussed further below.
Debt Profile
(dollar amounts in thousands)
(1)The interest rate on the 1st Lien term loan as of December 26, 2020, was 4.75%, which is a variable rate based on LIBOR, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus an applicable margin percent of 3.75%
(2)The interest rate on the 1st Lien B2 term loan as of December 26, 2020, was 5.50%, which is a variable rate based on LIBOR, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus an applicable margin percent of 4.50%
(3)The interest rate on the Amendment No. 4 1st Lien term loan as of January 1, 2022, was 4.25%, which is a variable rate based on LIBOR, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus an applicable margin percent of 3.25%
As of January 1, 2022, and December 26, 2020, the Company maintained one letter of credit totaling approximately $0.4 million and $0.3 million, respectively, on which there were no balances due.
In conjunction with the Business Combination with Juniper, Janus pre-paid approximately $61.6 million of existing 1st Lien Term Loan Debt upon the closing of the Transactions and the business becoming a public company. As a result of the prepayment a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $1.0 million was recognized. The loss is included in Other income (expense) on the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income.
On February 12, 2018, Janus was acquired by a private equity group. As a result of the acquisition, Janus originated a 1st Lien notes payable with a syndicate of lenders in the original amount of $470.0 million with interest payable in arrears. The interest rate on the facility was based on a Base Rate, unless a LIBOR Rate option was chosen by Janus. If the LIBOR Rate was elected, the interest computation was equal to the LIBOR Rate, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus the LIBOR Rate Margin. If the Base Rate was elected, the interest computation was equal to the Base Rate plus the Base Rate Margin. The outstanding loan balance was to be repaid on a quarterly basis of 0.25% of the original balance beginning the last day of June 2018 with the remaining principal due on the maturity date of February 12, 2025. The 1st Lien loan bore interest, as chosen by Janus, at a floating rate per annum consisting of the LIBOR, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus an applicable margin percent (total rate of 4.75% as of December 26, 2020).
On August 9, 2019, the 1st Lien notes payable was amended to increase the notes payable by $106.0 million. Interest on the 1st lien was payable in arrears, and the interest rate on the facility was based on a Base Rate, unless a LIBOR Rate option was chosen by Janus. If the LIBOR Rate was elected, the interest computation was equal to the LIBOR Rate, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus the LIBOR Rate Margin. If the Base Rate was elected, the interest computation was equal to the Base Rate plus the Base Rate Margin. Previous to the amendment of the 1st Lien, the 1st Lien notes payable outstanding loan balance was to be repaid on a quarterly basis of 0.25% of the original balance beginning the last day of June 2018 with the remaining principal due on the maturity date of February 12, 2025. The 1st Lien loan bore interest, as chosen by Janus, at a floating rate per annum consisting of the London InterBank Offered Rate plus an applicable margin percent (total rate was 4.75% as of December 26, 2020).
On July 21, 2020, Janus repurchased approximately $2.0 million of principal amount of the 1st Lien at an approximate $0.3 million discount, resulting in a gain on the extinguishment of debt of approximately $0.3 million.
On March 1, 2019, the 1st Lien B2 notes payable was originated in the amount of $75.0 million comprised of a syndicate of lenders, with interest payable in arrears. The interest rate on the facility was based on a Base Rate, unless a LIBOR Rate option is chosen by Janus. If the LIBOR Rate was elected, the interest computation was equal to the LIBOR Rate, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus the LIBOR Rate Margin. If the Base Rate was elected, the interest computation was equal to the Base Rate plus the Base Rate Margin. The outstanding loan balance was to be repaid on a quarterly basis of 0.25% of the original balance beginning the last day of June 2019 with the remaining principal due on
the maturity date of February 12, 2025. The 1st Lien B2 loan bore interest, as chosen by Janus, at a floating rate per annum consisting of the LIBOR plus an applicable margin percent (total rate of 5.50% as of December 26, 2020).
On February 5, 2021, the Company completed a repricing of its First Lien and First Lien B2 Term Loans. The Amended debt is comprised of a syndicate of lenders originating on February 5, 2021 in the amount of $634.6 million with interest payable in arrears. The interest rate on the facility is based on a base rate, unless a LIBOR Rate option is chosen by the Company. If the LIBOR Rate is elected, the interest computation is equal to the LIBOR Rate plus the LIBOR Rate Margin. If the base rate is elected, the interest computation is equal to the base rate plus the base rate margin. The outstanding loan balance is to be repaid on a quarterly basis of 0.25% of the original balance beginning the last day of March 2021 with the remaining principal due on the maturity date of February 12, 2025. As chosen by the Company, the Amended loan bears interest at a floating rate per annum consisting of LIBOR plus an applicable margin percent (total rate of 4.25% as of January 1, 2022). The debt is secured by substantially all business assets.
On August 18, 2021, the Company completed a refinancing of its First Lien Amendment No. 3, in which the principal terms of the amendment were a reduction in the overall interest rate based upon the loan type chosen, new borrowings of $155.0 million and a consolidation of the prior outstanding tranches into a single tranche of debt with the syndicate. The Amendment No.4 First Lien is comprised of a syndicate of lenders originating on August 18, 2021 in the amount of $726.4 million with interest payable in arrears. The outstanding loan balance is to be repaid on a quarterly basis of 0.25% of the original balance beginning the last day of September 30, 2021 with the remaining principal due on the maturity date of February 12, 2025. As chosen by the Company, the amended loan bears interest at a floating rate per annum consisting of LIBOR, plus an applicable margin percent (total rate of 4.25% as of January 1, 2022). The debt is secured by substantially all business assets. Unamortized debt issuance costs are approximately $10.6 million at January 1, 2022. This refinancing amendment was accounted for as modification of existing terms and as such no gain or loss was recognized for this transaction and any third party fees were expensed with bank fees, original issue discount and charges capitalized and are being amortized as a component of interest expense over the remaining loan term.
On February 12, 2018, Janus entered into a revolving line of credit facility with a domestic bank replacing the Predecessor revolving line of credit. The line of credit facility is for $50.0 million with interest payments due in arrears that matures on February 12, 2023. The interest rate on the facility is based on a Base Rate, unless a LIBOR Rate option is chosen by Janus. If the LIBOR Rate is elected, the interest computation is equal to the LIBOR Rate, subject to a 1.00% floor, plus the LIBOR Rate Margin. If the Base Rate is elected, the interest computation is equal to the Base Rate plus the Base Rate Margin. At the beginning of each quarter the applicable margin is set and determined by the administrative agent based on the average net availability on the line of credit for the previous quarter.
On August 18, 2021, the Company increased the available line of credit from $50.0 million to $80.0 million, incurred additional fees for this amendment of $0.4 million and extended the maturity date from February 18, 2023 to August 12, 2024. There was $6.4 million and no outstanding balance on the line of credit as of January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020, respectively. As of January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020 the interest rate in effect for the facility was 3.5%% and 3.5%, respectively. The line of credit is secured by accounts receivable and inventories.
The revolving line of credit facility and Amendment No. 4 1st Lien note payable contain affirmative and negative covenants, including limitations on, subject to certain exceptions, the incurrence of indebtedness, the incurrence of liens, fundamental changes, dispositions, restricted payments, investments, transactions with affiliates as well as other covenants customary for financings of these types.
The line of credit facility also includes a financial covenant, applicable only when the excess availability is less than the greater of (i) 10% of the lesser of the aggregate commitments under the line of credit facility and the borrowing base, and (ii) $5.0 million. In such circumstances, we would be required to maintain a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio for the trailing four quarters equal to at least 1.0 to 1.0; subject to our ability to make an equity cure (no more than twice in any four quarter period and up to five times over the life of the facility). As of January 1, 2022, we were compliant with our covenants under the agreements governing our outstanding indebtedness.
Statement of cash flows
(dollar amounts in thousands)
The following table presents a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the following comparative periods. For additional detail, please see the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Year ended January 1, 2022 compared to the year ended December 26, 2020:
Net cash provided by operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $26.0 million to $74.8 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to $100.8 million for the year ended December 26, 2020. This was primarily due to an increase of $14.1 million to net income adjusted for non-cash items and an investment in net working capital of $35.1 million to continue to support revenue growth, which was driven by a $3.4 million increase in prepaid and other current assets, $25.1 million increase in inventory to ensure supply to our plants in the current raw material constrained environment coupled with raw material inflation, $31.7 million increase in accounts receivable and deferred revenue as a result of increased sales volume and commercial initiatives, $16.2 million increase in accounts payable, and a $8.9 million increase in other accrued expenses. Additionally, there was a $5.1 million improvement in other assets and long-term liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased by $179.1 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended December 26, 2020. This increase was driven primarily by the acquisitions of G&M Stor-More Pty Ltd., DBCI and ACT with the net payments of $1.6 million, $169.0 million and $9.2 million, respectively, offset by $4.5 million paid in the prior year for the Steel Storage and PTI Australasia Pty Ltd acquisitions. In addition, there was an increase in capital expenditures of $13.5 million which was offset by $9.6 million of proceeds from the sale leaseback for the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared with the year ended December 26, 2020.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities increased by $146.9 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to the year ended December 26, 2020. This increase was driven by $155.0 million in proceeds from issuance of long-term debt as a result of the DBCI acquisition, $6.4 million of net borrowings on the line of credit, a decrease of $6.9 million of payments of contingent consideration and a decrease of $44.8M in distribution payments as compared to the prior year, which was partially offset by an increase of $60.6 million in principal payments of long-term debt and a $4.3 million increase in deferred financing fees. The increase in the principal payments of long-term debt was primarily attributed to the prepayment of approximately $61.6 million of existing Term Loan Debt upon the closing of the Business Combination and additional Term Loan Debt annual payments of $7.2 million. As a result of the business combination, the Company received $334.9 million related to proceeds from the merger and $250.0 million in proceeds from PIPE. In addition, the Company paid $541.7 million to Midco, LLC unitholders and $44.5 million in transaction costs.
Capital allocation strategy
We continually assess our capital allocation strategy, including decisions relating to M&A, capital expenditures, and debt pay-downs. The timing, declaration and payment of future dividends, falls within the discretion of the Janus’s Board of Directors and will depend upon many factors, including, but not limited to, Janus’s financial condition and earnings, the capital requirements of the business, restrictions imposed by applicable law, and any other factors the Board of Directors deems relevant from time to time.
Contractual Obligations
(dollar amounts in thousands)
Summarized below are our approximate contractual obligations as of January 1, 2022 and their expected impact on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)Long Term Supply Contracts relate to the multiple fixed price agreements.
(2)Other Long-Term Liabilities primarily consists of FICA deferral under the CARES Act due in less than 1 year and additional deferred leasing obligations.
Long-Term Debt Obligations is comprised of an Amendment No 4 First Lien Term Loan (see Note 9 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion) that expires on February 12, 2025. The Company’s intention is to amend and extend or refinance this loan well in advance of the current maturity date.
Operating Leases represent real and personal property leases with various lease expiration dates (see Notes 16 and 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a further discussion). The amount listed in the thereafter category is primarily comprised of five real property leases with expiration dates ranging from 2026 - 2036.
The table above does not include warranty liabilities because it is not certain when this liability will be funded and because this liability is considered immaterial.
In addition to the contractual obligations and commitments listed and described above, Janus also had another commitment for which it is contingently liable as of January 1, 2022 consisting of an outstanding letter of credit of $0.4 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of January 1, 2022, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are material or reasonably likely to be material to our financial condition or results of operations.
Related Party Transactions
See Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of related party transactions.
Subsequent Events
See Note 22 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of subsequent events.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
For the critical Accounting Policies and Estimates used in preparing Janus’s consolidated financial statements, Janus makes assumptions, judgments and estimates that can have a significant impact on its revenue, results from operations and net income, as well as on the value of certain assets and liabilities on its consolidated balance sheets. Janus bases its assumptions, judgments and estimates on historical experience and various other factors that Janus believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. To prepare these financial statements, Janus makes estimates, assumptions, and judgments that affect what Janus reports as its assets and liabilities, what Janus discloses as contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented.
In accordance with Janus’s policies, Janus regularly evaluates its estimates, assumptions, and judgments, including, but not limited to, those concerning revenue recognition, inventory, accounts receivable, depreciation and amortization, contingencies, goodwill and other long lived asset impairment, unit-based compensation, derivative warrant liability, contingent consideration, and income taxes, and bases its
estimates, assumptions, and judgments on its historical experience and on factors Janus believes reasonable under the circumstances. The results involve judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities not readily apparent from other sources. If Janus’s assumptions or conditions change, the actual results Janus reports may differ from these estimates. Janus believes the following critical accounting policies affect the more significant estimates, assumptions, and judgments Janus uses to prepare these consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
Pursuant to the JOBS Act, an emerging growth company is provided the option to adopt new or revised accounting standards that may be issued by the FASB or the SEC either (i) within the same periods as those otherwise applicable to non-emerging growth companies or (ii) within the same time periods as private companies. Janus qualifies as an emerging growth company. Janus intends to take advantage of the exemption for complying with new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies. Accordingly, the information contained herein may be different than the information you receive from other public companies.
Revenue Recognition
Under ASC 606, a performance obligation is a promise in a contract with a customer to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. Our performance obligations include material, installation, and software support fees for the Nokē Smart Entry solution. Material revenue is recognized at a point in time when the product is transferred to the customer which is at the time of a customer pickup or when the delivery of the material to the customer takes place. Installation services are a separate single performance obligation and revenue is recognized over time based upon appropriate input measures. Revenue for software support fees is recognized over time for the period the software support revenue covers. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, the standalone selling price is readily observable. Our revenues are generated from contracts with customers and the nature, timing, and any uncertainty in the recognition of revenues is not affected by the type of good, service, customer or geographical region to which the performance obligation relates. Payment terms are short-term, are customary for our industry and in some cases, early payment incentives are offered.
Contract assets are disclosed as costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts, and contract liabilities are disclosed as billings in excess of costs and estimated earnings on uncompleted contracts in the consolidated balance sheet.
Contracts that include installation are billed via payment requests (normally The American Institute of Architects (AIA) standard construction documents) instead of Company-generated invoices. The pay requests will often be submitted during the month following the period in which the revenues have been recognized, resulting in unbilled accounts receivable (costs and estimated earnings in excess of billings on uncompleted contracts) at the end of any given period. Accounts receivable also include any retention receivable under contracts.
Janus elected to apply an accounting policy election which permits an entity to account for shipping and handling activities as fulfillment activities rather than a promised good or service when the activities are performed, even if those activities are performed after the control of the good has been transferred to the customer. Therefore, Janus expenses shipping and handling costs at the time revenue is recognized. Janus classifies shipping and handling expenses in Cost of Sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income.
Janus elected a practical expedient which allows an entity to recognize the promised amount of consideration without adjusting for the time value of money if the contract has a duration of one year or less, or if the reason the contract extended beyond one year is because the timing of delivery of the product is at the customer’s discretion. Janus’s contracts typically are less than one year in length and do not have significant financing components.
Janus has not experienced significant returns, price concessions or discounts to give rise to any portfolio having variable consideration. Based on this, Janus has concluded the returns, discounts and concessions are not substantive and do not materially impact the application of ASC 606.
Allowance for doubtful accounts
Based upon review of the outstanding receivables, historical collection information and existing economic conditions, Janus has established an allowance for doubtful accounts and other returns not yet processed. Janus has incorporated a general and specific reserve component which are reviewed and updated monthly. Janus does not typically charge interest on past due accounts.
Inventories
Inventory is costed based on management estimates associated with material costs and allocations of certain labor and overhead cost pools for which a portion is ultimately captured within inventory costs. Inventories are measured using the first-in, first-out (FIFO) method. Labor and overhead costs associated with inventory produced by Janus are capitalized. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Janus maintains a reserve with general and specific components for inventory obsolescence. The general component of the reserve is updated monthly whereas the specific component is adjusted on a periodic basis to ensure that all slow moving and obsolete inventory items are appropriately accrued for. At the end of each quarter, management within each business entity, performs a detailed review of its inventory on an item by item basis and identifies which products are believed to be obsolete, excess or slow moving. Management assesses the need for
and the amount of any obsolescence write-down based on customer demand for the item, the quantity of the item on hand and the length of time the item has been in inventory.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment acquired in business combinations are recorded at fair value, when material, as of the acquisition date and are subsequently stated less accumulated depreciation. Property and equipment otherwise acquired are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is charged to expense on the straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of each asset. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of the lease term or their respective useful lives. Maintenance and repairs are charged to expense as incurred.
The estimated useful lives for each major depreciable classification of property and equipment are as follows:
Goodwill
Janus reviews goodwill for impairment on an annual basis or more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that its more likely than not that the goodwill may be impaired. If such circumstances or conditions exist, management applies the two step process under ASC 350-20; first, the Company compares the fair value of the reporting unit with its carrying amount, and second, if the fair value of the reporting is less than its carrying amount, the Company compares the implied fair value of the reporting unit’s goodwill with its carrying amount and records an impairment charge to the extent the carrying amount of the goodwill exceeds its implied fair value. We evaluate goodwill at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment).
Janus measures the fair value of the reporting units to which goodwill is allocated using an income based approach, a generally accepted valuation methodology, using relevant data available through and as of the impairment testing date. Under the income approach, fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow method, projecting future cash flows of each reporting unit, as well as a terminal value, and discounting such cash flows at a rate of return that reflects the relative risk of the cash flows. The key estimates and factors used in this approach include, but are not limited to, revenue growth rates and profit margins based on internal forecasts, a weighted average cost of capital used to discount future cash flows, and a review with comparable market multiples for the industry segment as well as our historical operating trends, all of which are subject to uncertainty. Future adverse developments relating to such matters as the growth in the market for our reporting units, competition, general economic conditions, and the market appeal of products or anticipated profit margins could reduce the fair value of the reporting units and could result in an impairment of goodwill in the reporting unit.
Intangible Assets
Fair values assigned to the definite life intangible assets, consisting of customer relationships, noncompete agreements, backlog and other intangibles (i.e., software) are amortized on the straight-line basis over estimated useful lives less than 15 years. Such assets are periodically evaluated as to the recoverability of their carrying values. In determining the impairment of intangible assets, management considers an analysis under ASC 360-10-35-21. If an intangible asset is tested for recoverability and the undiscounted estimated future cash flows to which the asset relates is less than the carrying amount of the asset, the asset costs is adjusted to fair value and an impairment loss is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value.
Trade names and trademarks have been identified as indefinite-lived intangible assets and are not amortized, but instead are tested for impairment annually or when indicators of impairment exist.
The estimated useful lives for each major classification of intangible asset are as follows:
Significant judgment is also required in assigning the respective useful lives of intangible assets. Our assessment of intangible assets that have a finite life is based on a number of factors including the competitive environment, market share, brand history, underlying product life cycles, churn rate, operating plans, cash flows (i.e., economic life based on the discounted and undiscounted cash flows), future usage of
intangible assets, and the macroeconomic environment. The costs of finite-lived intangible assets are amortized to expense over the estimated useful life.
The approaches used for determining the fair value of the trade names, customer relationships, non-compete agreements, and other intangibles acquired depends on the circumstances and can include the following:
•The income approach (within the income approach, various methods are available such as multi-period excess earnings, with and without, incremental and relief from royalty methods).
•In each method, a tax amortization benefit is included, which represents the tax benefit resulting from the amortization of that intangible asset depending on the tax jurisdiction where the intangible asset is held.
•The cost approach - this approach estimates the cost to recreate the intangible assets and is used when cash flows about the intangible asset are not easily available.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
Janus evaluates the recoverability of the carrying value of long-lived assets whenever events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If a long-lived asset is tested for recoverability and the undiscounted estimated future cash flows to which the asset relates is less than the carrying amount of the asset, the asset cost is adjusted to fair value and an impairment loss is recognized as the amount by which the carrying amount of a long-lived asset exceeds its fair value. No such charges were recognized during the periods presented.
Using a discounted cash flow method involves significant judgment and requires Janus to make significant estimates and assumptions, including long-term projections of cash flows, market conditions and appropriate discount rates. Judgments are based on historical experience, current market trends, consultations with external valuation specialists and other information. If facts and circumstances change, the use of different estimates and assumptions could result in a materially different outcome. Janus generally develops these forecasts based on recent sales data for existing products, acquisitions, and estimated future growth of the market in which Janus operates.
Income Taxes
Prior to June 7, 2021, the Company was a limited liability company taxed as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The Company was generally not directly subject to income taxes under the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code and most applicable state laws. Therefore, taxable income or loss was reported to the members for inclusion in their respective tax returns.
After June 7, 2021, the Group is taxed as a Corporation for U.S. income tax purposes and similar sections of the state income tax laws. The Group’s effective tax rate is based on pre-tax earnings, enacted U.S. statutory tax rates, non-deductible expenses, and certain tax rate differences between U.S. and foreign jurisdictions. The foreign subsidiaries file income tax returns in the United Kingdom, France, Australia, and Singapore as necessary. For tax reporting purposes, the taxable income or loss with respect to the 45% ownership in the joint venture operating in Mexico will be reflected in the income tax returns filed under that country’s jurisdiction. The Group’s provision for income taxes consists of provisions for federal, state, and foreign income taxes.
The provision for income taxes for the years ended January 1, 2022 and December 26, 2020 includes amounts related to entities within the group taxed as corporations in the United States, United Kingdom, France, Australia, and Singapore. The Company determines its provision for income taxes for interim periods using an estimate of its annual effective tax rate on year to date ordinary income and records any changes affecting the estimated annual effective tax rate in the interim period in which the change occurs. Additionally, the income tax effects of significant unusual or infrequently occurring items are recognized entirely within the interim period in which the event occurs.
Management of Janus is required to analyze all open tax years, as defined by the statute of limitations, for all major jurisdictions, which includes federal and certain states. Based on Janus’ evaluation, Janus has concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in its financial statements. Tax penalties and interest, if any, would be accrued as incurred and would be classified as tax expense on the consolidated statements of operations.
Janus recognizes accrued interest associated with uncertain tax positions as part of interest expense and penalties associated with uncertain tax positions as part of other expenses.
Business combinations
Under the acquisition method of accounting, Janus recognizes tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Janus records the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred, plus fair value of noncontrolling interest, plus fair value of preexisting interest in the acquiree over the value of the net assets acquired as goodwill. The accounting for business combinations requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets and the fair value of contingent payment obligations. Janus uses a variety of information sources to determine the value of acquired assets and liabilities including: third-party appraisers for the values and lives of property, identifiable intangibles and inventories; and legal counsel or other advisors to assess the obligations associated with legal, environmental or other claims. Critical estimates in valuing customer relationships, noncompete agreements, trademarks and tradenames, and other intangible assets (e.g., backlog, software, and technology)
acquired, include future cash flows that we expect to generate from the acquired assets. If the subsequent actual results and updated projections of the underlying business activity change compared with the assumptions and projections used to develop these values, we could experience impairment charges which could be material.
We record contingent consideration resulting from a business combination at its fair value on the acquisition date. We generally determine the fair value of the contingent consideration using the Monte Carlo simulation, and Probability-Weighted Payment method. Each reporting period thereafter, we revalue these obligations and record increases or decreases in their fair value as an adjustment to operating expenses within the Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Income. Changes in the fair value of the contingent consideration can result from changes in assumed discount periods and rates, and from changes pertaining to the achievement of the defined milestones. Significant judgment is employed in determining the appropriateness of these assumptions as of the acquisition date and for each subsequent period. Accordingly, future business and economic conditions, as well as changes in any of the assumptions described above, can materially impact the amount of contingent consideration expense we record in any given period.
Equity Incentive Plan and Unit Option Plan
2021 Equity Incentive Plan
Effective June 7, 2021, Group implemented an equity incentive program designed to enhance the profitability and value of its investment for the benefit of its shareholders by enabling Group to offer eligible directors, officers and employees equity-based incentives in order to attract, retain and reward such individuals and strengthen the mutuality of interest between such individuals and the Group’s shareholders.
The Company measures compensation expense for restricted stock units (“RSUs”) issued under the 2021 Omnibus Incentive Plan (the “Plan”) in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”). Stock-based compensation is measured at fair value on the grant date and recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period. The Company records compensation cost for these awards using the straight-line method. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
2018 Equity Incentive Plan
After being acquired by CCG on February 12, 2018, Intermediate implemented a new equity incentive program (the “2018 Plan”) on March 15, 2018 designed to enhance the profitability and value of its investment for the benefit of its members by enabling Janus to offer eligible individuals equity-based incentives in order to attract, retain and reward such individuals and strengthen the mutuality of interest between such individuals and the Parent’s members. Under the 2018 Plan, incentive units are issued in the form of Class B Common Unit awards that are subject to either service condition (the “Time Vesting Units”) or market and implied performance vesting conditions (the “Performance Vesting Units”). Implied performance condition, which is a liquidity event such as an IPO or change in control, exists as the achievement of the market condition is only likely upon the occurrence of such liquidity events. Janus measures and recognizes compensation expense for all incentive units granted based on the estimated fair values on the date of grant. The compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for Time Vesting Units while compensation expense for Performance Vesting Units are not recognized until the implied performance condition is achieved. If the market condition is not yet achieved at the time that performance condition is achieved, the proportionate amount of compensation expense recognized on a straight-line basis over the derived service period will be recognized and the remaining compensation cost will be recognized on a straight-line basis over the remaining derived service period regardless of whether the market condition is ultimately achieved. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur.
For Time Vesting Units granted in fiscal 2018, Janus used a market approach, specifically the subject company transaction method (the “Backsolve” method), weighted on the probability of Janus’s Performance Vesting Units achieving the vesting conditions to estimate the fair value of Janus’s equity. Monte Carlo simulations were used to determine the probability. The Backsolve method was used since it is based on the terms of the then-recent acquisition of Janus by CCG in February 2018, representing the most reliable indication of value. The Black-Scholes option pricing model (“BSOPM”) was used to allocate the equity value to different classes of equity, with inputs for unit value of Janus, term to exit, risk-free rate, expected volatility, and exercise price. For Performance Vesting Units granted in fiscal 2018, Janus used a combination of probability analysis and Monte Carlo Simulation to estimate the fair value with inputs for Janus’s equity value, risk-free rate, expected volatility, expected tax and non-tax distributions, probability of merger and acquisition, expected term of the awards, and expected timing of achieving the vesting conditions. Discount for lack of marketability was applied in the valuation of all grants.
For Time Vesting Units granted in fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020, Janus used a combination of the income and market approach, guideline public company method and comparable transaction method equally to estimate the fair value of Janus’s equity. Key inputs and assumptions to the valuation include income tax rate estimate, revenue, capital expenditure, change in net working capital, operating expense, and depreciation forecasts. BSOPM was used to allocate the equity value to different classes of equity, with inputs for unit value of Janus, term to exit, risk-free rate, expected volatility, and exercise price. For Performance Vesting Units granted in fiscal 2019 and fiscal 2020, Janus used a combination of probability analysis and Monte Carlo Simulation to estimate the fair value with inputs for Janus’s equity value, risk-free rate, expected volatility, expected tax and non-tax distribution, probability of merger and acquisition, expected term of the award, and expected timing of achieving the vesting condition. Discount for lack of marketability was applied in the valuation of all grants.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or
estimates, our share-based compensation expense could be materially different. See Note 12, “Equity Incentive Plan and Unit Option Plan,” of the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information. Effective June 7, 2021 this plan was terminated as a result of the Business Combination transaction closing.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.