Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Our fiscal year ends on the final Thursday of June each year, and typically consists of fifty-two
weeks (four thirteen-week quarters). However, the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 consisted of fifty-three weeks with our fourth quarter containing fourteen weeks. Additional information on the comparability of the periods presented is as follows:
•
References herein to fiscal 2023 are to the fiscal year ending June 29, 2023.
•
References herein to fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 are to the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022, June 24, 2021 and June 25, 2020, respectively.
As used herein, unless the context otherwise indicates, the terms “we”, “us”, “our” or “Company” collectively refer to John B. Sanfilippo & Son, Inc. and our wholly-owned subsidiary, JBSS Ventures, LLC.
We are one of the leading processors and distributors of peanuts, pecans, cashews, walnuts, almonds, and other nuts in the United States. These nuts are sold under our Fisher, Orchard Valley Harvest,
Squirrel Brand
and Southern Style Nuts
brand names and under a variety of private brands. We also market and distribute, and in most cases, manufacture or process, a diverse product line of food and snack products, including peanut butter, almond butter, cashew butter, candy and confections, snack and trail mixes, snack bites, sunflower kernels, dried fruit, corn snacks, chickpea snacks, sesame sticks and other sesame snack products under our brand names and under private brands. We distribute our products in the consumer, commercial ingredients and contract packaging distribution channels.
During fiscal 2022, the Company created a Long-Range Plan to clarify our future growth priorities. Our Long-Range Plan focuses on growing our non-branded
business across key customers, transforming Fisher,
Orchard Valley Harvest
and Squirrel Brand
into leading brands while increasing distribution and diversifying our portfolio into high growth snacking segments to accelerate growth with innovation and targeted, opportunistic acquisitions. We plan to execute on our Long-Range Plan by providing non-branded
customer value-added solutions based on our extensive industry and consumer expertise. We will grow our branded business by reaching new consumers via product expansion and packaging innovation, expanding distribution across current and alternative channels, diversifying our product offerings and focusing on new ways for consumers to buy our products, including sales via e-commerce
platforms.
We face a number of challenges in the future, which include recent widespread inflation, potential for economic downturn, supply chain challenges and the impacts of COVID-19.
We have also experienced a tightening in the labor market for those employed at our production facilities which has led to increased labor costs.
Inflation
We face changing industry trends as consumer purchasing preferences evolve. Due to the recent widespread inflation and increasing commodity acquisition costs, we have seen higher selling prices at retail. With higher prices across our categories and the broader food market, consumers may purchase fewer snack products, shift their preferences to private brands or lower priced nuts or purchase snack products outside the nut and trail mix category. With the inflationary environment, we are also seeing signs of consumers shifting to more value-focused channels, such as mass merchandising retailers, club stores and dollar stores. E-commerce
platforms still showed growth during fiscal 2022 but at a lower rate than we saw during fiscal 2021.
Supply Chain and Transportation
In recent months we have faced challenges with shortages and cost increases for shipping pallets, packaging, imported ingredients, transportation and shipping availability. The conflict in Ukraine has further exacerbated supply chain disruptions, especially related to sunflower oil used in roasting our nut products and aluminum which is used in certain of our product packaging.
We have also experienced supply chain issues related to a shortage in capacity in the transportation industry. Compounding the associated driver shortage was an increase in demand driven by additional spending on consumer goods during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022, which led to periodic shortages of shipping containers, container chassis, space on container ships and trains and capacity constraints at U.S. ports. This tightening in transportation capacity began to ease during the third quarter of fiscal 2022 as inflation resulted in rising costs which drove down demand in the freight market. However, intermodal capacity remains tight and ongoing labor negotiations with both port and rail workers by the operators of such port and rail centers may cause further disruptions. In addition, fuel prices were at record highs during calendar 2022. While we have mitigated some of the transportation shortages and maintained high service levels, we may continue to face an unpredictable transportation environment and there is no guarantee that our mitigation strategies will continue to be effective, or that any transportation capacity easing will continue or transportation prices will return to historic levels.
These shortages and related challenges have impacted our operations and resulted in increased expenses and manufacturing inefficiencies that have adversely impacted (and may continue to impact) our net income. We anticipate pricing relief in some of these areas in the coming quarters if and as shortages decrease and supply chains normalize, but we expect that some costs may remain elevated or unpredictable for a longer period of time, particularly as the conflict in Ukraine continues.
We are working, and will continue to work, with our vendors, customers and suppliers to source additional raw materials and packaging supplies and to remain flexible in obtaining the transportation and labor services we need. If these shortages and other supply chain issues continue and we cannot secure adequate supplies to fulfill customer orders or cannot obtain the transportation and labor services we need, such shortages and supply chain issues could have an unfavorable impact on net sales and our operations in fiscal year 2023. In addition, as costs increase due to these issues or due to inflationary pressures in general, there is an additional risk of not being able to pass (in part or in full) such potential cost increases onto our customers or in a timely manner. If we cannot align costs with prices for our products, our operating performance could be adversely impacted.
COVID-19
We may continue to face challenges in our fiscal 2023 as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic and the uncertainty of future local, state and federal restrictions aimed to mitigate and control the pandemic. During fiscal 2022, as various COVID-19
vaccines became more widely distributed and accepted by the public and indoor dining restrictions were again loosened, we saw a significant improvement in sales volume with our foodservice, restaurant, convenience store and non-essential
retail customers.
We will continue to focus our promotional and advertising activity to invest in our brands to achieve growth. We intend to execute an omnichannel approach to win in key categories including recipe nuts, nut flours, snack nuts, trail mix and snacking. We continue to see strong e-commerce
performance across our branded portfolio and anticipate taking various actions with the goal of accelerating that growth across a variety of established and emerging platforms. We will continue to face the ongoing challenges specific to our business, such as food safety and regulatory issues and the maintenance and growth of our customer base for branded and private label products. See the information referenced in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” of this report for additional information about our risks, challenges and uncertainties.
Climate Change Impacts
Similar to other commodity dependent businesses, extreme weather events from climate change can have an unfavorable impact on our business. Floods, hurricanes, wildfires, tornadoes, blizzards, droughts, mudslides and extreme temperatures can affect our ability to obtain adequate (or acceptable quality) input fruit and nut material and manufacture products in our facilities. These extreme weather events can also have an adverse impact on the transportation industry and supply chains upon which we rely. Climate change can also result in unfavorable impacts that are unique to our business, especially for normal crop development. Below are some examples of essential weather conditions that must be present for normal development of the crops from which we derive the major raw materials we use in our products.
•
Almonds, pecans and walnuts require a minimum of approximately 200, 250 and 700 chilling hours, respectively, during the winter to allow for an adequate amount of dormancy time so the tress can rest.
•
Peanuts require adequate rainfall or access to water for irrigation for the period starting about 7 weeks after planting and ending about 15 weeks after planting.
•
Cashews require a minimum of approximately 2,000 hours of sunlight per year. Sunlight is especially critical during the flowering period.
•
Almonds require bees for pollination. For bees to pollinate effectively during the bloom period, temperatures cannot be less than about 55 degrees Fahrenheit, winds cannot exceed about 15 MPH, and there must be little or no rainfall during that period.
•
Cranberries require adequate snow and ice coverage during the winter to protect vines from freezing.
•
Raisins require hot days (about 93 - 100 degrees Fahrenheit) and cool nights (about 55 - 65 degrees Fahrenheit) during the growing season for optimum quality and sugar levels.
The non-occurrence
of these weather conditions and other essential weather conditions can result in smaller crops, crop failures, or quality failures, which can lead to increased acquisition costs and supply shortages. Should climate changes significantly alter weather patterns, some of these needed input products may not be available at all, which would have a material adverse impact on our business.
Annual Highlights
•
Our net sales for fiscal 2022 increased $97.4 million, or 11.3%, to $955.9 million compared to fiscal 2021.
•
Gross profit increased $14.6 million, while our gross profit margin, as a percentage of net sales, decreased to 20.9% in fiscal 2022 from 21.5% in fiscal 2021.
•
Total operating expenses for fiscal 2022 increased $12.4 million, or 12.4%, to $112.2 million. Operating expenses, as a percentage of net sales, increased slightly to 11.7% compared to 11.6% of net sales in fiscal 2021.
•
Diluted earnings per share increased approximately 3.1% compared to last fiscal year.
•
Our strong financial position allowed us to pay cash dividends of $34.5 million during fiscal 2022.
•
The total value of inventories on hand at the end of fiscal 2022 increased $56.9 million, or 38.4%, in comparison to the total value of inventories on hand at the end of fiscal 2021. We have seen acquisition costs for dried fruit and most major nut types increase in the 2021 crop year (which falls into our 2022 fiscal year).
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the percentage relationship of certain items to net sales for the periods indicated and the percentage increase or decrease of such items from fiscal 2022 to fiscal 2021 and from fiscal 2021 to fiscal 2020.
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
Net Sales
Our net sales increased 11.3% to $955.9 million for fiscal 2022 from $858.5 million for fiscal 2021. The increase in net sales was primarily due to a 6.9% increase in sales volume, which is defined as pounds sold to customers, and a 4.2% increase in the weighted average selling price per pound. The increase in the weighted average selling price resulted mainly from pricing actions taken due to an increase in commodity acquisition costs for peanuts, all major tree nuts except walnuts, dried fruits and other input costs due to inflationary conditions.
The following table summarizes sales by product type as a percentage of total gross sales. The information is based upon gross sales, rather than net sales, because certain adjustments from gross sales to net sales, such as promotional discounts, are not allocable to product type.
The following table shows a comparison of net sales by distribution channel (dollars in thousands):
(1)
Sales of branded products were approximately 22% and 24% of total consumer channel sales during fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. Fisher
branded products were approximately 62% and 66% of branded sales during fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively, with Orchard Valley Harvest
branded products accounting for the majority of the remaining branded product sales.
Net sales in the consumer distribution channel increased 9.3% in dollars and 3.9% in sales volume in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The sales volume increase came primarily from an 8.9% increase in private brand sales volume driven by increases for trail and snack mixes and mixed nuts, which mainly resulted from new distribution at existing customers. The increase was partially offset by the discontinuance of our inshell peanut product line, which occurred in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021, and a decrease in peanut butter sales volume due to the planned downtime associated with the upgrade of our peanut butter line that occurred and was completed in the third quarter of the current fiscal year. Sales volume for Fisher
snack nuts decreased 32.9% primarily due to the discontinuance of our inshell peanut product line as mentioned above. Without considering the impact of this discontinued product line, Fisher
snack nuts sales volume increased 4.8%. Sales volume of Fisher
recipe nuts was relatively unchanged compared to fiscal 2021. Sales volume
of Orchard Valley Harvest
products increased 11.9% primarily driven by increased distribution and promotional activity at a major customer in the non-food
sector, as this retailer continues to recover from COVID-19
restrictions, as well as regained distribution at a customer in the club channel. These gains were partially offset by reduced merchandising activity and item discontinuance at a mass merchandising retailer. Sales volume of Southern Style Nuts
increased 4.4% due to increased distribution and promotional activity at a current club store customer, which was partially offset by reduced purchases as a result of higher selling prices at a mass merchandising retailer.
Net sales in the commercial ingredients distribution channel increased 29.8% in dollars and 23.5% in sales volume compared to fiscal 2021. The increase in sales volume was due to a 34.6% increase in sales volume to foodservice customers, which was related to the continued recovery in the restaurant industry from the impacts of COVID-19
and new distribution at existing customers.
Net sales in the contract packaging distribution channel increased 7.4% in dollars and 7.7% in sales volume in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase in sales volume was due to increased distribution, largely for peanuts, and new product offerings by a major customer in this channel, as well as business with a new customer.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased 7.9% to $199.6 million in fiscal 2022 from $185.0 million in fiscal 2021. The increase in gross profit was mainly due to increased sales volume and related manufacturing efficiencies. Our gross profit margin, as a percentage of sales, decreased to 20.9% for fiscal 2022 from 21.5% for fiscal 2021. The decrease in gross profit margin was attributable to higher commodity acquisition costs for pecans, cashews and almonds and other inflationary cost increases for labor, freight and manufacturing supplies, which were largely offset by manufacturing efficiencies that resulted from increased sales volume.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for fiscal 2022 increased $12.4 million to $112.2 million. Operating expenses as a percent of net sales were 11.7% for fiscal 2022 compared to 11.6% for fiscal 2021. Operating expenses as a percent of net sales increased slightly in fiscal 2022 due to an increase in total operating expenses which was largely offset by a higher net sales base. The increase in total operating expenses was mainly due to increases in freight, advertising, consumer insight research and related consulting and sales broker commission expenses which was partially offset by a decrease in incentive compensation.
Selling expenses for fiscal 2022 were $76.9 million, an increase of $13.9 million, or 22.0%, over the amount recorded for fiscal 2021. The increase was driven by a $5.7 million increase in freight expense due to higher freight rates and fuel prices compared to fiscal 2021, as well as an increase in sales made on a delivered basis, a $4.7 million increase in advertising, consumer insight research and related consulting expenses, and a $1.6 million increase in sales broker commission expense.
Administrative expenses for fiscal 2022 were $37.7 million, an increase of $0.9 million, or 2.4%, from the amount recorded for fiscal 2021. The increase was due to a $3.3 million decrease in the gain on asset disposals, mainly resulting from an insurance settlement gain of $2.3 million in fiscal 2021 related to the fire that occurred in our Garysburg facility combined with losses on current year disposals. This increase was largely offset by a $2.9 million decrease in compensation expense, primarily related to incentive compensation.
The $2.3 million gain on sale of facility is the result of the sale of our Garysburg, North Carolina facility that occurred in the first quarter of fiscal 2022.
Income from Operations
Due to the factors discussed above, income from operations was $87.4 million, or 9.1% of net sales, for fiscal 2022, compared to $85.2 million, or 9.9% of net sales, for fiscal 2021.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $1.9 million for fiscal 2022 compared to $1.4 million for fiscal 2021. The increase in interest expense resulted primarily from higher average short-term debt levels driven mainly by increased commodity acquisition costs.
Rental and Miscellaneous Expense, Net
Net rental and miscellaneous expense was $1.3 million for fiscal 2022 compared to $1.4 million for fiscal 2021.
Pension Expense (Excluding Service Costs)
Pension expense (excluding service costs) was $2.5 million for both fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense was $19.9 million, or 24.4% of income before income taxes, for fiscal 2022 compared to $20.1 million, or 25.2% of income before income taxes, for fiscal 2021.
Net Income
Net income was $61.8 million, or $5.36 basic and $5.33 diluted per common share, for fiscal 2022, compared to $59.7 million, or $5.19 basic and $5.17 diluted per common share, for fiscal 2021, due to the factors discussed above.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
The discussion of our results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 24, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended June 25, 2020 can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K
for the year ended June 24, 2021 and such discussion is incorporated by reference herein.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
The primary uses of cash are to fund our current operations, fulfill contractual obligations, pursue our Long-Range Plan through growing our branded and private label nut programs and repay indebtedness. Also, various uncertainties, including cost uncertainties, could result in additional uses of cash. The primary sources of cash are results of operations and availability under our Credit Facility. We anticipate that expected net cash flow generated from operations and amounts available pursuant to the Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next twelve months. See Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” above. Our available credit under our Credit Facility has allowed us to devote more funds to promote our products, increase our consumer insight capabilities and promotional efforts, reinvest in the Company through capital expenditures, develop new products, pay cash dividends, consummate strategic investments and business acquisitions and explore other growth strategies outlined in our Long-Range Plan.
Cash flows from operating activities have historically been driven by net income but are also significantly influenced by inventory requirements, which can change based upon fluctuations in both quantities and market prices of the various nuts and nut products we buy and sell. Current market trends in nut prices and crop estimates also impact nut procurement.
The following table sets forth certain cash flow information for the last two fiscal years (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $19.6 million in fiscal 2022, a decrease of $85.1 million compared to fiscal 2021. The decrease in operating cash flow was primarily due to an increased use of working capital for inventory compared to fiscal 2021 as a result of increasing commodity acquisition costs. Inventories increased $56.9 million in fiscal 2022 compared to a $24.1 million decrease in inventories in fiscal 2021, which resulted in an additional usage of cash of $81.0 million.
Total inventories were $204.9 million at June 30, 2022, an increase of $56.9 million, or 38.4%, from the inventory balance at June 24, 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher commodity acquisition costs for substantially all raw nut and dried fruit input stocks and higher quantities of finished goods on hand at year end. This increase was partially offset by lower quantities of pecans and walnuts on hand at year end.
Raw nut and dried fruit input stocks, some of which are classified as work in process, decreased 3.0 million pounds, or 6.3%, at June 30, 2022 compared to June 24, 2021. The weighted average cost per pound of raw nut and dried fruit input stocks on hand at the end of fiscal 2022 increased by 39.7% compared to the end of fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher commodity acquisition costs for substantially all raw nut and dried fruit input stocks.
As of June 30, 2022, there are known purchase obligations of $258.9 million which are expected to be settled during fiscal 2023. These purchase obligations primarily represent inventory purchase commitments; however, these amounts exclude purchase commitments under walnut purchase agreements due to the uncertainty of pricing and quantity.
Additional contractual cash obligations include amounts owed for lease commitments and the Supplemental Employee Retirement Plan (“SERP”). With the planned retirement of two SERP participants in fiscal 2023, there has been an increase in the benefits expected to be paid in the near term. We believe cash on hand, combined with cash provided by operations and borrowings available under the Credit Facility, will be sufficient to meet the cash requirements for all contractual cash obligations. See Note 3 - “Leases” and Note 14 - “Retirement Plan” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and future maturities.
Investing Activities.
Cash used in investing activities was $11.4 million in fiscal 2022. Capital expenditures accounted for a $17.8 million use of cash in fiscal 2022, which was offset in part by $4.0 million of cash proceeds resulting from the sale of our Garysburg, North Carolina facility and $3.2 million of cash proceeds resulting from the Sanfilippo family’s exercise of their contractual purchase option and our resulting sale of certain life insurance policies to the Sanfilippo family.
Cash used in investing activities was $23.0 million in fiscal 2021. Capital expenditures accounted for a $25.2 million use of cash in fiscal 2021, which was offset in part by $2.5 million of proceeds from insurance recoveries related to a fire in our Garysburg, North Carolina facility.
We expect total capital expenditures for equipment purchases and upgrades, facility maintenance and food safety enhancements for fiscal 2023 to be approximately $18.0 million. Absent any material acquisitions or other significant investments, we believe that cash on hand, combined with cash provided by operations and borrowings available under the Credit Facility, will be sufficient to meet the cash requirements for capital expenditures.
Financing Activities.
Cash used in financing activities was $8.5 million during fiscal 2022. We paid dividends totaling $34.5 million in fiscal 2022. We repaid $3.8 million of long-term debt during fiscal 2022, $3.3 million of which was related to the Mortgage Facility (as defined below). There was a net increase in borrowings outstanding under our Credit Facility of $31.8 million during fiscal 2022 primarily due to increasing commodity acquisition costs. See Note 6 - “Revolving Credit Facility” and Note 7 - “Long-Term Debt” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information and future maturities.
Cash used in financing activities was $82.6 million during fiscal 2021. We paid dividends totaling $57.5 million in fiscal 2021. We repaid $5.3 million of long-term debt during fiscal 2021, $3.1 million of which was related to the Mortgage Facility. There was a net decrease in borrowings outstanding under our Credit Facility of $18.4 million during fiscal 2021 which occurred, in part, as a result of the decrease in inventory.
Financing Arrangements
On February 7, 2008, we entered into the Former Credit Agreement (as defined below) with a bank group (the “Bank Lenders”) providing a $117.5 million revolving loan commitment and letter of credit subfacility. Also on February 7, 2008, we entered into a Loan Agreement with an insurance company (the “Mortgage Lender”) providing us with two term loans, one in the amount of $36.0 million (“Tranche A”) and the other in the amount of $9.0 million (“Tranche B”), for an aggregate amount of $45.0 million (the “Mortgage Facility”).
Credit Facility
On March 5, 2020, we entered into an Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Amended and Restated Credit Agreement”) which amended and restated our Credit Agreement dated as of February 7, 2008 (the “Former Credit Agreement”). The Amended and Restated Credit Agreement provides for a $117.5 million senior secured revolving credit facility with the same borrowing capacity, interest rates and applicable margin as the Former Credit Agreement and extends the term of the Former Credit Agreement from July 7, 2021 to March 5, 2025. In addition, the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement included language for an alternate benchmark rate as an option as a replacement for LIBOR.
The Amended and Restated Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of our assets other than machinery and equipment, real property and fixtures and matures on March 5, 2025. The Mortgage Facility is secured by mortgages on essentially all of our owned real property located in Elgin, Illinois and Gustine, California (the “Encumbered Properties”).
At June 30, 2022, the weighted average interest rate for the Credit Facility was 3.41%. The terms of the Credit Facility contain covenants that, among other things, require us to restrict investments, indebtedness, acquisitions and certain sales of assets and limit annual cash dividends or distributions, transactions with affiliates, redemptions of capital stock and prepayment of indebtedness (if such prepayment, among other things, is of a subordinate debt). If loan availability under the borrowing base calculation falls below $25.0 million, we will be required to maintain a specified fixed charge coverage ratio, tested on a monthly basis, until loan availability equals or exceeds $25.0 million for three consecutive months. All cash received from customers is required to be applied against the Credit Facility. The Bank Lenders have the option to accelerate and demand immediate repayment of our obligations under the Credit Facility in the event of default on the payments required under the Credit Facility, a change in control in the ownership of the Company, non-compliance
with the financial covenant or upon the occurrence of other defaults by us under the Credit Facility (including a default under the Mortgage Facility). As of June 30, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Facility, and we currently expect to be in compliance with the financial covenant in the Credit Facility for the foreseeable future. At June 30, 2022, we had $71.9 million of available credit under the Credit Facility. If this entire amount were borrowed at June 30, 2022, we would still be in compliance with all restrictive covenants under the Credit Facility.
Mortgage Facility
The Mortgage Facility matures on March 1, 2023. On March 1, 2018 the interest rate on the Mortgage Facility was fixed at 4.25% per annum. Monthly principal payments on the Mortgage Facility in the amount of $0.3 million commenced on June 1, 2008.
The terms of the Mortgage Facility contain covenants that require us to maintain a specified net worth of $110.0 million and maintain the Encumbered Properties. The Mortgage Lender is entitled to require immediate repayment of our obligations under the Mortgage Facility in the event we default in the payments required under the Mortgage Facility, non-compliance
with the covenants or upon the occurrence of certain other defaults by us under the Mortgage Facility. As of June 30, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants under the Mortgage Facility and a total principal amount of $2.5 million was outstanding. The Mortgage Facility is expected to be fully repaid in fiscal 2023.
Selma Property
In September 2006, we sold our Selma, Texas properties (the “Selma Properties”) to two related party partnerships for $14.3 million and are leasing them back. The selling price was determined by an independent appraiser to be the fair market value which also approximated our carrying value. The provisions of the arrangement are not eligible for sale-leaseback accounting, and the $14.3 million was recorded as a debt obligation. No gain or loss was recorded on the Selma Properties transaction. The lease for the Selma Properties had an initial ten-year
term at a fair market value rent with three five-year renewal options. In September 2015, we exercised two of the five-year renewal options, which extended the lease term to September 2026. The lease extension also reduced the monthly lease payment on the Selma Properties, beginning in September 2016, to reflect then current market conditions. At the end of each five-year renewal option, the base monthly lease amounts are reassessed, and the monthly payments increased to $114 beginning in September 2021. One five-year renewal option remains. Also, we have an option to purchase the Selma Properties from the lessor at 95% (100% in certain circumstances) of the then fair market value, but not less than the original $14.3 million purchase price. At June 30, 2022, $8.4 million of the debt obligation was outstanding.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The accounting policies as disclosed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements are applied in the preparation of our financial statements and accounting for the underlying transactions and balances. The policies discussed below are considered by our management to be critical for an understanding of our financial statements because the application of these policies places the most significant demands on management’s judgment, with financial reporting results relying on estimation regarding the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Specific risks, if applicable, for these critical accounting policies are described in the following paragraphs. For a detailed discussion on the application of these and other accounting policies, see Note 1 - “Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Preparation of this Annual Report on Form 10-K
requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from those estimates. See “Forward-Looking Statements” below.
Revenue Recognition
The Company records revenue based on a five-step model in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606. The core principle of the guidance is that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled to in exchange for the goods or services. We sell our products under some arrangements which include customer contracts that fix the sales price for periods, which typically can be up to one year for some commercial ingredient customers. We also sell our products through specific programs consisting of promotion allowances, volume and customer rebates and marketing allowances, among others, to consumer and some commercial ingredient users. We recognize revenue as performance obligations are fulfilled, which occurs when control passes to our customers. We report all amounts billed to a customer in a sale transaction as revenue, including those amounts related to shipping and handling. We reduce revenue for estimated promotion allowances, volume and customer rebates and marketing allowances, among others. These reductions in revenue are considered variable consideration and are recorded in the same period the related sales are recorded. Such estimates are calculated using historical averages adjusted for any expected changes due to current business conditions and experience. See Note 2 - “Revenue Recognition” below for additional information on revenue recognition.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review held and used long-lived assets, including our rental investment property and amortizable identifiable intangible assets (e.g., customer relationships and brand names), to assess recoverability from projected undiscounted cash flows whenever events or changes in facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be recoverable. When such events occur, we compare the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset or asset group to the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group. The cash flows are based on our best estimate of future cash flows derived from the most recent business projections. If this comparison indicates there is an impairment, the carrying value of the asset is reduced to its estimated fair value. We also evaluate the amortization periods assigned to our intangible assets to determine whether events or changes in circumstances require a revised estimate of useful lives. We did not record any impairment of long-lived assets or amortizable identifiable intangible assets in any of the last three fiscal years.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but is tested annually for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may be impaired. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. Such indicators may include deterioration in general economic conditions, adverse changes in the markets in which we operate, increases in input costs that have negative effects on earnings and cash flows, or a trend of negative or declining cash flows over multiple periods, among others. The fair value that could be realized in an actual transaction may differ from that used to evaluate the impairment of goodwill.
In testing goodwill for impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not (more than 50%) that the estimated fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. If we elect to perform a qualitative assessment and determine that an impairment is more likely than not, we are then required to perform a quantitative impairment test, otherwise no further analysis is required. We also may elect not to perform the qualitative assessment and, instead, proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test.
Under the goodwill qualitative assessment, various events and circumstances that would affect the estimated fair value of our single reporting unit are identified (similar to impairment indicators above).
Under the goodwill quantitative impairment test, the evaluation of impairment involves comparing the current fair value of our single reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. We estimate the fair value using level 3 inputs as defined by the fair value hierarchy. The inputs used to estimate fair value include several subjective factors, such as estimates of future cash flows, estimates of our future cost structure, discount rates for our estimated cash flows, required level of working capital, assumed terminal value, and time horizon of cash flow forecasts. Our market capitalization is also an estimate of fair value that is considered in our qualitative impairment analysis which is a level 1 input in the fair value hierarchy. If the carrying value of our single reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we recognize an impairment loss equal to the difference between the carrying value and estimated fair value.
Retirement Plan
In order to measure the annual expense and calculate the liability associated with our retirement plan, management must make a variety of estimates including, but not limited to, discount rates, compensation increases and anticipated mortality rates. The estimates used by management are based on our historical experience as well as current facts and circumstances. We use a third-party specialist to assist management in appropriately measuring the expense associated with this employment-related benefit. Different estimates used by management could result in us recognizing different amounts of expense over different periods of time.
We recognize net actuarial gains or losses in excess of 10% of the plan’s projected benefit obligation into current period expense over the average remaining expected service period of active participants.
The most significant assumption for pension plan accounting is the discount rate. We select a discount rate each year (as of our fiscal year end measurement date) for our plan based upon a hypothetical corporate bond portfolio for which the cash flows match the
year-by-year
projected benefit cash flows for our pension plan. The hypothetical bond portfolio is comprised of high-quality fixed income debt securities (usually Moody’s Aa3 or higher) available at the measurement date. Based on this information, the discount rate selected by us for determination of pension expense was 2.89% for fiscal 2022, 2.69% for fiscal 2021, and 3.56% for fiscal 2020. A
25-basis
point increase or decrease in our discount rate assumption for fiscal 2022 would have resulted in an immaterial change in our pension expense for fiscal 2022. For our year end pension obligation determination, we selected discount rates of 4.68% and 2.89% for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 - “Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements.
Forward-Looking Statements
The statements contained in this Annual Report on Form
10-K,
and in the Chief Executive Officer’s letter to stockholders accompanying the Annual Report on Form
10-K
delivered to stockholders, that are not historical (including statements concerning our expectations regarding market risk) are “forward-looking statements.” These forward-looking statements may be followed (and therefore identified) by a cross reference to Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” or may be otherwise identified by the use of forward-looking words and phrases such as “will”, “anticipates”, “intends”, “may”, “believes”, “should” and “expects”, and they are based on our current expectations or beliefs concerning future events and involve risks and uncertainties. We undertake no obligation to update publicly or otherwise revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or other factors that affect the subject of these statements, except where expressly required to do so by law. We caution that such statements are qualified by important factors, including the factors described in Part I, Item 1A - “Risk Factors” and other factors, risks and uncertainties that are beyond our control, that could cause results to differ materially from our current expectations and/or those in the forward-looking statements, as well as the timing and occurrence (or nonoccurrence) of transactions and other factors, risk, uncertainties and events which may be subject to circumstances beyond our control. Consequently, results actually achieved may differ materially from the expected results included in these statements.