Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Jack Creek Investment Corp. (the “Company”) is a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on August 18, 2020. The Company was incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (a “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of 9,400,000 Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from August 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating
income in the form of interest income on investments held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $15,113,643, which consists of the change in fair value of warrants of $22,422,330, interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $68,571 and a loss on issuance of private warrants of $3,948,000 offset by operating costs of $3,429,258.
For the period from August 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $16,565, which consists of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 26, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 34,500,000 Units which includes the full exercise by the underwriter of its over-allotment option in the amount of 4,500,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $345,000,000 which is described in Note 3. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 9,400,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $9,400,000, which is described in Note 4.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,752,236. Net income of $15,113,643 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $68,571, the change in the fair value of the warrant liability of $22,422,330, loss on initial issuance of private warrants of $3,948,000 and transaction costs associated with the warrants issued at the Initial Public Offering of $1,360,701. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $316,321 of cash from operating activities.
For the period from August 18, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, there was no cash used in operating activities. Net loss of $16,565, which was affected by formation cost paid by sponsor of $5,000 and changes in operating asset and liabilities were $11,565.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $345,068,571 (including approximately $69,000 of interest income and realized gains) consisting of money market funds invested in U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $89,920. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our initial shareholders, officers or directors. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through one year and one day from the issuance of this report.
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the sponsor up to $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services. Upon completion of a Business Combination or its liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $12,075,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the 34,500,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s balance sheets.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in
capital and accumulated deficit.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC815-40
under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement
at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available were valued using the Binomial Lattice Model. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date. The Private Placement Warrants were valued using the Black Scholes Option Pricing Model as of the Initial Public Offering and based on the observed price for Public Warrants as of December 31, 2021.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income (loss) is allocated pro rata between the two share classes. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic815-40) (“ASU2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.