Item 7.
Management’s Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (“MD&A”) is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management regarding our financial condition and results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Refer to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 25, 2021 for additional information related to the discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended September 25, 2021 compared to the fiscal year ended September 26, 2020.
Business Overview
The Company manufactures snack foods and distributes frozen beverages which it markets nationally to the foodservice and retail supermarket industries. The Company’s principal snack food products are soft pretzels, frozen novelties, churros and bakery products. We believe we are the largest manufacturer of soft pretzels in the United States. Other snack food products include funnel cake and handheld products. The Company’s principal frozen beverage products are the ICEE brand frozen carbonated beverage and the SLUSH PUPPIE brand frozen non-carbonated beverage.
The Company’s Food Service and Frozen Beverages sales are made primarily to foodservice customers including snack bar and food stand locations in leading chain, department, discount, warehouse club and convenience stores; malls and shopping centers; fast food and casual dining restaurants; stadiums and sports arenas; leisure and theme parks; movie theatres; independent retailers; and schools, colleges and other institutions. The Company’s retail supermarket customers are primarily supermarket chains.
Business Trends
COVID-19
Dating back to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in fiscal 2020, the effects of COVID-19 on consumer behavior have impacted the relevant demand for our Food Service, Retail, and Frozen Beverage segments. In fiscal 2020, we saw a shift in demand towards increased at-home food consumption, which benefited our Retail segment, and away from in-restaurant dining, and experience driven activities, which negatively impacted our Food Service and Frozen Beverage segments. This shift in demand proved inconsistent and volatile over the course of the pandemic. In fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022, as part of the economy that impact our operations opened, sales in our Food Service and Frozen Beverages segments improved.
The aforementioned shift, and overall volatility in demand, has had a significant impact on the operating results of each of our three segments over the past three fiscal years. Additional impacts from the pandemic have caused us to experience higher hourly wage rates paid to our front-line employees, increased costs for personal protective equipment, increased complexity and uncertainty around production planning and forecasting, and overall lower levels of efficiency in our production and distribution network, all of which has unfavorably impacted our operating results.
Inflation
The inflationary cost environment we experienced during fiscal 2022 resulted in significantly higher input costs for our business. During fiscal 2022, we experienced unprecedented inflationary pressures on commodities such as flour, oils, eggs, meats and dairy, in addition to notably higher costs for packaging, freight and warehousing, and labor. To help offset these cost headwinds, we implemented a series of pricing actions throughout fiscal 2022.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS:
Fiscal Year 2022 (52 weeks) Compared to Fiscal Year 2021 (52 weeks)
Results of Consolidated Operations
Net sales increased $236.1 million, or 21%, to $1,380.7 million in fiscal 2022 from $1,144.6 million in fiscal 2021. The sales growth was largely driven by improved marketing, new customers, additional product placement, as well as a positive pricing environment. Additional benefits were seen from our recent acquisition, and to a lessor extent, from the comparative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on fiscal 2022 sales compared with fiscal 2021 sales, with most of the latter comparative benefit reflected in our first quarter of fiscal 2022.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased to 26.8% in fiscal 2022 from 26.1% in fiscal 2021. Inflation continued to build over the year which significantly pressured margins. The impact was especially pronounced in key raw material purchases like flour, eggs, dairy, chocolates and meats, as well as packaging and fuel. Pricing actions that were implemented during fiscal 2022 helped to offset some of these significant cost pressures. Comparatively, the increase in gross profit percentage was largely attributable to the benefit of increased sales, as well as favorable product mix.
Total operating expenses increased $80.1 million to $307.8 million in fiscal 2022 and increased as a percentage of sales to 22.3% of sales from 19.9% in fiscal 2021. The increase reflects the significant impact of inflationary pressures across the majority of our cost line items including industry-wide freight and distribution cost increases, wage increases, and overall administrative expense increases.
Operating expenses included intangible asset impairment charges of $1.0 million in fiscal 2022 and $1.3 million in fiscal 2021. Marketing and selling expenses decreased to 6.6% this year from 6.8% of sales in fiscal 2021 driven by effective investment of marketing dollars aligned with sales recovery. Distribution expenses as a percent of sales increased to 11.6% from 9.5% in fiscal 2021 due to rising freight and fuel costs. Administrative expenses were 4.0% and 3.5% of sales in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
Operating income decreased $9.4 million or 13% to $61.8 million in fiscal year 2022 as a result of the aforementioned items.
Our investments generated before tax income of $1.0 million in fiscal 2022, down from $2.8 million in fiscal 2021 due to decreases in the amount of investments.
Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2022 was 23.5%. Our effective tax rate in fiscal 2021 year was 24.9%.
Net earnings decreased $8.4 million or 15%, in fiscal 2022 to $47.2 million, or $2.46 per diluted share, from $55.6 million or $2.91 per diluted share, in fiscal 2021 as a result of the aforementioned items.
There are many factors which can impact our net earnings from year to year and in the long run, among which are the supply and cost of raw materials and labor, insurance costs, factors impacting sales as noted above, the continuing consolidation of our customers, our ability to manage our manufacturing, marketing and distribution activities, our ability to make and integrate acquisitions and changes in tax laws and interest rates.
Results of Operations - Segments
We have three reportable segments, as disclosed in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements: Food Service, Retail Supermarkets and Frozen Beverages.
The Chief Operating Decision Maker for Food Service, Retail Supermarkets and Frozen Beverages reviews monthly detailed operating income statements and sales reports in order to assess performance and allocate resources to each individual segment. Sales and operating income are the key variables monitored by the Chief Operating Decision Maker and management when determining each segment’s and the Company’s financial condition and operating performance. In addition, the Chief Operating Decision Maker reviews and evaluates depreciation, capital spending and assets of each segment on a quarterly basis to monitor cash flow and asset needs of each segment.
FOOD SERVICE
Sales to food service customers increased $147.7 million, or 20%, to $872.7 million in fiscal 2022. Soft pretzel sales to the food service market increased 18% to $205.8 million for the year. Frozen novelties sales increased $33.6 million, or 75%, to $78.2 million for the year, which included the benefit of the Company’s recent acquisition. Churro sales to food service customers were up 36% to $88.2 million for the year. Sales of bakery products increased $38.9 million, or 11%, to $381.5 million for the year. Handheld sales to food service customers were up 22% to $92.1 million in fiscal 2022. Sales of funnel cake increased $4.6 million, or 21% to $26.9 million.
Sales were up across most product lines as many of the venues and locations where our products are sold that were previously shut down or operating at reduced capacity in fiscal 2021 have mostly fully re-opened in fiscal 2022. Theaters and outdoor venues, including stadiums and amusement parks, as well as schools, restaurants and strategic accounts continued to experience an increase in visitation that drove strong sales in our core products. Additionally, sales across all of our product lines were favorably impacted by the positive pricing environment, and frozen novelties sales were also favorably impacted by our recent acquisition.
Sales of new products in the first twelve months since their introduction were approximately $4.6 million for the year. Operating income in our Food Service segment decreased from $39.2 million in fiscal 2021 to $18.5 million in fiscal 2022. The decrease in operating income was primarily due to the significant increase in ingredients, production and distribution costs year over year, as well as our ERP implementation which previously impacted our results in the fiscal second quarter.
RETAIL SUPERMARKETS
Sales of products to retail supermarkets increased $13.0 million or 7% to $197.9 million in fiscal year 2022. Soft pretzel sales to retail supermarkets were $61.9 million, an increase of $6.9 million, or 13%, from sales in fiscal 2021. Sales of frozen novelties increased $8.9 million or 9% to $108.9 million. Sales of biscuits and dumplings increased 2% to $24.7 million for the year. Handheld sales to retail supermarket customers decreased 26% to $5.6 million for the year.
Sales of new products in the first twelve months since their introduction were approximately $0.9 million in fiscal year 2022. Operating income in our Retail Supermarkets segment decreased from $25.9 million to $9.5 million for the year. The decreases in operating income were primarily attributable to higher cost of goods sold as well as higher shipping and distribution related costs.
FROZEN BEVERAGES
Total frozen beverage segment sales increased 32% to $310.0 million in fiscal 2022 and beverage sales increased 48% or $59.6 million for the year. Gallon sales increased 39% from last year. The increase in gallon sales reflects the strong demand across theaters, amusement parks, convenience and restaurants. In the amusement parks channel, we continue to see strong growth as both domestic and international visitation numbers continue to recover, and exceed, pre-COVID-19 levels. Theater sales continue on their upward trajectory as movie goers indulge in their favorite snacks and view highly anticipated movie releases. Service revenue increased 10% to $89.8 million for the year led by an acceleration in maintenance calls and additional growth in one of our larger customers, earlier in the fiscal year. Machines revenue, primarily sales of machines, increased from $27.0 million in fiscal 2021 to $33.6 million in fiscal 2022 driven mainly by growth from large quick service restaurant (QSR) and convenience customers.
The estimated number of Company-owned frozen beverage dispensers was 22,000 and 19,000 at September 24, 2022 and September 25, 2021, respectively. Our Frozen Beverage segment had operating income of $33.8 million in fiscal 2022 compared to $6.1 million in fiscal 2021 primarily a result of higher beverage sales volume which drove leverage across the business.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS:
Fiscal Year 2021 (52 weeks) Compared to Fiscal Year 2020 (52 weeks)
Net sales increased $122.5 million, or 12%, to $1,144.6 million in fiscal 2021 from $1,022.0 million in fiscal 2020. As parts of the economy that impact our operations continued to open, sales for the year improved from a year ago. Approximately 2/3 of the Company’s sales are to venues and locations that previously shut down or sharply curtailed their foodservice operations as a result of COVID-19.
FOOD SERVICE
Sales to food service customers increased $106.1 million, or 17%, to $725.0 million in fiscal 2021. Soft pretzel sales to the food service market increased 16% to $175.0 million for the year. Frozen novelties sales increased $9.4 million, or 27%, to $44.6 million for the year. Churro sales to food service customers were up 38% to $64.9 million for the year. Sales of bakery products increased $10.1 million, or 3%, to $342.6 million for the year. Handheld sales to food service customers were up 110% to $75.6 million in 2021. Sales of funnel cake increased $4.9 million, or 29% to $21.5 million. Sales were up across all product lines as many of the venues and locations where our products are sold that were previously shut down or operating at reduced capacity in 2020 have partially or fully re-opened in 2021.
Sales of new products in the first twelve months since their introduction were approximately $39 million for the year. Operating income in our Food Service segment increased from $6.5 million in 2020 to $39.2 million in 2021. The increase in operating income was primarily due to the increase in sales which improved margin efficiencies and expense leverage.
RETAIL SUPERMARKETS
Sales of products to retail supermarkets increased $7.7 million or 4% to $184.9 million in fiscal year 2021. Soft pretzel sales to retail supermarkets were $55.0 million, an increase of $5.8 million, or 12%, from sales in 2020. Sales of frozen novelties increased $11.3 million or 13% to $100.1 million. Sales of biscuits and dumplings decreased 15% to $24.2 million for the year. Handheld sales to retail supermarket customers decreased 38% to $7.6 million for the year.
Sales of new products in the first twelve months since their introduction were approximately $1 million in fiscal year 2021. Operating income in our Retail Supermarkets segment increased from $23.2 million to $25.9 million for the year primarily due to higher volume.
FROZEN BEVERAGES
Total frozen beverage segment sales increased 4% to $234.7 million in fiscal 2021 and beverage sales increased 16% or $17.5 million for the year. Gallon sales increased 16% from last year. Service revenue decreased 3% to $81.3 million for the year primarily due to the loss of a major customer in October 2020. Machines revenue, primarily sales of machines, decreased from $34.0 million in 2020 to $27.0 million in 2021 due to lower sales volumes with a major customer. Overall, sales in the frozen beverage segment grew as key amusement, convenience, restaurants, and retail venues returned to pre-COVID capacity in the second half of the year, which offset a slower recovery in the theater channel.
The estimated number of Company-owned frozen beverage dispensers was 19,000 and 27,000 at September 25, 2021 and September 26, 2020, respectively. Our Frozen Beverage segment had operating income of $6.1 million in 2021 compared to an operating loss of $12.5 million in 2020 primarily as a result of higher beverage sales volume due to COVID-19 recovery during 2021.
CONSOLIDATED
Other than as commented upon above by segment, there are no material specific reasons for the reported sales increases or decreases. Sales levels can be impacted by the appeal of our products to our customers and consumers and their changing tastes, competitive and pricing pressures, sales execution, marketing programs, seasonal weather, customer stability and general economic conditions.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales increased to 26.1% in 2021 from 23.3% in 2020. The increase is largely attributable to the benefit of increased sales, favorable product mix and corresponding margin efficiencies.
Total operating expenses increased $6.5 million to $227.7 million in fiscal 2021 but as a percentage of sales decreased to 19.9% of sales from 21.6% in 2020. Operating expenses this year included $1.3 million of intangible asset impairment charges and operating expenses in 2020 included $6.4 million of plant shutdown impairment costs for the shutdown of one of our manufacturing plants. Marketing and selling expenses decreased to 6.8% this year from 8.3% of sales in 2020 driven by effective investment of marketing dollars aligned with sales recovery. Distribution expenses as a percent of sales increased to 9.5% from 9.1% in 2020 due to rising freight and fuel costs. Administrative expenses were 3.5% and 3.6% of sales in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating income increased $54.0 million or 314% to $71.2 million in fiscal year 2021 as a result of the aforementioned items.
Our investments generated before tax income of $2.8 million this year, down from $4.4 million last year due to decreases in the amount of investments and lower interest rates.
Our effective tax rate in our fiscal 2021 year was 24.9%. Net earnings for the 2020 year benefited from a reduction in income tax expense related to state deferred taxes of approximately $2.2 million. Excluding this adjustment, our effective tax rate in our fiscal 2020 year was 25.0%.
Net earnings increased $37.3 million or 204%, in fiscal 2021 to $55.6 million, or $2.91 per diluted share, from $18.3 million or $0.96 per diluted share, in fiscal 2020 as a result of the aforementioned items.
There are many factors which can impact our net earnings from year to year and in the long run, among which are the supply and cost of raw materials and labor, insurance costs, factors impacting sales as noted above, the continuing consolidation of our customers, our ability to manage our manufacturing, marketing and distribution activities, our ability to make and integrate acquisitions and changes in tax laws and interest rates.
ACQUISITIONS
On October 1, 2019, we acquired the assets of ICEE Distributors LLC, based in Bossier City, Louisiana for approximately $45 million. ICEE Distributors does business in Arkansas, Louisiana and Texas. Sales and operating income of ICEE Distributors were $9.7 million and $2.4 million for the year ended September 25, 2021. Sales and operating income of ICEE Distributors were $11.4 million and $3.6 million for the year ended September 26, 2020.
On February 4, 2020, we acquired the assets of BAMA ICEE, based in Birmingham, Alabama for approximately $12 million. BAMA ICEE does business in Alabama and Georgia. Sales and operating income of BAMA ICEE were $1.8 million and $0.5 million for the year ended September 25, 2021. Sales and operating income of BAMA ICEE were $1.7 million and $0.6 million for the year ended September 26, 2020.
On June 21, 2022, J & J Snack Foods Corp. and its wholly-owned subsidiary, DD Acquisition Holdings, LLC, completed the acquisition of one hundred percent (100%) of the equity interests of Dippin’ Dots Holding, L.L.C. (“Dippin’ Dots”) which, through its wholly-owned subsidiaries, owns and operates the Dippin’ Dots and Doc Popcorn businesses. The purchase price was approximately $223.6 million, consisting entirely of cash, and may be modified for certain customary post-closing purchase price adjustments.
Dippin’ Dots is a leading producer of flash-frozen beaded ice cream treats, and the acquisition will leverage synergies in entertainment and amusement locations, theaters, and convenience to continue to expand our business. The acquisition also includes the Doc Popcorn business operated by Dippin’ Dots.
These acquisitions were accounted for under the purchase method of accounting, and their operations are included in the accompanying consolidated financial statements from their respective acquisition dates.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Although there are many factors that could impact our operating cash flow, most notably net earnings, we believe that our future operating cash flow, along with our borrowing capacity, our current cash and cash equivalent balances and our investment securities is sufficient to satisfy our cash requirements over the next twelve months and beyond, as well as fund future growth and expansion.
Fiscal 2022 Compared to Fiscal 2021
-
The increase in deferred income taxes was primarily related to increased deferred tax liabilities which arose in connection with overall depreciation related temporary differences, in fiscal year 2022.
-
Cash flows associated with changes in assets and liabilities, net effects from purchase of companies decreased in fiscal year 2022 largely due to the increase in accounts receivable, inventory, and prepaid balances. The accounts receivable balance increased primarily due to the overall increase in sales in our fourth quarter of fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021. The inventory balance increased primarily due to inflationary pressures seen during fiscal 2022, as well as strategic decisions to store more finished goods. The prepaid balance increased primarily due to an increase in prepaid income taxes.
-
Payments for purchases of companies, net of cash acquired, in fiscal 2022 related to the Dippin’ Dots acquisition.
-
Purchases of property, plant and equipment include spending for production growth, in addition to acquiring new equipment, infrastructure replacements, and upgrades to maintain competitive standing and position us for future opportunities. The increase in fiscal 2022 was primarily due to increased spend for new lines at various plants aimed at increasing capacity.
-
Proceeds from redemption and sales of marketable securities decreased in fiscal 2022 as in prior years, we strategically chose to no longer re-invest redeemed proceeds into marketable securities given the low interest rate environment.
-
Borrowings under credit facility in fiscal 2022 related to funding used to supplement available cash balances for the Dippin’ Dots acquisition.
-
Repayment of borrowings under credit facility in fiscal 2022 related to the cash paydown of borrowings, primarily resulting from the generation of operating cash subsequent to the acquisition.
-
Dividends paid during fiscal 2022 increased as our quarterly dividend was raised during fiscal 2022.
Liquidity
As of September 24, 2022, we had $35.2 million of cash and cash equivalents, and $9.7 million of marketable securities.
In December 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated loan agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with our existing banks which provided for up to a $50 million revolving credit facility repayable in December 2026.
On June 21, 2022, the Company entered into an amendment to the Credit Agreement, the “Amended Credit Agreement” which provided for an incremental increase of $175 million in available borrowings. The Amended Credit Agreement also includes an option to increase the size of the revolving credit facility by up to an amount not to exceed in the aggregate the greater of $225 million or, $50 million plus the Consolidated EBITDA of the Borrowers, subject to the satisfaction of certain terms and conditions.
Interest accrues, at the Company’s election at (i) the BSBY Rate (as defined in the Credit Agreement) plus an applicable margin, based upon the Consolidated Net Leverage Ratio, as defined in the Credit Agreement, or (ii) the Alternate Base Rate (a rate based on the higher of (a) the prime rate announced from time-to-time by the Administrative Agent, (b) the Federal Reserve System’s federal funds rate, plus 0.50% or (c) the Daily BSBY Rate, plus an applicable margin. The Alternate Base Rate is defined in the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement requires the Company to comply with various affirmative and negative covenants, including without limitation (i) covenants to maintain a minimum specified interest coverage ratio and maximum specified net leverage ratio, and (ii) subject to certain exceptions, covenants that prevent or restrict the Company’s ability to pay dividends, engage in certain mergers or acquisitions, make certain investments or loans, incur future indebtedness, alter its capital structure or line of business, prepay subordinated indebtedness, engage in certain transactions with affiliates, or amend its organizational documents. As of September 24, 2022, the Company is in compliance with all financial covenants of the Credit Agreement.
As of September 24, 2022, we had $55.0 million of outstanding borrowings drawn on the Amended Credit Agreement. As of September 24, 2022, we had $160.2 million of additional borrowing capacity, after giving effect to the $9.8 million of letters of credit outstanding.
The Company’s material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Purchase Commitments
Our most significant raw material requirements include flour, packaging, shortening, corn syrup, sugar, juice, cheese, chocolate, and a variety of nuts. We attempt to minimize the effect of future price fluctuations related to the purchase of raw materials primarily through forward purchasing to cover future manufacturing requirements, generally for periods from 1 to 12 months. As of September 24, 2022, we have approximately $130 million of such commitments. The purchase commitments do not exceed our projected requirements over the related terms and are in the normal course of business.
Leases
We have operating leases with initial noncancelable lease terms in excess of one year covering the rental of various facilities and equipment. Our operating leases include leases for real estate from some of our office and manufacturing facilities as well as manufacturing and non-manufacturing equipment used in our business. As of September 24, 2022, we have operating lease payment obligations of $56.2 million, with $13.5 million payable within 12 months.
Off -Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company has off-balance sheet arrangements for purchase commitments as of September 24, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies, Judgments and Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of such financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of those financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
The Company discloses its significant accounting policies in the accompanying notes to its audited consolidated financial statements.
Judgments and estimates of uncertainties are required in applying the Company’s accounting policies in certain areas. Following are some of the areas requiring significant judgments and estimates: revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful receivables, valuation of goodwill and long-lived and intangible assets, insurance reserves, and income taxes and business combinations.
Revenue Recognition
The singular performance obligation of our customer contracts for product and machine sales is determined by each individual purchase order and the respective products ordered, with revenue being recognized at a point-in-time when the obligation under the terms of the agreement is satisfied and product control is transferred to our customer. Specifically, control transfers to our customers when the product is delivered to, installed, or picked up by our customers based upon applicable shipping terms, as our customers can direct the use and obtain substantially all of the remaining benefits from the product at this point in time. The performance obligations in our customer contracts for product are generally satisfied within 30 days.
The singular performance obligation of our customer contracts for time and material repair and maintenance equipment service is the performance of the repair and maintenance with revenue being recognized at a point-in-time when the repair and maintenance is completed.
The singular performance obligation of our customer repair and maintenance equipment service contracts is the performance of the repair and maintenance with revenue being recognized over the time the service is expected to be performed. Our customers are billed for service contracts in advance of performance and therefore we have contract liability on our balance sheet.
Revenue is measured by the transaction price, which is defined as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for satisfying the performance obligations noted above. The transaction price is adjusted for estimates of known or expected variable consideration which includes sales discounts, trade promotions and certain other sales and customer incentives, including rebates and coupon redemptions. Variable consideration related to these programs is recorded as a reduction to revenue when the related revenue is recognized, and is recorded using the most likely amount method, with updates to estimates and related accruals of variable consideration occurring each period based on historical experience, changes in circumstances and other factors, including review of contractual pricing and rebate arrangements with customers.
We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be material change in the estimates or assumptions used to recognize revenue. As noted above, estimates are made based on historical experience and other factors. However, if the level of redemption rates or performance was to vary significantly from estimates, we may be exposed to gains or losses that could be material. We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to recognize revenue during the past three fiscal years.
Allowance for Doubtful Receivables
We provide an allowance for doubtful receivables after taking into consideration historical experience and other factors. On September 27, 2020, the Company adopted guidance issued by the FASB in ASU 2016-13 Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which requires companies to recognize an allowance that reflects a current estimate of credit losses expected to be incurred over the life of the asset. The Company continuously monitors collections and payments from its customers and maintains a provision for estimated credit losses. The allowance for doubtful accounts considers a number of factors including the age of receivable balances, the history of losses, expectations of future credit losses and the customers’ ability to pay off obligations.
We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions used to value our accounts receivable. Since adoption of the new guidance on September 27, 2020, we have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to value accounts receivable.
Valuation of Goodwill
We have three reporting units with goodwill. Goodwill is evaluated annually by the Company for impairment. We perform impairment tests at year end for our reporting units, which are also the operating segment levels with recorded goodwill utilizing primarily the discounted cash flow method. This methodology used to estimate the fair value of the total Company and its reporting units requires inputs and assumptions (i.e. revenue growth, operating profit margins, capital spending requirements and discount rates) that reflect current market conditions. The estimated fair value of each reporting unit is compared to the carrying value of the reporting unit. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value, the goodwill of the reporting unit is potentially impaired, and the Company then determines the implied fair value of goodwill, which is compared to the carrying value of goodwill to determine if impairment exists. Our tests at September 24, 2022 show that the fair value of each of our reporting units with goodwill exceeded its carrying value by at least 50%. Therefore, no further analysis was required.
The inputs and assumptions used involve considerable management judgment and are based upon assumptions about expected future operating performance. Assumptions used in these forecasts are consistent with internal planning. The actual performance of the reporting units could differ from management’s estimates due to changes in business conditions, operating performance, economic conditions, competition, and consumer preferences. We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to value goodwill during the past three fiscal years.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets and Other Intangible Assets
We record an impairment charge to property, plant and equipment and amortizing intangible assets in accordance with the applicable accounting standards, when, based on certain indicators of impairment, we believe such assets have experienced a decline in value that is other than temporary. Future adverse changes in market conditions or poor operating results of these underlying assets could result in losses or an inability to recover the carrying value of the asset that may not be reflected in the asset’s current carrying value, thereby possibly requiring impairment charges in the future.
Indefinite lived intangibles are reviewed annually for impairment. The fair value of our indefinite lived intangible assets is calculated principally using a relief from royalty valuation approach. We are required to make estimates and assumptions about sales growth, royalty rates, and discount rates based on budgets, business plans, economic projections, and marketplace data. Our impairment analysis contains uncertainties due to uncontrollable events that could positively or negatively impact the future economic and operating conditions.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to evaluate impairment of long-lived assets and other intangibles during the last three fiscal years. While we believe we have made reasonable estimates and assumptions to calculate fair value of these assets, it is possible a material change could occur. If our actual results are not consistent with our estimates and assumptions used to calculate fair value, it could result in a material impairment of our long-lived assets and other intangibles.
Insurance Reserves
We have a self-insured medical plan which covers approximately 1,700 of our employees. We record a liability for incurred but not yet reported or paid claims based on our historical experience of claims payments and a calculated lag time period. We maintain a spreadsheet that includes claims payments made each month according to the date the claim was incurred. This enables us to have an historical record of claims incurred but not yet paid at any point in the past. We then compare our accrued liability to the more recent claims incurred but not yet paid amounts and adjust our recorded liability up or down accordingly. Considering that we have stop loss coverage of $225,000 for each individual plan subscriber, the general consistency of claims payments and the short time lag, we believe that there is not a material exposure for this liability.
We self-insure, up to loss limits, workers’ compensation, automobile and general liability claims. Accruals for claims under our self-insurance program are recorded on a claims-incurred basis. We estimate the liability based on total incurred claims and paid claims adjusting for loss development factors which account for the development of open claims over time. We estimate the amounts we expect to pay for some insurance years by multiplying incurred losses by a loss development factor which is based on insurance industry averages and the age of the incurred claims; our estimated liability is then the difference between the amounts we expect to pay and the amounts we have already paid for those years. Loss development factors that we use range from 1.0 to 2.0. However, for some years, the estimated liability is the difference between the amounts we have already paid for that year and the maximum we could pay under the program in effect for that particular year because the calculated amount we expect to pay is higher than the maximum. For other years, where there are few claims open, the estimated liability we record is the amount the insurance company has reserved for those claims. We evaluate our estimated liability on a continuing basis and adjust it accordingly. Due to the multi-year length of these insurance programs, there is exposure to claims coming in lower or higher than anticipated; however, due to constant monitoring and stop loss coverage of $350,000 on individual claims, we believe our exposure is not material. Because of the foregoing, we do not engage a third-party actuary to assist in this analysis.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to establish our self-insurance liability during the past three fiscal years. We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimate or assumptions used to calculate our self-insurance liability. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to gains or losses that could be material.
Income Taxes
The annual tax rate is based on our income and statutory tax rates. Changes in statutory rates and tax laws in jurisdictions in which we operate may have a material effect on our annual tax rate. The effect of these changes, if any, would be recognized as a discrete item upon enactment.
Deferred income taxes arise from temporary differences between the tax and financial statement recognition of revenues and expenses. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured based on the enacted tax rates that will apply in the years in which the temporary differences are expected to be recovered or paid.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to account for income taxes during the past three fiscal years. Changes in tax laws and rates could affect recorded deferred tax assets and liabilities in the future. Other than those potential impacts, we do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in tax related balances.
Business Combinations
We use assumptions and estimates in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We use various models to value assets acquired and liabilities assumed, such as the net realizable value method to value inventory, and the cost method and market approach to value property, plant and equipment. The determination of the fair value of intangible assets, which can represent a significant portion of the purchase price of our acquisitions, requires the use of significant judgement with regard to the fair value, and whether such intangibles are amortizable or non-amortizable and, if the former, the period and method by which the intangible will be amortized. We estimate the fair value of acquisition-related intangibles either through the relief of royalty method or multi-period excess earnings method, or based on projections of cash flows that will arise from identifiable intangible assets of acquired businesses, which includes estimate of customer attrition. The projected cash flows are discounted to determine the present value of the assets at the date of acquisition. For significant acquisitions, we may use independent third-party valuation specialists to assist us in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
We have not made any material changes in the accounting methodology used to account for business combinations during the past three fiscal years. We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimate or assumptions used to determine the fair value of assets acquired or liabilities assumed in a business combination. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to impairment charges that could be material.