ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following section provides management's view of the Company's financial condition and results of operations and should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements, and related notes included elsewhere in this report. All dollar and share amounts, except per share amounts, are in thousands and discussions compare fiscal 2022 to fiscal 2021. Discussions of fiscal 2020 items and comparisons between fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7 “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
OVERVIEW
Jack Henry & Associates, Inc. is a well-rounded financial technology company headquartered in Monett, Missouri, that employs approximately 6,900 full-time and part-time associates nationwide, and is a leading provider of technology solutions and payment processing services primarily for financial services organizations. Its solutions serve over 7,800 customers and consist of integrated data processing systems solutions to U.S. banks ranging from de novo to multi-billion-dollar institutions with assets up to $50 billion, core data processing solutions for credit unions of all sizes, and non-core highly specialized core-agnostic products and services that enable financial institutions of every asset size and charter, and diverse corporate entities outside the financial services industry, to mitigate and control risks, optimize revenue and growth opportunities, and contain costs. JKHY's integrated solutions are available for on-premise installation and delivery in our private cloud.
Each of our solutions shares the fundamental commitment to provide high-quality business systems, service levels that consistently exceed customer expectations, and integration of solutions and practical new technologies. The quality of our solutions, our high service standards, and the fundamental way we do business typically foster long-term customer relationships, attract prospective customers, and have enabled us to capture substantial market share.
Through internal product development, disciplined acquisitions, and alliances with companies offering niche solutions that complement our proprietary solutions, we regularly introduce new products and services and generate new cross-sales opportunities across our three primary marketed brands. We provide compatible computer hardware for our on-premise installations and secure processing environments for our outsourced solutions in our private cloud. We perform data conversions, software implementations, initial and ongoing customer training, and ongoing customer support services.
We believe our primary competitive advantage is customer service. Our support infrastructure and strict standards provide service levels we believe to be the highest in the markets we serve and generate high levels of customer satisfaction and retention. We consistently measure customer satisfaction using comprehensive annual surveys and randomly generated daily surveys we receive in our everyday business. Dedicated surveys are also used to grade specific aspects of our customer experience, including product implementation, education, and consulting services.
Our two primary revenue streams are "services and support" and "processing." Services and support includes: "private and public cloud" fees that predominantly have contract terms of seven years or longer at inception; "product delivery and services" revenue, which includes revenue from the sales of licenses, implementation services, deconversion fees, consulting, and hardware; and "on-premise support" revenue, composed of maintenance fees which primarily contain annual contract terms. Processing revenue includes: "remittance" revenue from payment processing, remote capture, and ACH transactions; "card" fees, including card transaction processing and monthly fees; and "transaction and digital" revenue, which includes transaction and mobile
processing fees. We continually seek opportunities to increase revenue while at the same time containing costs to expand margins.
We have four reportable segments: Core, Payments, Complementary, and Corporate and Other. The respective segments include all related revenues along with the related cost of sales.
COVID-19 Impact and Response
Since its outbreak in early calendar 2020, COVID-19 has rapidly spread and continues to represent a public health concern. The health, safety, and well-being of our employees and customers is of paramount importance to us. In March 2020, we established an internal task force composed of executive officers and other members of management to frequently assess updates to the COVID-19 situation and recommend Company actions. We offered remote working as a recommended option to employees whose job duties allowed them to work off-site, and we suspended all non-essential business travel. As of August 15, 2022, the majority of our employees were continuing to work remotely either full time or in a hybrid capacity. We have announced that our official return-to-office date is September 6, 2022, though employees have been permitted to voluntarily return to the office since May 2, 2022. Individual decisions on returning to the office will be manager-coordinated and based on conversations with specific teams and departments. A large number of our employees have requested to remain fully remote or participate in a hybrid approach where they would split their time between remote and in-person working. While our business travel is normalizing, we do not expect it to return to pre-pandemic levels and continue to encourage a cautious approach to business travel activities.
Customers
We work closely with our customers who are scheduled for on-site visits to ensure their needs are met while taking necessary safety precautions when our employees are required to be at a customer site. Delays of customer system installations due to COVID-19 have been limited, and we have developed processes to handle remote installations when available. We expect these processes to provide flexibility and value both during and after the COVID-19 pandemic. Even though a substantial portion of our workforce has worked remotely during the outbreak and business travel has been limited, we have not yet experienced significant disruption to our operations. We believe our technological capabilities are well positioned to allow our employees to work remotely without materially impacting our business.
Financial Impact
Despite the changes and restrictions caused by COVID-19, the overall financial and operational impact on our business has been limited and our liquidity, balance sheet, and business trends remain strong. We experienced positive operating cash flows during fiscal 2022, and we do not expect that to change in the near term. However, we are unable to accurately predict the future impact of COVID-19 due to a number of uncertainties, including further government actions; the duration, severity and recurrence of the outbreak, including the onset of variants of the virus; the effectiveness of vaccines against new variants; the development and effectiveness of treatments; the effect on the economy generally; the potential impact to our customers, vendors, and employees; and how the potential impact might affect future customer services, processing and installation-related revenue, and processes and efficiencies within the Company directly or indirectly impacting financial results. We will continue to monitor COVID-19 and its possible impact on the Company and to take steps necessary to protect the health and safety of our employees and customers. For a further discussion of the uncertainties and risks associated with COVID-19, see Part II, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A detailed discussion of the major components of the results of operations follows.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
FISCAL 2022 COMPARED TO FISCAL 2021
In fiscal 2022, total revenue increased 11% or $184,659, compared to fiscal 2021. Reducing total revenue for the effects of deconversion fees of $53,279 for the current fiscal year and $20,635 for the prior fiscal year, and for revenue from acquisitions and divestitures in fiscal 2022 of $274 and in fiscal 2021 of $1,182, results in a 9% increase, or $152,923. This increase was primarily driven by growth in private and public cloud, card processing, remittance, implementation, and transaction and digital revenues, partially offset by a decrease in license fee revenue compared to the prior fiscal year.
Operating expenses increased 8% in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher costs related to our card payment processing platform associated with corresponding increases in revenue, higher personnel costs, increased operating licenses and fees, and higher travel expenses.
We move into fiscal 2023 following strong performance in fiscal 2022. Significant portions of our business continue to provide recurring revenue and our sales pipeline is also encouraging. Our customers continue to face regulatory and operational challenges which our products and services address, and in these times, they have an even greater need for our solutions that directly address institutional profitability, efficiency, and security. We believe our strong balance sheet, access to extensive lines of credit, the strength of our existing product line and an unwavering commitment to superior customer service position us well to address current and future opportunities.
A detailed discussion of the major components of the results of operations for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 follows.
REVENUE
Services and support includes: "private and public cloud" fees that predominantly have contract terms of seven years or greater at inception; "product delivery and services" revenue, which includes revenue from the sales of licenses, implementation services, deconversion fees, consulting, and hardware; and "on-premise support" revenue, which is composed primarily of maintenance fees with annual contract terms.
In the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, services and support revenue increased compared to the prior fiscal year. Reducing total services and support revenue by the effects of deconversion fees for each year, which totaled $53,279 in fiscal 2022 and $20,635 in fiscal 2021, and for revenue from acquisitions and divestitures in fiscal 2021 of $1,181, revenue grew 7.5%. This increase was primarily driven by higher private and public cloud revenue resulting from organic growth in data processing and hosting fee revenue reflecting a continuing shift of customers to our term license model. Growth in implementation and software usage revenues also contributed to the increase, partially offset by a decrease in license fee revenue compared to the prior fiscal year.
Processing revenue includes: "remittance" revenue from payment processing, remote capture, and ACH transactions; "card" fees, including card transaction processing and monthly fees; and "transaction and digital" revenue, which includes transaction and mobile processing fees. We continually seek opportunities to increase revenue while at the same time containing costs to expand margins.
Processing revenue increased 11% for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, with strong organic growth in the card processing, transaction and digital, and remittance revenue components primarily due to expanding volumes.
OPERATING EXPENSES
Cost of revenue for fiscal 2022 increased 6% compared to fiscal 2021, driven by higher direct costs associated with our card processing platform in line with related revenue increases, higher personnel costs, and higher operating licenses and fees. Cost of revenue decreased 2% as a percentage of total revenue for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
We devote significant effort and expense to develop new software, service products and continually upgrade and enhance our existing offerings. We believe our research and development efforts are highly efficient because of the extensive experience of our research and development staff and because our product development is highly customer driven.
Research and development expenses for fiscal 2022 increased 11% compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher personnel costs, net of capitalization. Research and development expense remained consistent as a percentage of total revenue for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021. The consistency of this expense category for the fiscal years presented reflected our continuing commitment to the development of strategic products.
Selling, general, and administrative costs included all expenses related to sales efforts, commissions, finance, legal, and human resources, plus all administrative costs.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses for fiscal 2022 increased 17% compared to fiscal 2021. Reducing total selling, general, and administrative expense for the effects of deconversion fees from each year, which totaled $2,485 in fiscal 2022 and $489 in fiscal 2021, and removing the effects of acquisitions, divestitures, and gain/loss of $29 for the current fiscal year and of $(2,012) for the prior fiscal year, selling, general, and administrative expense increased 14% compared to fiscal 2021. This increase was primarily due to higher personnel costs, increased travel expenses, and a smaller gain on sale of assets in the current fiscal year. Selling, general, and administrative expense remained consistent as a percentage of total revenue for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Interest income fluctuated due to changes in invested balances and yields on invested balances. Interest expense increased in fiscal 2022 mainly due to the timing and amounts of borrowed balances.
The increase in the Company's effective tax rate in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 was primarily the result of an increase in the state tax rate applied to net deferred tax liabilities and less rate benefit received from research and development credits.
Net income grew 17% to $362,916, or $4.94 per diluted share, in fiscal 2022 from $311,469, or $4.12 per diluted share, in fiscal 2021. The diluted earnings per share increase year over year was 20%. Growth in net income and
earnings per share was primarily due to the organic growth in our lines of revenue in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, partially offset by the increase in provision for income taxes.
REPORTABLE SEGMENT DISCUSSION
The Company is a leading provider of technology solutions and payment processing services primarily for financial services organizations.
The Company’s operations are classified into four reportable segments: Core, Payments, Complementary, and Corporate and Other. The Core segment provides core information processing platforms to banks and credit unions, which consist of integrated applications required to process deposit, loan, and general ledger transactions, and maintain centralized customer/member information. The Payments segment provides secure payment processing tools and services, including ATM, debit, and credit card processing services; online and mobile bill pay solutions; ACH origination and remote deposit capture processing; and risk management products and services. The Complementary segment provides additional software, hosted processing platforms, and services, including call center support, and network security management, consulting, and monitoring, that can be integrated with our core solutions and many can be used independently. The Corporate and Other segment includes revenue and costs from hardware and other products not attributed to any of the other three segments, as well as operating costs not directly attributable to the other three segments.
Immaterial adjustments were made in fiscal 2022 to reclassify cost of revenue in fiscal 2021 from the Core segment to the Corporate and Other segment to be consistent with the current fiscal year allocation of cost of revenue by segment. The amounts reclassified for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 were $135.
In fiscal 2022, revenue in the Core segment increased 10% compared to fiscal 2021. Reducing total Core revenue by the effects of deconversion fees from both years, which totaled $23,048 in fiscal 2022 and $7,458 in fiscal 2021, and for revenue from acquisitions and divestitures in fiscal 2021 of $1,180, Core segment revenue increased 8%. This increase was primarily driven by organic increases in our private and public cloud revenue. Cost of revenue in the Core segment increased 6% for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased costs associated with the organic growth in cloud revenue. Core segment cost of revenue decreased 2% as a percentage of revenue for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
In fiscal 2022, revenue in the Payments segment increased 10% compared to fiscal 2021. Reducing total Payments revenue by the effects of deconversion fees from both years, which totaled $14,319 in fiscal 2022 and $6,285 in fiscal 2021, Payments segment revenue increased 9%. This increase was primarily driven by organic growth within card processing and remittance fee revenues. Cost of revenue in the Payments segment increased 8% for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased costs associated with our card processing platform and other costs related to the organic growth in card processing and remittance fees. Payments segment cost of revenue decreased 1% as a percentage of revenue for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Revenue in the Complementary segment increased 11% for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. Reducing total Complementary revenue by the effects of deconversion fees from both years, which totaled $15,589 in fiscal 2022 and $6,778 in fiscal 2021, and for revenue from acquisitions and divestitures of $274 from fiscal 2022, Complementary segment revenue increased 9%. This increase was driven by organic increases in our transaction
and digital, private and public cloud, and on-premise support revenues. Cost of revenue in the Complementary segment increased 9% for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher direct costs, increased personnel costs, amortization expense mainly related to capitalized software, and operating licenses and fees. Complementary segment cost of revenue decreased 1% as a percentage of revenue for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Revenue in the Corporate and Other segment increased 14% for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was mainly due to increased on-premise support and implementation revenues.
Cost of revenue for the Corporate and Other segment includes operating costs not directly attributable to any of the other three segments and increased 2% for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increased Corporate and Other segment cost of revenue was primarily related to increased operating licenses and fees.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
The Company's cash and cash equivalents decreased to $48,787 at June 30, 2022 from $50,992 at June 30, 2021. The following table summarizes net cash from operating activities in the statement of cash flows:
Cash provided by operating activities for fiscal 2022 increased 9% compared to fiscal 2021. Cash from operations is primarily used to repay debt, pay dividends and repurchase stock, and for capital expenditures.
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2022 totaled $196,344 and included: $148,239 for the ongoing enhancements and development of existing and new product and service offerings; capital expenditures on facilities and equipment of $34,659, mainly for the purchase of computer equipment; $8,491 for the purchase and development of internal use software; and $5,000 for purchase of investments. These expenditures were partially offset by $45 of proceeds from asset sales.
Cash used in investing activities for fiscal 2021 totaled $162,250 and included: $128,343 for the ongoing enhancements and development of existing and new product and service offerings; capital expenditures on facilities and equipment of $22,988, mainly for the purchase of computer equipment; $13,300 for the purchase of investments; $6,506 for the purchase and development of internal use software; and $2,300, net of cash acquired, for asset acquisitions last year; These expenditures were partially offset by $6,187 of proceeds from the sale of assets and $5,000 of proceeds from investments.
Financing activities used cash of $310,492 for fiscal 2022 and included $193,916 for the purchase of treasury shares and $139,070 for dividends paid to stockholders. These expenditures were partially offset by borrowings and repayments on our revolving credit facility and financing leases which netted to a borrowing of $14,873 and $7,621 of net cash inflow related to stock-based compensation.
Financing activities used cash in fiscal 2021 of $462,232 and included $431,529 for the purchase of treasury shares and $133,800 for dividends paid to stockholders. These expenditures were partially offset by borrowings and repayments on our revolving credit facility and financing leases which netted to $99,886 at June 30, 2021 and $3,211 of net cash inflow related to stock-based compensation.
Capital Requirements and Resources
The Company generally uses existing resources and funds generated from operations to meet its capital requirements. Capital expenditures totaling $34,659 and $22,988 for fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, respectively, were made primarily for additional equipment and the improvement of existing facilities. These additions were funded from cash generated by operations. At June 30, 2022, the Company had no significant outstanding purchase commitments related to property and equipment. We assessed our liquidity needs throughout fiscal 2022, including in relation to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and determined we had adequate capital resources and sufficient access to external financing sources to satisfy our current and reasonably anticipated funding needs. We will continue to monitor and assess these needs going forward.
At June 30, 2022, the Company had contractual obligations of $1,449,442, including operating lease obligations and $1,393,541 related to off-balance sheet purchase obligations. Included in off-balance sheet purchase obligations were open purchase orders of $167,692 and a strategic services agreement entered into by JKHY in fiscal 2017 with First Data® and PSCU® to provide full-service debit and credit card processing on a single platform to all existing core bank and credit union customers, as well as to expand our card processing platform to financial institutions outside our core customer base. This agreement and subsequent amendments include a total purchase commitment at June 30, 2022 of $980,348 over the remaining term of the contract, which currently extends until January 2036, subject to certain renewal terms. Contractual obligations also include an agreement entered into during fiscal 2022 with Google LLC to provide Google Cloud Platform to the Company, including a total purchase commitment at June 30, 2022 of $225,000. Contractual obligations also include an agreement entered into during fiscal 2022 with Feedzai Inc. to provide a software as a service offering that allows prevention, detection, and monitoring of financial crime, including a total purchase commitment at June 30, 2022 of $20,501. Contractual obligations exclude, however, $10,225 of liabilities for uncertain tax positions as we are unable to reasonably estimate the ultimate amount or timing of settlement.
The Board of Directors has authorized the Company to repurchase shares of its common stock. Under this authorization, the Company may finance its share repurchases with available cash reserves or short-term borrowings on its existing credit facilities. The share repurchase program does not include specific price targets or timetables and may be suspended at any time. At June 30, 2022, there were 31,043 shares in treasury stock and the Company had the remaining authority to repurchase up to 3,948 additional shares. The total cost of treasury shares at June 30, 2022 was $1,807,118. During fiscal 2022, the Company repurchased 1,250 treasury shares for $193,916. At June 30, 2021, there were 29,793 shares in treasury stock and the Company had authority to repurchase up to 5,198 additional shares.
We have entered into a definitive agreement to acquire Payrailz, LLC. We anticipate the transaction closing on August 31, 2022. In connection with the closing, we expect to amend the revolving credit facility to increase the borrowing limit to allow funding of the transaction.
Revolving credit facility
On February 10, 2020, the Company entered into a five-year senior, unsecured revolving credit facility. The credit facility allows for borrowings of up to $300,000, which may be increased by the Company at any time until maturity to $700,000. The credit facility bears interest at a variable rate equal to (a) a rate based on a eurocurrency rate or (b) an alternate base rate (the highest of (i) 0%, (ii) the U.S. Bank prime rate for such day, (iii) the sum of the Federal Funds Effective Rate for such day plus 0.50% and (iv) the eurocurrency rate for a one-month interest period on such day for dollars plus 1.0%), plus an applicable percentage in each case determined by the Company's leverage ratio. The credit facility is guaranteed by certain subsidiaries of the Company and is subject to various financial covenants that require the Company to maintain certain financial ratios as defined in the credit facility agreement. As of June 30, 2022, the Company was in compliance with all such covenants. The revolving credit facility terminates February 10, 2025. There was a $115,000 outstanding balance under the credit facility at June 30, 2022 and $100,000 outstanding balance under this credit facility at June 30, 2021.
Other lines of credit
The Company has an unsecured bank credit line which provides for funding of up to $5,000 and bears interest at the prime rate less 1%. The credit line was renewed in May 2019 and modified in March 2021 to extend the expiration to April 30, 2023. There was no balance outstanding at June 30, 2022 or June 30, 2021.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
In December 2019, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") No. 2019-12, Income Taxes (Topic 740): Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes, which removes certain exceptions and simplifies other requirements of Topic 740 guidance. The ASU was effective for the Company on July 1, 2021. The Company adopted ASU 2019-12 effective July 1, 2021 with no material impact on its condensed consolidated financial statements.
Not Adopted at Fiscal Year End
In October 2021, the FASB issued ASU No. 2021-08, Business Combinations (Topic 805): Accounting for Contract Assets and Contract Liabilities from Contracts with Customers, which improves the accounting for acquired revenue contracts with customers in a business combination by addressing diversity in practice and inconsistency related to recognition of an acquired contract liability and payment terms and their effect on subsequent revenue recognized by the acquirer. The ASU is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022, and interim periods within those fiscal years. The Company plans to adopt the ASU effective July 1, 2023, and will apply it prospectively to business combinations occurring on or after that date.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The significant accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements. The preparation of consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses, as well as disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates and judgments upon historical experience and other factors believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Changes in estimates or assumptions could result in a material adjustment to the consolidated financial statements.
We have identified several critical accounting estimates. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both: (a) the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact of changes in the estimates and assumptions would have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from data processing, transaction processing, software licensing and related services, professional services, and hardware sales.
Significant Judgments in Application of the Guidance
Identification of Performance Obligations
We enter into contracts with customers that may include multiple types of goods and services. At contract inception, we assess the solutions and services promised in our contracts with customers and identify a performance obligation for each promise to transfer to the customer a solution or service (or bundle of solutions or services) that is distinct - that is, if the solution or service is separately identifiable from other items in the arrangement and if the customer can benefit from the solution or service on its own or together with other resources that are readily available. Significant judgment is used in the identification and accounting for all performance obligations. We recognize revenue when or as we satisfy each performance obligation by transferring control of a solution or service to the customer.
Determination of Transaction Price
The amount of revenue recognized is based on the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods and services to the customer. Our contracts with our customers frequently contain some component of variable consideration. We estimate variable consideration in our contracts primarily using the expected value method, based on both historical and current information. Where appropriate, we may constrain the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price in the event of a high degree of uncertainty as to the final consideration amount. Significant judgment is used in the estimate of variable consideration of customer contracts that are long-term and include uncertain transactional volumes.
Technology or service components from third parties are frequently included in or combined with our applications or service offerings. Whether we recognize revenue based on the gross amount billed to the customer or the net amount retained involves judgment in determining whether we control the good or service before it is transferred to the customer. This assessment is made at the performance obligation level.
Allocation of Transaction Price
The transaction price, once determined, is allocated between the various performance obligations in the contract based upon their relative standalone selling prices. The standalone selling prices are determined based on the prices at which we separately sell each good or service. For items that are not sold separately, we estimate the standalone selling prices using all information that is reasonably available, including reference to historical pricing data.
Contract Costs
We incur incremental costs to obtain a contract as well as costs to fulfill contracts with customers that are expected to be recovered. These costs consist primarily of sales commissions, which are incurred only if a contract is obtained, and customer conversion or implementation-related costs.
Capitalized costs are amortized based on the transfer of goods or services to which the asset relates, in line with the percentage of revenue recognized for each performance obligation to which the costs are allocated.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
The calculation of depreciation and amortization expense is based on the estimated economic lives of the underlying property, plant and equipment and intangible assets, which have been examined for their useful life and determined that no impairment exists. We believe it is unlikely that any significant changes to the useful lives of our tangible and intangible assets will occur in the near term, but rapid changes in technology or changes in market conditions could result in revisions to such estimates that could materially affect the carrying value of these assets and our future consolidated operating results. For long-lived assets, we consider whether any impairment indicators are present. If impairment indicators are identified, we test the recoverability of the long-lived assets. If this recoverability test is failed, we determine the fair value of the long-lived assets and recognize an impairment loss if the fair value is less than its carrying value.
Capitalization of software development costs
We capitalize certain costs incurred to develop commercial software products. For software that is to be sold, significant areas of judgment include: establishing when technological feasibility has been met and costs should be capitalized, determining the appropriate period over which to amortize the capitalized costs based on the estimated useful lives, estimating the marketability of the commercial software products and related future revenues, and assessing the unamortized cost balances for impairment. Costs incurred prior to establishing technological feasibility are expensed as incurred. Amortization begins on the date of general release and the appropriate amortization period is based on estimates of future revenues from sales of the products. We consider various factors to project marketability and future revenues, including an assessment of alternative solutions or products, current and historical demand for the product, and anticipated changes in technology that may make the product obsolete.
For internal use software, capitalization begins at the beginning of application development. Costs incurred prior to this are expensed as incurred. Significant estimates and assumptions include determining the appropriate amortization period based on the estimated useful life and assessing the unamortized cost balances for impairment. Amortization begins on the date the software is placed in service and the amortization period is based on estimated useful life.
A significant change in an estimate related to one or more software products could result in a material change to our results of operations.
Estimates used to determine current and deferred income taxes
We make certain estimates and judgments in determining income tax expense for financial statement purposes. These estimates and judgments occur in the calculation of certain tax assets and liabilities, which arise from differences in the timing of recognition of revenue and expense for tax and financial statement purposes. We also must determine the likelihood of recoverability of deferred tax assets and adjust any valuation allowances accordingly. Considerations include the period of expiration of the tax asset, planned use of the tax asset, and historical and projected taxable income as well as tax liabilities for the tax jurisdiction to which the tax asset relates. Valuation allowances are evaluated periodically and will be subject to change in each future reporting period as a result of changes in one or more of these factors. Also, liabilities for uncertain tax positions require significant judgment in determining what constitutes an individual tax position as well as assessing the outcome of each tax position. Changes in judgment as to recognition or measurement of tax positions can materially affect the estimate of the effective tax rate and consequently, affect our financial results.
Assumptions related to purchase accounting and goodwill
We account for our acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting. This method requires estimates to determine the fair values of assets and liabilities acquired, including judgments to determine any acquired intangible assets such as customer-related intangibles, as well as assessments of the fair value of existing assets such as property and equipment. Liabilities acquired can include balances for litigation and other contingency reserves established prior to or at the time of acquisition and require judgment in ascertaining a reasonable value. Third-party valuation firms may be used to assist in the appraisal of certain assets and liabilities, but even those determinations would be based on significant estimates provided by us, such as forecast revenues or profits on contract-related intangibles. Numerous factors are typically considered in the purchase accounting assessments, which are conducted by Company professionals from legal, finance, human resources, information systems, program management and other disciplines. Changes in assumptions and estimates of the acquired assets and liabilities would result in changes to the fair values, resulting in an offsetting change to the goodwill balance associated with the business acquired.
As goodwill is not amortized, goodwill balances are regularly assessed for potential impairment. Such assessments include a qualitative assessment of factors that may indicate a potential for impairment, such as: macroeconomic conditions, industry and market changes, our overall financial performance, changes in share price, and an assessment of other events or changes in circumstances that could negatively impact us. If that qualitative assessment indicates a potential for impairment, a quantitative assessment is then required, including an analysis of future cash flow projections as well as a determination of an appropriate discount rate to calculate present values. Cash flow projections are based on management-approved estimates, which involve the input of numerous Company professionals from finance, operations and program management. Key factors used in estimating future cash flows include assessments of labor and other direct costs on existing contracts, estimates of overhead costs and other indirect costs, and assessments of new business prospects and projected win rates. Our most recent assessment indicates that no reporting units are currently at risk of impairment as the fair value of each reporting unit is significantly in excess of the carrying value. However, significant changes in the estimates and assumptions used in purchase accounting and goodwill impairment testing could have a material effect on the consolidated financial statements.