Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those factors set forth in the section entitled “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Industry Data” and in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage immunotherapy company dedicated to transforming the treatment of cancer by developing therapies that enable the immune system to attack tumors and provide long-lasting benefits to patients. Our strategy is to use a biomarker-driven approach from discovery through clinical development. We have developed a suite of integrated technologies that comprise our Translational Science Platform, enabling us to comprehensively interrogate the cellular and molecular composition of tumors. By focusing on specific cell types, both immune and non-immune, within tumors, we can prioritize targets and then identify related biomarkers designed to match the right therapy to the right patient. Our pipeline is focused on product candidates to address PD-(L)1-inhibitor resistant and PD-(L)1 inhibitor sensitive tumors, which represent significant opportunities requiring different biological approaches. We aim to develop product candidates that address the unmet medical need of patients in both of these populations.
Our highest priority program, JTX-8064, is being developed for patients with either PD-(L)1-inhibitor resistant or PD-(L)1 inhibitor sensitive tumors. JTX-8064 is the first tumor-associated macrophage candidate to emerge from our Translational Science Platform. JTX-8064 is a monoclonal antibody that binds to Leukocyte Immunoglobulin Like Receptor B2, or LILRB2 (also known as ILT4), which is a cell surface receptor expressed on macrophages and other myeloid cells. Our INNATE clinical trial is a Phase 1/2 clinical trial of JTX-8064 as a monotherapy and in combination with our PD-1 inhibitor, pimivalimab, in patients with solid tumors. In January 2021, we began enrollment in the dose-escalation portion of the INNATE trial and enrollment was completed in July and October 2021 for monotherapy and combination therapy, respectively. JTX-8064 has been well-tolerated to date with no observed dose limiting toxicities. We selected 700 mg as our recommended phase 2 dose for further evaluation. We initiated enrollment in August 2021 and October 2021 in the phase 2 monotherapy and combination therapy portions, respectively. The INNATE trial is comprised of one monotherapy and seven combination indication-specific expansion cohorts and is designed to demonstrate proof-of-concept. Once proof-of-concept is established, we plan to move JTX-8064 rapidly into registrational trials on a cohort by cohort basis.
The expansion cohorts are studying tumor types in three groups of patients: (i) PD-(L)1 inhibitor experienced patients whose tumors progressed on or after treatment with a PD-(L)1 inhibitor (including, non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC), (ii) PD-(L)1 inhibitor naïve patients whose tumors are historically resistant to PD-(L)1 inhibitors (including, ovarian cancer), and (iii) PD-(L)1 inhibitor naïve patients whose tumors are historically more sensitive to PD-(L)1 inhibitors (including, front line PD-L1 positive head and neck squamous cell carcinoma). Proof-of concept expansion cohorts have the potential to enroll up to 29 patients per combination therapy cohort and 47 patients in the monotherapy cohort if pre-specified criteria are met. We expect to report preliminary clinical and biomarker data from INNATE in 2022.
Vopratelimab is a clinical-stage monoclonal antibody that binds to and activates the Inducible T cell CO-Stimulator, or ICOS, a protein on the surface of certain T cells commonly found in many solid tumors. We are currently enrolling patients in the SELECT trial, a randomized phase 2 proof-of-concept trial outside the United States evaluating vopratelimab in combination with pimivalimab compared to pimivalimab alone in biomarker-selected, immunotherapy-naive second-line NSCLC patients. We identify patients for SELECT using TISvopra, an 18 gene signature that includes genes relevant to both CD8 and CD4 T cell biology. TISvopra has been optimized to predict for emergence of ICOS hi CD4 T cells in the peripheral blood, which have been associated with clinical benefit in patients treated with vopratelimab alone or in combination with nivolumab. We expect to report complete clinical data from SELECT in the second half of 2022.
Pimivalimab is a clinical-stage anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibody that we are developing primarily for potential use in combination with our product candidates, as we believe that combination therapy has the potential to be a mainstay of cancer immunotherapy. We presented safety and preliminary efficacy data from our monotherapy Phase 1 clinical trial of pimivalimab in 2019. Based on the results of that clinical trial, we are using pimivalimab in combination with JTX-8064 in INNATE and vopratelimab in SELECT.
GS-1811, formerly JTX-1811, is our fourth internally developed program to enter the clinic. In August 2020, we entered into an agreement to exclusively license GS-1811 to Gilead Sciences, Inc., or Gilead. GS-1811 is a monoclonal antibody that is designed to selectively deplete T regulatory cells in the tumor microenvironment, or TME, by targeting a receptor called CCR8, which is preferentially expressed on intra-tumoral T regulatory cells. Pursuant to our exclusive license agreement with Gilead,
or the Gilead License Agreement, we granted Gilead a worldwide license to develop, manufacture and commercialize GS-1811 and certain derivatives thereof, as well as backup antibodies defined within the agreement. Under the terms of the Gilead License Agreement, we advanced GS-1811 through the clearance of an investigational new drug application, or IND, in June 2021, which triggered a $25.0 million milestone payment in July 2021, and have transitioned the program to Gilead. Gilead initiated clinical trials of GS-1811 in August 2021. We are entitled to receive additional payments from Gilead upon the achievement of specified clinical, regulatory and sales milestones. We are also eligible to receive tiered royalty payments based on a percentage of annual worldwide net sales ranging from the high-single digits to mid-teens, based on future annual net sales of licensed products, on a licensed product-by-licensed product and country-by-country basis.
JTX-1484 is the most recent product candidate to emerge from our Translational Science Platform. JTX-1484 is a monoclonal antibody designed to block human LILRB4 on various myeloid cells which we believe may lead to reduced immune suppression and enhancement of T cell functionality. We are currently conducting IND-enabling activities for JTX-1484, with the goal of filing an IND in 2023.
With our biomarker-driven approach, we leverage our Translational Science Platform to interrogate cell types within the human TME and to identify and prioritize targets across a broad spectrum of immune and non-immune cell types. In addition, early in the development process, we use our Translational Science Platform to identify potential predictive biomarkers to enable us to enrich our clinical trials for patient populations that may be more likely to respond to a particular immunotherapy. Once clinical data is available for a product candidate, we then use a reverse translational approach to interrogate tumor and blood samples from patients with known outcomes. By using these reverse translational findings, we believe we are better able to design clinical trials and more efficiently develop cancer immunotherapies that potentially provide greater benefit to patients. These biomarker results, coordinated to clinical response, will assist with determining the benefit of proceeding to the use of a companion diagnostic and/or complementary diagnostic for a given therapy.
Beyond our product candidates, we continue to advance and build our discovery pipeline. We are discovering and developing next-generation immunotherapies by leveraging our Translational Science Platform to systematically and comprehensively interrogate cell types within the tumor microenvironment. Our broad discovery pipeline includes multiple programs targeting myeloid cells such as macrophages, T regulatory cells and non-immune cells. We believe that the use of our Translational Science Platform to efficiently identify novel immuno-oncology targets and advance them from discovery to investigational new drug application, or IND, stage is a sustainable approach that we plan to continually apply across our broad discovery pipeline and target selection process.
Since inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, developing our Translational Science Platform and conducting research, preclinical studies and clinical trials. We do not have any products approved for sale. We are subject to a number of risks comparable to those of other similar companies, including dependence on key individuals; the need to develop commercially viable products; competition from other companies, many of which are larger and better capitalized; and the need to obtain adequate additional financing to fund the development of our products. We have funded our operations primarily through proceeds received from public offerings and private placements of our stock totaling $389.5 million and payments from license and collaboration agreements totaling $385.0 million.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have accumulated substantial losses since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $241.9 million. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we expand our research and development activities.
The spread of COVID-19 during 2020 and 2021 has caused disruption on a global scale and we continue to monitor the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business. As of March 2, 2022, we have not experienced a significant financial impact directly related to the COVID-19 pandemic but have experienced some disruptions to clinical operations and to our supply chain. As the pandemic continues to unfold, the extent of its effect on our operational and financial performance will depend in large part on future developments, which cannot be predicted with confidence at this time.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $26.9 million of license and collaboration revenue under the Gilead License Agreement primarily relating to a $25.0 million milestone achievement for FDA clearance of the IND for GS-1811 and $1.9 million related to the completion of research and transition services. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $62.3 million of license and collaboration revenue under the Gilead License Agreement for the GS-1811 license and performance of research and transition services.
In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales or collaboration agreements, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements, including potential milestone payments and royalties under the Gilead License Agreement. We expect that our revenue will fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year as a result of the timing and amount of license fees, milestones, reimbursement of costs incurred and other payments, if any, and product sales, to the extent any products are successfully commercialized. If we or third parties fail to complete the development of our product candidates in a timely manner or obtain regulatory approval for them, our ability to generate future revenue, and our results of operations and financial position, would be materially adversely affected.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred by us for the discovery, development and manufacture of our current and future product candidates and include: external research and development expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, including contract research organizations, contract manufacturing organizations, academic and non-profit institutions and consultants; salaries and personnel-related costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense; license fees to acquire in-process technology and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for laboratory, facilities and other costs.
We use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs and for identifying, testing and developing product candidates from our Translational Science Platform. We manage certain activities such as contract research and manufacture of our product candidates and discovery programs through our third-party vendors.
At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from sales of our product candidates. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing such product candidates, including the uncertainty of:
•addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
•establishing an appropriate safety profile with IND-enabling toxicology studies and clinical trials;
•the cost to acquire or make therapies to study in combination with our immunotherapies;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing and progress of our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•establishing agreements with third-party contract manufacturing organizations for clinical supply for our clinical trials and commercial manufacturing, if our product candidates are approved;
•receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•commercializing products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•the cost to develop companion diagnostics and/or complementary diagnostics as needed for each of our development programs;
•the costs associated with the development of any additional product candidates we acquire through third-party collaborations or identify through our Translational Science Platform;
•the terms and timing of any collaboration, license or other arrangement, including any milestone payments thereunder;
•obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our products, if and when approved; and
•continued acceptable safety profiles of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate. We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates through clinical trials and continue the enhancement of our Translational Science Platform and the progression of our pipeline.
Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development, we do not allocate all of our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they primarily relate to personnel and lab consumables costs that are deployed across multiple programs under development. Our research and development expenses also include external costs, which we do track on a program-by-program basis following the program’s nomination as a development candidate. We began incurring such external costs for vopratelimab in 2015, pimivalimab in 2016, JTX-8064 in 2017, GS-1811 in 2019 and JTX-1484 in 2021.
Included below are external research and development and external clinical and regulatory costs for JTX-8064, vopratelimab (which includes our SELECT trial), pimivalimab, GS-1811, JTX-1484 and our pre-development candidates:
Research and development activities account for a significant portion of our operating expenses. As we continue to implement our business strategy, we expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years. We expect that these expenses will increase as we:
•continue our clinical development of JTX-8064, including our INNATE trial as a monotherapy and in combination with pimivalimab;
•continue our clinical development of vopratelimab, including our SELECT trial of vopratelimab and pimivalimab;
•continue advancing programs through IND-enabling activities;
•continue to identify and develop potential predictive biomarkers and companion diagnostics and/or complementary diagnostics for our product candidates; and
•continue to develop and enhance our Translational Science Platform and advance our pipeline of immunotherapy programs and our early research activities into IND-enabling activities.
Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally incur higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries and personnel-related costs, including non-cash stock-based compensation expense, for our personnel in executive, business development, legal, finance and accounting, human resources and other administrative functions, consulting fees, facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, fees paid for accounting and tax services, insurance expenses and legal costs. Legal costs include general corporate legal fees, patent legal fees and related costs. We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued operations.
Other Income, Net
Other income, net, consists primarily of interest and investment income on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and accompanying notes. We base our estimates on historical experience, known facts and trends, and other market specific or relevant assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates in light of changes in circumstance, facts or experience. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies to be most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606. Under ASC 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. In applying ASC 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the promises and performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy the performance obligations. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract, determine those that are performance obligations and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied.
The terms of our license agreements include upfront and license fees, milestones and other contingent payments for the achievement of defined certain clinical, regulatory and sales-based milestone events, as well as royalties on sales of commercialized products. Arrangements that include upfront payments may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until obligations under such arrangements are fulfilled. The event-based milestone payments represent variable consideration, and we use the “most likely amount” method to estimate this variable consideration. Given the high degree of uncertainty around the occurrence of these events, we determined the milestone and other contingent amounts to be fully constrained until the uncertainty associated with these payments is resolved. Revenue will be recognized from sales-based royalty payments when or as the sales occur. We will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period as uncertain events are resolved and other changes in circumstances occur.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with internal personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with our service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. The financial terms of agreements with these service providers are subject to negotiation, vary from contract-to-contract and may result in uneven payment flows. In circumstances where amounts have been paid in excess of costs incurred, we record a prepaid expense.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We account for stock-based payments in accordance with ASC Topic 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. This guidance requires all stock-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, restricted stock awards and restricted stock units, to be recognized as expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) based on their grant date fair values. For stock options granted to employees and to members of our board of directors for their services on the board of directors, we estimate the grant date fair value of each stock option using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. For restricted stock awards and restricted stock units granted to employees, we estimate the grant date fair value of each award using intrinsic value, which is based on the value of the underlying common stock less any purchase price. For stock-based payments subject to service-based vesting conditions, we recognize stock-based compensation expense equal to the grant date fair value of stock-based payment on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period.
The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires the input of certain subjective assumptions, including (i) the calculation of expected term of the stock-based payment, (ii) the risk-free interest rate, (iii) the expected stock price volatility and (iv) the expected dividend yield. We use the simplified method as prescribed by SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 107 to calculate the expected term for stock options granted to employees as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. We determine the risk-free interest rate based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. Because there had been no public market for our common stock prior to our IPO, there is a lack of historical and implied volatility data. Accordingly, we base our estimates of expected volatility on a combination of our own historical volatility and historical volatility of a group of publicly-traded companies with characteristics similar to ours, including stage of product development and therapeutic focus within the life sciences industry. Historical volatility is calculated over a period of time commensurate with the expected term of the stock-based payment. We use an assumed dividend yield of zero as we have never paid dividends on our common stock, nor do we expect to pay dividends on our common stock in the foreseeable future.
We account for forfeitures of all stock-based payments when such forfeitures occur.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are recorded in accordance with ASC Topic 740, Income Taxes, which provides for deferred taxes using an asset and liability approach. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. A valuation allowance against deferred tax assets is recorded if, based on the weight of the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We account for uncertain tax positions using a more-likely-than-not threshold for recognizing and resolving uncertain tax positions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions is based on factors, including, but not limited to, changes in the law, the measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in tax returns, the effective settlement of matters subject to audit, new audit activity and changes in facts or circumstances related to a tax position.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
License and Collaboration Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $26.9 million of license and collaboration revenue under the Gilead License Agreement related to the achievement of a $25.0 million clinical development and regulatory milestone for FDA clearance of the IND for GS-1811 and $1.9 million related to the completion of research and transition services. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $62.3 million of license and collaboration revenue under the Gilead License Agreement for the GS-1811 license and performance of research and transition services.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and development expenses increased by $10.3 million from $78.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $89.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily attributable to:
•$2.9 million of increased employee compensation costs primarily attributable to increased payroll and stock-based compensation;
•$2.6 million of increased external clinical and regulatory costs primarily attributable to increased costs for our INNATE and SELECT clinical trials, partially offset by decreased costs for our Phase 2 EMERGE trial; and
•$5.1 million of increased external research and development costs associated with manufacturing activities for our development programs, partially offset by reduced IND-enabling activities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
General and administrative expenses increased by $0.2 million from $28.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $29.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to increased other administrative costs for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income, net
Other income, net, decreased by $1.1 million from $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease in other income, net is attributable to decreased rates of return on our investments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have funded our operations primarily through proceeds received from public offerings and private placements of our stock totaling $389.5 million and payments from license and collaboration agreements totaling $385.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and investments of $220.2 million.
On November 4, 2021, we entered into a new Sales Agreement (the “2021 Sales Agreement”) with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million under an ATM offering program (the “2021 ATM Offering”). The 2021 Sales Agreement provides that Cowen will be entitled to a sales commission equal to 3.0% of the gross sales price per share of all shares sold under the 2021 ATM Offering. No sales were made under the 2021 ATM Offering during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the first quarter of 2021, we completed a follow-on public offering of its common stock, selling an aggregate of 5,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $11.25 per share for net proceeds of $60.6 million.
On December 17, 2019, we entered into a Sales Agreement with Cowen, pursuant to which we could offer and sell shares of our common stock with an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million under an “at the market” offering program (the “2019 ATM Offering”). During the first quarter of 2021, the Company sold an aggregate of 3,156,200 shares at an average price of $9.87 per share for net proceeds of $30.2 million, which completed the sale of all available amounts under the 2019 ATM Offering.
Funding Requirements
Our plan of operation is to continue implementing our business strategy, the research and development of our current product candidates, our preclinical development activities, the expansion of our research pipeline and the enhancement of our internal research and development capabilities. Due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development and given the early stage of our programs and product candidates, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs we will incur and the timelines that will be required to complete development, obtain marketing approval, and commercialize our products, if and when approved. For the same reasons, we are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will generate revenue from product sales or whether, or when, if ever, we may achieve profitability. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs can differ materially from expectations. In addition, we cannot forecast which products, if and when approved, may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
Due to our significant research and development expenditures, we have generated substantial operating losses since inception. We have incurred an accumulated deficit of $241.9 million through December 31, 2021. We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we expand our research and development activities and continue to advance our programs. Based on our research and development plans, we expect that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments of $220.2 million will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through the third quarter of 2023 and we will require additional funding to continue our operations beyond the third quarter of 2023. However, we have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could exhaust our capital resources sooner than we expect. The timing and amount of our operating expenditures will depend largely on:
•the timing and progress of preclinical and clinical development activities, including the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the timing and progress of our ongoing and planned clinical trials;
•the cost to access, acquire or develop therapies to study in combination with our immunotherapies;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•the cost to develop companion diagnostics and/or complementary diagnostics as needed for each of our development programs;
•our ability to establish agreements with third-party manufacturers for clinical supply for our clinical trials and, if any of our product candidates are approved, commercial manufacturing;
•the costs associated with the development of any additional product candidates we acquire through acquisition or third-party collaborations or identify through our Translational Science Platform;
•our ability to maintain our current research and development programs and enhancement of our Translational Science Platform;
•addition and retention of key research and development personnel;
•our efforts to enhance operational, financial and information management systems, and hire additional personnel, including personnel to support development of our product candidates;
•the legal patent costs involved in prosecuting patent applications and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property claims;
•the costs and ongoing investments to in-license or acquire additional technologies, including the in-license of intellectual property related to our potential product candidates; and
•the terms and timing of any other collaboration, license or other arrangement, including the terms and timing of any option and milestone payments thereunder.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans.
In addition to the variables described above, if and when any of our product candidates successfully complete development, we expect to incur substantial additional costs associated with regulatory filings, marketing approval, post-marketing requirements, maintaining our intellectual property rights, and regulatory protection, in addition to other costs. We cannot reasonably estimate these costs at this time.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity or debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements and strategic alliances. We currently do not have a credit facility or committed sources of capital. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the future sale of equity or debt, the ownership interests of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our existing common stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities, these securities could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We may require additional capital beyond our currently anticipated amounts. Additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, or at all. If we raise additional funds through collaboration arrangements in the future, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams or product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce, or terminate development or future commercialization efforts, or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $83.5 million, compared to $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in operating activities increased by $55.7 million due to increased net loss during the year ended December 31, 2021 driven by increased operating expenses and reduced revenue recognition under the Gilead License Agreement as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash (Used in) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $60.5 million, compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $51.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities increased by $111.8 million due to increased purchases of investments as a direct result of our financing activities during the first quarter of 2021.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $92.0 million, compared to $70.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash provided by financing activities increased by $21.3 million due to proceeds received from our follow-on public offering and ATM Offering completed during the first quarter of 2021.