ITEM 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read with the Business section in Item 1 of Part I and the Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes in Item 8 of Part II of this Report. We intend the discussion of our financial condition and results of operations to provide information that will assist the reader in understanding our Consolidated Financial Statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting estimates affect our Consolidated Financial Statements. To aid in understanding our operating results for the periods covered by this Report, we have provided an executive overview, which includes a financial results and key performance metrics overview and a discussion of material events and uncertainties known to management such as the COVID-19 pandemic and global component shortage. These sections should be read in conjunction with the more detailed discussion and analysis of our consolidated financial condition and results of operations in this Item 7, our “Risk Factors” section included in Item 1A of Part I, and our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto included in Item 8 of Part II of this Report.
Executive Overview
Financial Results and Key Performance Metrics Overview
The following table provides an overview of our financial results and key financial metrics (in millions, except per share amounts, percentages, and days sales outstanding, or DSO):
________________________________
(1) DSO is for the fourth quarter ended December 31, 2021, and 2020.
(2) Includes deferred revenue from hardware solutions, software licenses, software support and maintenance and SaaS offerings sold in our Automated WAN Solutions, Cloud-Ready Data Center, and AI-Driven Enterprise customer solution categories.
•Net Revenues: Net revenues increased during 2021 compared to 2020 across all of our verticals, customer solutions, and geographies. Service net revenues increased primarily due to strong sales of hardware maintenance and software subscriptions.
•Gross Margin: Gross margin as a percentage of net revenues was flat during 2021 compared to 2020. Product gross margin decreased primarily due to higher intangible amortization associated with the acquisitions of Apstra, 128 Technology and Netrounds, and to a lesser extent, logistics and other supply chain costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by favorable product and software mix and higher volume. The decrease in product gross margin was offset by the increase in service gross margin, which was primarily due to higher revenue and lower service delivery costs.
•Operating Margin: Operating income as a percentage of net revenues increased primarily from the drivers described in the gross margin discussion above and lower restructuring charges. The increase in operating margin was partially offset by higher personnel-related costs.
•Operating Cash Flows: Net cash provided by operations increased primarily due to higher invoicing activity, partially offset by higher supplier payments and higher payments for employee compensation.
•Capital Return: We continue to return capital to our stockholders. During 2021, we repurchased a total of 15.7 million shares of our common stock in the open market at an average price of $27.56 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $433.3 million. During 2021, we paid quarterly dividends of $0.20 per share, for an aggregate amount of $259.1 million.
•DSO: DSO is calculated as the ratio of ending accounts receivable, net of allowances, divided by average daily net revenues for the preceding 90 days. DSO decreased, primarily driven by higher revenue.
•Deferred Revenue: Total deferred revenue increased, primarily driven by an increase in deferrals of SaaS and software license subscriptions.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and the containment measures taken by governments and businesses are expected to continue to have a substantial negative impact on businesses around the world and on global, regional, and national economies. As a result, the pandemic has, and may continue to, negatively affect our operations, including as a result of external factors beyond our control, such as restrictions on the physical movement of our employees, contract manufacturers, component suppliers, partners, and customers. The majority of our global workforce has been working remotely since March 2020, and we continue to implement our four-phased approach to office reopening. In order to maximize the protection of the health and safety of our employees working in our offices in the U.S. and India during the current voluntary return to office period, subject to certain exceptions, we require all personnel working onsite in these offices, or traveling for business on behalf of Juniper, to be fully vaccinated against COVID-19. We also require proof of vaccination for employees and guests returning to our sites, where permitted by local laws and regulations. We will continue to follow the guidance of local and national governments, including monitoring the health of our employees who have returned or will be returning to our offices. Numerous ongoing emerging governmental regulations in the U.S. and other countries, including those regarding vaccination mandates and ongoing testing requirements, may negatively impact our operations and increase the complexity of managing the pandemic.
We continue to support healthy customer demand for our products by working with our suppliers and distributors to address supply chain disruptions as well as travel restrictions that have impacted our operations. We have a global supply chain, which consists of primary manufacturing partners and component suppliers. During 2021, the supply constraints we continued to experience were due to both constrained manufacturing capacity as well as component parts shortages as our component vendors were also facing manufacturing challenges. These challenges resulted in extended lead-times to our customers, increased logistics costs, and impacted the volume of products we were able to deliver, which negatively impacted our ability to recognize revenue.
Challenges to our supply chain due to the impact of the pandemic remain dynamic, and we continue to experience higher costs, including logistics costs due to air travel and transport restrictions that limited the availability of flights on which we were able to ship products as well as cost increases and extended shipping times for ocean transit that have increased our dependence on higher-cost air freight. Our supply chain team has been working to meet our customer needs by executing on a strong risk mitigation plan, including multi-sourcing, pre-ordering components, transforming our logistics network, prioritizing critical customers, working with local government agencies to understand challenges, and partnering on solutions that limit disruptions to our operations while ensuring the safety of our employees, partners and suppliers.
The pandemic did not have a substantial net impact to our consolidated operating results or our liquidity position in 2021. We continue to generate operating cash flows to meet our short-term liquidity needs, and we expect to continue to maintain access to the capital markets enabled by our strong credit ratings. In 2021, we did not observe any material impairments of our assets or a significant change in the fair value of assets due to the pandemic.
We enter fiscal year 2022 with strong momentum and record backlog across all verticals, customers, and geographies. We continue to work with government authorities and implement safety measures to ensure that we are able to continue manufacturing and distributing our products during the pandemic. We continue to experience constrained supply, increased logistics costs, and accelerated customer demand, any of which could adversely impact our business, results of operations, and
overall financial performance in future periods. For more information on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and supply chain constraints on our business, see the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part I of this Report.
Global Component Shortage
There is a worldwide shortage of various components, including semiconductors, impacting many industries, caused in-part by the COVID-19 pandemic. Similar to others, we are experiencing ongoing component shortages, which have resulted in extended lead times of certain products and significant disruption to our production schedule. We also experienced and may continue to experience increased component costs, which have had a negative impact on our gross margin. During the past year, we experienced strong product orders across all verticals and customer solutions; we believe some of the strength was attributable to industry supply chain challenges that were causing certain customers to place orders early in an effort to secure supply when needed. We continue to work to resolve our supply chain challenges and have increased inventory levels and purchase commitments. We are working closely with our suppliers to further enhance our resiliency and mitigate the effects of recent disruptions outside of our control. We believe the extended lead times and increased component and logistic costs will likely persist for at least the next few quarters. We have taken pricing actions to mitigate the effects of rising component costs and do not expect these actions to have an impact until later in fiscal year 2022. While the situation is dynamic, at this point in time we believe we will have access to sufficient supplies of semiconductors and other components and will be able to meet our full-year financial forecast. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this Report for further discussion of this risk.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make judgments, assumptions, and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and the accompanying notes. We base our estimates and assumptions on current facts, historical experience, and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Note 1, Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report, describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The below accounting policies require significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates used in the preparation of the Consolidated Financial Statements and actual results could differ materially from the amounts reported based on these policies.
•Revenue Recognition: We enter into contracts to sell our products and services, and while most of our sales agreements contain standard terms and conditions, there are agreements that contain non-standard terms and conditions and include promises to transfer multiple goods or services. As a result, significant interpretation and judgment are sometimes required to determine the appropriate accounting for these transactions, including: (1) whether performance obligations are considered distinct that should be accounted for separately versus together, how the price should be allocated among the performance obligations, and when to recognize revenue for each performance obligation; (2) developing an estimate of the stand-alone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct performance obligation; (3) combining contracts that may impact the allocation of the transaction price between product and services; and (4) estimating and accounting for variable consideration, including rights of return, rebates, price protection, expected penalties or other price concessions as a reduction of the transaction price.
Our estimates of SSP for each performance obligation require judgment that considers multiple factors, including, but not limited to, historical discounting trends for products and services, pricing practices in different geographies and through different sales channels, gross margin objectives, internal costs, competitor pricing strategies, and industry technology lifecycles. Our estimates for rights of return, rebates, and price protection are based on historical sales returns and price protection credits, specific criteria outlined in customer contracts or rebate agreements, and other factors known at the time. Our estimates for expected penalties and other price concessions are based on historical trends and expectations regarding future incurrence.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
•Income Taxes: We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. We apply the authoritative accounting guidance for uncertainty in income taxes to all income tax positions, including the potential recovery of previously paid taxes, which if settled unfavorably could adversely affect our provision for income taxes. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our taxes including the interpretation and application of GAAP and complex domestic and international tax laws and matters related to the allocation of international taxation rights between countries. In addition, we are subject to the continuous examination of our income tax returns by the IRS and other tax authorities. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from these examinations to determine the adequacy of our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, Description of Business, Basis of Presentation and Significant Accounting Policies, in Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on financial condition and results of operations, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 is presented below. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019 can be found under Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 12, 2021, which is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at http://investor.juniper.net.
Revenues
The following table presents net revenues by customer solution (in millions, except percentages):
The following table presents net revenues by customer vertical and geographic region (in millions, except percentages):
Total net revenues increased primarily due to increases across all customer solutions mainly driven by higher sales volume.
The AI-Driven Enterprise revenue increase was primarily driven by Enterprise and Cloud, and to a lesser extent, Service Provider.
The Cloud-Ready Data Center revenue increase was primarily driven by Cloud, partially offset by a decline in Service Provider.
The Automated WAN Solutions revenue increase was primarily driven by Service Provider and Cloud, partially offset by a decline in Enterprise.
Effective in the first quarter of 2021, we began presenting revenues from software and related services as well as total security, as these offerings represent key areas of strategic focus that are critical components to our business success. Software and related services offerings include revenue from software license, software support and maintenance and SaaS contracts. Total security offerings include revenue from our complete portfolio of hardware and software security products, including SD-WAN solutions, as well as services related to our security solutions.
The following table presents net revenues from software and security products and services (in millions, except percentages):
Gross Margins
The following table presents gross margins (in millions, except percentages):
Our gross margins as a percentage of net revenues have been and will continue to be affected by general inflationary pressure and a variety of other factors, including the mix and average selling prices of our products and services, new product introductions and enhancements, manufacturing, component and logistics costs, expenses for inventory obsolescence and warranty obligations, cost of support and service personnel, customer mix as we continue to expand our footprint with certain strategic customers, the mix of distribution channels through which our products and services are sold, and import tariffs. For example, our logistics and other supply chain-related costs have increased due to the COVID-19 pandemic and global component shortage. For more information on the impact of COVID-19 and supply chain constraints on our business, see the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part I of this Report.
Product gross margin
Product gross margin as a percentage of product revenues decreased primarily due to higher intangible amortization associated with the acquisitions of Apstra, 128 Technology and Netrounds, and to a lesser extent, logistics and other supply chain costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by favorable product and software mix and higher volume. We continue to undertake specific efforts to address certain factors impacting our product gross margin. These efforts include performance and
quality improvements through engineering to increase value across our products; optimizing our supply chain and service business; pricing management; and increasing software and solution sales.
Service gross margin
Service gross margin as a percentage of service net revenues increased primarily due to higher revenue and lower service delivery costs.
Operating Expenses
The following table presents operating expenses (in millions, except percentages):
Our operating expenses have historically been driven in large part by personnel-related costs, including salaries and wages; commissions and bonuses, which we refer to collectively as variable compensation; benefits; share-based compensation; and travel. Facility and information technology, or IT, departmental costs are allocated to each department based on usage and headcount. We had a total of 10,191 and 9,950 employees as of December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. Our headcount increased by 241 employees, or 2%, primarily from hiring for the sales and marketing organization. We expect inflationary pressures to impact operating expense, at least for the next twelve months.
Research and development
Research and development expense, or R&D, increased primarily due to higher personnel-related costs driven by higher variable compensation and share-based compensation expenses.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expense, or S&M, increased primarily due to higher personnel-related costs driven by headcount growth, higher variable compensation and share-based compensation expenses, as well as higher costs associated with marketing initiatives. The increase was partially offset by lower professional services costs and decreased travel expenses due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Restructuring charges
Restructuring charges decreased primarily due to higher severance costs related to voluntary and involuntary workforce reductions recorded under the 2020 Restructuring Plan, partially offset by higher facility consolidation, contract termination and other exit costs recorded under the 2021 Restructuring Plan.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
The following table presents the loss on extinguishment of debt (in millions, except percentages):
In 2021 and 2020, we incurred a loss on extinguishment of debt related to the redemption of our Senior Notes maturing in March 2024 and June 2025. The loss primarily consists of a premium on the early redemption and acceleration of unamortized debt discount and fees on the redeemed debt.
Other Expense, Net
The following table presents other expense, net (in millions, except percentages):
_______________________________
N/M - percentage is not meaningful.
Interest income primarily includes interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments. Interest expense primarily includes interest, net of capitalized interest expense, from long-term debt and customer financing arrangements. Gain on investments, net, primarily includes gains from the sale of investments in public and privately-held companies, and any observable changes in fair value and impairment charges recorded on these investments. Other typically consists of foreign exchange gains and losses and other non-operational income and expense items.
Total other expense, net, decreased primarily due to lower interest expense related to our debt portfolio, partially offset by lower interest income related to our fixed income investment portfolio, as a result of lower yields from a lower average portfolio balance.
Income Tax Provision
The following table presents the income tax provision (benefit) (in millions, except percentages):
The effective tax rate for fiscal year 2021 was higher than fiscal year 2020, primarily due to the net difference in discrete items in fiscal year 2021 compared to fiscal year 2020 and a change in the geographic mix of earnings. For a complete reconciliation of our effective tax rate to the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% and further explanation of our income tax provision, see Note 13, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report.
As a result of the Tax Act, beginning January 1, 2022, all U.S. and non-U.S. based R&D expenditures must be capitalized and amortized over five and fifteen years, respectively. Absent a change in legislation, cash taxes are expected to increase significantly for several years and the Company’s effective tax rate may be adversely impacted.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity and capital resources may be impacted by our operating activities as well as acquisitions, investments in strategic relationships, repurchases of shares of our common stock, and payment of cash dividends on our common stock. Since the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 ("Tax Act"), we have repatriated a significant amount of cash from outside of the U.S., and plan to continue to repatriate on an ongoing basis. We intend to use the repatriated cash to invest in the business, support value-enhancing merger and acquisitions, or M&A, and fund our return of capital to stockholders.
Based on past performance and current expectations, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, short-term, and long-term investments, cash generated from operations together with the revolving credit facility and our ability to access to capital markets will be sufficient to fund our operations; planned stock repurchases and dividends; capital expenditures; purchase commitments and other liquidity requirements; and anticipated growth for at least the next twelve months. However, our future liquidity and capital requirements may vary materially from those now planned depending on many factors, including, but not limited to, our growth rate; the timing and amount we spend to support development efforts; the expansion of sales and marketing activities; the introduction of new and enhanced products and services; the costs to acquire or invest in businesses and technologies; an increase in manufacturing or component costs; and the risks and uncertainties detailed in the “Risk Factors” section of Item 1A of Part I of this Report.
The Company's material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Debt
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding fixed-rate senior notes with varying maturities for an aggregate principal amount of $1,700.0 million (collectively the "Notes"), none of which is payable within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with the Notes total $705.3 million, with $55.4 million payable within 12 months.
Purchase Commitments with Contract Manufacturers and Suppliers
In order to reduce manufacturing lead times and in the interest of having access to adequate component supply, we enter into agreements with contract manufacturers and certain suppliers to procure inventory based on the Company's requirements. A significant portion of the Company's purchase commitments arising from these agreements consists of firm and non-cancelable commitments. As of December 31, 2021, we had purchase commitments of $2,632.2 million, with $2,094.3 million payable within 12 months.
Tax
Our transition tax liability represents future cash payments on accumulated foreign earnings of subsidiaries as a result of the Tax Act. The Company has elected to pay its transition tax, net of applicable tax refunds, over the eight-year period provided in the Tax Act. As of December 31, 2021, the balance of our transition tax obligation was $250.6 million, with none payable within 12 months.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $79.9 million included in long-term income taxes payable on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for unrecognized tax positions. At this time, the Company is unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments related to this amount due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes.
As a result of the Tax Act, beginning January 1, 2022, all U.S. and non-U.S. based R&D expenditures must be capitalized and amortized over five and fifteen years, respectively. Absent a change in legislation, cash taxes are expected to increase significantly for the next several years.
Leases
The Company leases its facilities and certain equipment under non-cancelable operating leases that have remaining lease terms of 1 to 10 years and 1 to 4 years, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had fixed lease payment obligations of $203.6 million, with $48.7 million payable within 12 months.
Unconditional Purchase Obligations
Unconditional purchase obligations consist of agreements that include firm and non-cancelable terms to transfer funds in the future for fixed or minimum amounts or quantities to be purchased at fixed or minimum prices. As of December 31, 2021, we had unconditional purchase obligations of $129.3 million, with $61.0 million payable within 12 months. See Note 15, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for further discussion of our unconditional purchase obligations.
Guarantees
We have financial guarantees consisting of guarantees of product and service performance and standby letters of credit for certain lease facilities, insurance programs, and customs of $2.4 million as of December 31, 2021.
In addition to our cash requirements, we have a capital return program authorized by the Board of Directors (the "Board"). In January 2018, the Board, approved a $2.0 billion share repurchase program, which we refer to as the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program. In October 2019, the Board authorized a $1.0 billion increase to the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program for a total of $3.0 billion.
During the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased 15.7 million shares of our common stock in the open market at an average price of $27.56 per share for an aggregate purchase price of $433.3 million, under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program. As of December 31, 2021, there was $0.9 billion of authorized funds remaining under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program.
Future share repurchases under the 2018 Stock Repurchase Program will be subject to a review of the circumstances at that time and will be made from time to time in private transactions or open market purchases as permitted by securities laws and other legal requirements. Our 2018 Stock Repurchase Program may be discontinued at any time. See Note 10, Equity, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for further discussion of our share purchase program.
In addition, any future dividends, and the establishment of record and payment dates, are subject to approval by the Board or an authorized committee thereof. See Note 16, Subsequent Events, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of Part II of this Report for discussion of our dividend declaration subsequent to December 31, 2021.