Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information included in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Forward-Looking Statements,” “Summary Risk Factors” and “Risk Factors” sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
We report on the basis of a 52- or 53-week fiscal year, which ends on the Saturday closest to the last day of January. Accordingly, references herein to “fiscal 2020” relate to the 52 weeks ended February 1, 2020, references herein to “fiscal 2021” relate to the 52 weeks ended January 30, 2021 and references herein to “fiscal 2022” relate to the 52 weeks ended January 29, 2022.
JOANN Overview
JOANN is the nation’s category leader in Sewing and one of the fastest growing competitors in the arts and crafts category. As a well-established and trusted brand for over 75 years, we believe we have a deep understanding of our customers, what inspires their creativity and what fuels their incredibly diverse projects. Since 2016, we have embarked on a strategy to transform JOANN, which has helped us pivot from a traditional retailer to a fully-integrated, digitally-connected provider of Creative Products.
As the nation’s category leader in Sewing with approximately one-third market share, based on our internal research estimates of market share of the Creative Products industry that primarily consist of a survey of Creative Product consumers as of July 31, 2020, we believe we offer the broadest selection of products while being committed to providing the most inspiration, helpful service and education to our customers. While we continue to gain market share and solidify this leadership position in Sewing, which represented 43% of our total net sales in fiscal 2022, we have also been growing our share of and believe we have further significant share opportunity in the arts and crafts category. We are well-positioned in the marketplace and have multiple competitive advantages, including our broad assortment, established omni-channel platform, multi-faceted digital interface with customers and skilled and knowledgeable team members. We offer an extensive assortment, which at its seasonal peak, averages more than 128,000 SKUs in stores and over 273,000 SKUs online, across Creative Product categories. Over 50% of our in-store net sales cannot be directly comparison-shopped because of our strong and growing own-brand portfolio, including our copyrighted or proprietary fabric patterns and designs and factory direct relationships. We have expanded access to this broad assortment through e-commerce and digital capabilities that complement our physical network, drive customer engagement and deliver an exceptional customer experience while supporting consistently strong gross margins. Through our omni-channel platform, we serve our customers in a differentiated manner by offering several convenient fulfillment options, including BOPIS, curbside pick-up and ship-to-home offerings. Our omni-channel platform operates at a large scale, having generated approximately $299 million, $511 million and $126 million in net sales in fiscal 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our data-driven digital capabilities further reinforce our relationship with our customers. Customers can interact with our brand whenever and however they want. Customers connect with us through our mobile-first website, joann.com, both domestically and internationally, as well as our widely-used mobile application with more than 14 million downloads. As of the end of fiscal 2022, we had approximately 77 million addressable customers in our vast database, approximately 19 million customers in our email database and over four million customers in our SMS text database. These points of differentiation are reinforced by our knowledgeable, friendly and trusted team members, a significant number of whom are sewing and craft enthusiasts, who offer a service-oriented experience for our customers that we believe cannot be replicated by mass retailers or pure play online players.
Starting in 2016, we accelerated our journey to transform JOANN by reinventing the in-store and digital customer experience. We recruited talent at every level of the company and across all key business areas to complement our existing expertise. This undertaking has resulted in significant enhancements to our value proposition, including reinvigorating our core merchandise assortment, refreshing our branding, developing a store location refresh prototype and improving the customer experience. We improved our assortment by conducting a systematic review of all categories at a product-level and all layouts at a store location-level in order to optimize sales and gross margin. We have also expanded our data-driven digital footprint, which includes our extensive digital marketing assets, CRM system, social media platforms and e-commerce capabilities. We better understand our customers through our centralized database that brings together how each customer interacts in our physical and digital properties and provides a holistic view of their behavior. We are able to utilize this data to drive engagement with our brand, create loyalty and inspire, educate and ensure we are increasing our share of customer spend through timely and relevant marketing. By using data and digital contact channels, including email and SMS digital display, and leveraging our mobile application, we are able to contact customers with personalized content and provide the convenience to shop wherever and however they choose. We believe that these core initiatives and transformational investments have driven our performance and increased customer engagement over the last several years and strategically position us to continue to create long-term value.
Factors Affecting Our Business
Overall economic trends. The overall economic environment and related changes in consumer behavior have a significant impact on our business. Spending by customers on our products and services is primarily discretionary, and as a result, generally positive economic conditions create increased discretionary household income that promotes higher levels of spending across our business. However, the creative activities we support tend to be lower cost than other leisure activities, which could protect us to a certain degree from economic downturns. Macroeconomic factors that can affect customer spending patterns, and thereby our results of operations, include employment rates, availability of consumer credit, interest rates, tax rates, inflation and fuel and energy costs. Macroeconomic factors can also affect our input and labor costs, notably inflation, as our financial results and ability to invest in the business are directly impacted by increases or decreases in the cost of goods and services required in our operations and initiatives. In addition to inflation, our input and labor costs are impacted by mandated costs such as minimum wages and trade policies, most significantly tariffs and duties on our products imported from foreign countries. The implementation of incremental U.S. tariffs on Chinese imports in particular has had a significant impact on our cost of goods sold, product demand and sourcing strategies.
The COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve and disrupt normal activities in many segments of the global economy. We continue to work with government and health authorities to operate our business, including our store locations, distributions centers and other facilities. We also continue to follow recommended actions of government authorities and health officials in order to protect the health and well-being of our team members, customers and their families worldwide. We continue to manage the impacts on supply chains, inflationary costs and labor availability and costs, but the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the long-term impacts on the economy are uncertain and could negatively impact our results of operations.
Management of inventory and our supply chain. We offer an extensive assortment, which at its seasonal peak, averages more than 128,000 SKUs in stores and over 273,000 SKUs through our e-commerce platforms, across Creative Product categories. The high number of SKUs required to support our business as well as the need to introduce new products and manage seasonality create complexity in our operations. We also sometimes experience long lead times for manufacture and delivery of our products, particularly those that we source directly from foreign suppliers, which further increases inventory carrying costs. The ability to effectively forecast product demand, maintain a high number of vendor relationships and order volume, replenish and allocate product and manage distribution and logistics are all critical to our success. Issues with any of these processes could result in lost sales or excess inventories which would have a negative impact on our results of operations.
Shipping and freight costs. A significant portion of our products are sourced from suppliers overseas. During fiscal 2022, we experienced higher than expected import and domestic freight costs largely due to COVID-19 driven inflationary pressures, transportation shortages, labor shortages and port congestion. While these costs have a negative impact on our results of operations, we are currently taking measures to mitigate, and expect to continue to take measures to mitigate, the impact of these additional costs through strategic purchasing, efficiency gains and pursuing various supply chain alternatives. However, we expect that there could be a difference between the timing of when these beneficial actions impact our results of operations and when the cost inflation is incurred.
Consumer demand for our products and services. Our industry supports activities that are discretionary in nature and can be highly influenced by consumer trends. Our ability to achieve our desired results, including attracting new customers and growing share of spend with existing customers, depends on our ability to develop compelling product assortments and services delivered within a convenient and engaging shopping experience. Moreover, due to the nature of our business, we purchase much of our inventory well in advance of each selling season. If we misjudge consumer preferences and demand for certain products, we could be faced with excess inventories that would impact our net sales and profits.
Size and loyalty of our customer database. Our ability to effectively market to our customers is a critical component of our business success. We tier our customers based on total sales volume and frequency of purchase. For fiscal 2022, 34% of our net sales were generated by our top three million customers. Our recent success is also being largely driven by new customers added to our database, as 10% of our net sales for fiscal 2022 were generated by new customers added to our database over that same time period.
Competition. The Creative Products industry includes specialty retailers and mass merchandisers that provide assortments in many of our categories albeit typically with more limited breadth, local shops that tend to feature select categories (e.g., quilting and yarn shops) and pure play e-commerce players. We compete with all of these providers for customer attention, shopping visits, exclusive vendor relationships, leadership talent and, in some cases, front line team members and store locations. Our ability to be effective across all of those points of competition has a significant effect on our results of operations.
Effective development and sourcing of products. Our business success requires that we provide relevant and innovative products to our customers at competitive prices. Development of those products is dependent on effective relationships with key suppliers and, in many cases, internal development of new products or application of current consumer trends to existing product lines. Our ability to develop, promote and apply our exclusive brands to new products is a critical component of building competitive assortments that drive our sales. Our ability to effectively source products, including through factory direct relationships, allows us to offer assortments at competitive prices while maintaining profitable product margins.
Investments in our store locations, technology, infrastructure, team members and new business opportunities. We have made, and will continue to make, significant investments in our business and operations. We believe these investments have laid the foundation for our results of operations and continued profitable growth. Refreshing our store locations, enhancing our omni-channel and other customer-facing and supporting technologies, strengthening our core business processes, adding talent while developing our current team and making investments in ventures that augment our current business are critical to sustaining a vibrant enterprise that will drive strong financial results.
Seasonality in quarterly results. Historically, our net sales and operating profits have been materially higher in our third and fourth fiscal quarters, particularly in the months of September through December, coinciding with fall and holiday selling seasons. We incur significantly higher expenses and working capital needs in April through August in order to procure inventory to support higher levels of sales activity later in the year. Our ability to generate cash flow or otherwise finance increased costs in the earlier portion of our fiscal year is critical to achieving strong net sales and operating profit in our historically busier fall and holiday seasons.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing our performance, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) measures include net sales, cost of sales, selling, general and administrative expenses and operating profit. In addition, we also review other important non-GAAP metrics such as Adjusted EBITDA and other performance indicators such as total comparable sales.
Net Sales
Net sales are derived from direct retail sales to customers in our store locations and online, net of merchandise returns, discounts and coupons, and excluding sales tax. Growth in net sales is impacted by total comparable sales, new store location openings, store location refreshes and closures.
Total Comparable Sales
Total comparable sales are an important measure throughout the retail industry. This measure allows us to evaluate how our store location base and e-commerce business are performing by measuring the change in period-over-period net sales in store locations that have been open for the applicable period. We define total comparable sales as net sales for store locations that have been open for at least 13 months as well as net sales for store locations that have not been relocated, expanded or downsized in the last 13 months. In addition, total comparable sales include our e-commerce sales generated via joann.com (online sales for all products) and creativebug.com (online sales of digital videos for crafting projects). There may be variations in the way in which some of our competitors and other retailers calculate comparable sales. As a result, data in this Annual Report on Form 10-K regarding our total comparable sales may not be comparable to similar data made available by other retailers.
Gross Profit
Gross profit is calculated as net sales less cost of sales. Cost of sales consists primarily of the direct cost of merchandise sold at our store locations and through our e-commerce platforms, along with several other costs including freight expense, vendor allowances and cash discounts, inventory shrink and clearance activity. We define gross margin as gross profit divided by net sales.
Our calculations of gross profit may not be directly comparable to those of our competitors. Some retailers include all of the costs related to their distribution network in cost of sales, while we exclude the indirect portion from gross profit and include it within selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses. We include distribution costs that are directly associated with the acquisition of our merchandise and delivery to our store locations in cost of sales. These costs are primarily freight incurred when we receive merchandise shipments from the vendor to our distribution centers or directly to our store locations and also when we ship merchandise from our distribution centers to our store locations. Freight incurred to ship e-commerce orders to our customers is also included in our cost of sales. These freight costs as well as duties, including tariffs, related to import purchases and internal transfer costs are considered to be direct costs of our merchandise and, accordingly, are recognized as cost of sales when the related merchandise is sold.
Purchasing, receiving, warehousing, fulfillment of e-commerce orders (excluding shipping costs) and other costs of our distribution network (including depreciation) and store location occupancy costs are considered to be period costs not directly attributable to the value of merchandise and, accordingly, are expensed as incurred as SG&A expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses consist of various costs related to supporting and facilitating the sale of merchandise in our store locations and via our e-commerce platforms. These costs include, but are not limited to, store location, distribution center and administrative payroll, team member benefits, stock-based compensation, occupancy, facility and operating costs for our store locations, distribution centers and corporate offices, advertising expenses, payment card acceptance and interchange fees, store location and distribution center pre-opening and closing costs and other administrative expenses.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize key components of our results of operations for the periods indicated. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on form 10-K. Discussion of the 52 weeks ended January 30, 2021 compared with the 52 weeks ended February 1, 2020 is included in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 30, 2021.
Statement of Consolidated Income Data:
Other Operational Data:
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for a definition of Adjusted EBITDA and a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income (loss).
Comparison of the 52 Weeks Ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021
Net Sales
Net sales were $2,417.6 million for fiscal 2022, a decrease of $344.7 million or 12.5% compared to fiscal 2021. Total comparable sales decreased 12.4% for fiscal 2022 compared to a 23.5% total comparable sales increase for the prior year. The total comparable sales decrease resulted primarily from a decrease in transaction volume partially offset by an increase in average ticket. We saw a decline in our Sewing category due to the reduction in demand for supplies to produce personal protective equipment related to COVID-19 in the prior year.
Gross Profit
Gross profit was $1,212.7 million for fiscal 2022, a decrease of $153.5 million or 11.2% compared to fiscal 2021. That decrease was driven by lower net sales and partially offset by an increase in our gross margin. Gross margin was 50.2% for fiscal 2022, an increase of 70 basis points compared to fiscal 2021. Improvement in our gross margin was driven by our strategic sourcing efforts along with optimization of our promotional discounts. In addition, we experienced favorable shrink results driven by various initiatives implemented last year to better control inventory theft, along with reduced outbound freight costs associated with a lower penetration to total sales of ship-from-store online orders compared to fiscal 2021, which were in part pandemic driven. These savings were offset in part by additional freight costs, both domestic and import, primarily due to increasing freight rates. The increase in freight rates was primarily driven by the significant transitory impact of constrained ocean freight capacity and incremental domestic transportation costs incurred due to unprecedented congestion in U.S. ports resulting from conditions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses were $1,032.9 million for fiscal 2022, a decrease of $99.1 million or 8.8% compared to fiscal 2021. This decrease was primarily driven by additional store labor expense in fiscal 2021 due to premium pay and additional labor needed to support the significant increase in ship-from-store orders along with support needed for the excess cleaning and facilities management in our stores that did not reoccur in fiscal 2022. In addition, SG&A expenses were favorably impacted by lower incentive compensation accruals in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year.
As a percentage of net sales, SG&A expenses for fiscal 2022 were 42.7%, an increase of 170 basis points compared to fiscal 2021. This increase was primarily due to our 12.4% total comparable sales decline in fiscal 2022.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense was $80.1 million in fiscal 2022, an increase of $0.1 million compared to fiscal 2021. This increase was driven primarily by investments in capital projects that were placed in service in late fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022 offset by lower depreciation after the sale and leaseback of our distribution center in Opelika, Alabama in the second quarter of fiscal 2022.
Goodwill and Trade Name Impairment
There were no goodwill or trade name impairment losses recorded in fiscal 2022 or fiscal 2021 due to no indication of impairment.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for fiscal 2022 was $51.2 million, a decrease of $17.8 million compared to fiscal 2021. This decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower average borrowings. The decrease was also partially due to lower interest rates as a result of the repayment of the Term Loan due 2024 and our term loan refinancing during the first thirty-nine weeks of fiscal 2022. Partially offsetting these decreases, we recorded $3.0 million of financing costs related to our term loan refinancing in July 2021. The average debt level in fiscal 2022 was $811.6 million compared to $1,054.6 million in fiscal 2021. The weighted average interest rate was 5.29 percent and 5.99 percent for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, respectively.
We had $794.3 million of debt outstanding (face value) as of January 29, 2022 versus $793.7 million as of January 30, 2021.
Debt Related Loss (Gain)
During fiscal 2022, we refinanced our Term Loan due 2023. A write-off of the deferred charges and original issue discount, totaling $3.1 million associated with the original debt issuance was recognized within debt related loss (gain) within the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, during fiscal 2022, we refinanced our ABL Facility and wrote off $0.3 million of previously deferred costs. Also contributing to the debt related loss, was a $0.9 million write-off of the original issue discount and deferred issuance costs related to the paydown of the Term Loan due 2024. The Term Loan due 2024 was retired at face value. Partially offsetting these losses, during the first quarter of fiscal 2022, we repurchased $1.9 million in face value of the Term Loan due 2024 at an average of 53 percent of par, resulting in a $1.0 million gain. A write-off of the deferred charges and original issue discount, totaling less than $0.1 million, associated with the original debt issuance was recognized as an offset to the debt related gain.
During fiscal 2021, we repurchased $351.5 million in face value of the term loans pursuant to our First Lien Facility and our Second Lien Facility, at an average of 54% of par, resulting in a $155.1 million gain, which is included in debt related loss (gain) within the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. A
write-off of the deferred charges and original issue discount, totaling $6.0 million, associated with the original debt issuance was recognized as an offset to the gain recognized. The term loan repurchases were executed, following a competitive market bidding process, through several open market purchases on arm’s length terms and in compliance with the terms of the underlying credit agreements.
See Note 2-Financing to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Gain on Sale Leaseback
We recognized a gain on the sale of fixed assets of $24.5 million during fiscal 2022. The gain was attributable to the sale and leaseback of our distribution center in Opelika, Alabama. See Note 15-Gain on Sale and Leaseback to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate for fiscal 2022 was 18.7% compared to 11.7% for fiscal 2021. The increase in the effective income tax rate in fiscal 2022, as compared to fiscal 2021, resulted primarily from fiscal 2021 rate-lowering activity, including the reversal of the valuation allowance for the deferred tax asset relating to the interest expense carryover, and an effective tax rate benefit for a net operating loss carried back to tax years with a federal tax rate of 35% versus 21%.
Net Income (Loss)
Net income was $56.7 million for fiscal 2022, a decrease of $155.6 million compared to fiscal 2021. The decrease was driven by the factors described above.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA decreased 25.0% to $242.5 million, or 10.0% of net sales, for fiscal 2022 compared to $323.3 million, or 11.7% of net sales, for fiscal 2021. Our decrease in Adjusted EBITDA of $80.8 million and decline of Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales of 170 basis points was driven primarily by lower total comparable sales and higher SG&A expenses as a percentage of net sales, partially offset by improvements in our gross margin.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We present Adjusted EBITDA, which is not a recognized financial measure under GAAP, because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance. Management believes Adjusted EBITDA is helpful in highlighting trends in our core operating performance compared to other measures, which can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments. We also use Adjusted EBITDA in connection with establishing discretionary annual incentive compensation; to supplement GAAP measures of performance in the evaluation of the effectiveness of our business strategies; to make budgeting decisions; to compare our performance against that of other peer companies using similar measures; and because our Credit Facilities use measures similar to Adjusted EBITDA to measure our compliance with certain covenants.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) plus income tax provision, interest expense, net and depreciation and amortization, as further adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain non-cash items and other items that we do not consider indicative of our ongoing operating performance, including debt related loss (gain), gains on sale leasebacks, costs related to strategic initiatives, COVID-19 costs, technology development expense, stock-based compensation expense, loss on disposal and impairment of fixed and operating lease assets, goodwill and trade name impairment, sponsor management fees and other one-time costs. Our adjustments for COVID-19 related costs include, as a separate line item, excess import freight costs. The excess import freight costs are directly attributable to surging market demand for shipping capacity as economies begin to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as actions taken by government and industry leaders designed to protect against further spread of the virus, which have disrupted the efficient operation of domestic and international supply chains. These COVID-19 related conditions have produced an imbalance of ocean freight capacity and related demand, as well as port congestion and other supply chain disruptions that are adding significant cost to the Company’s procurement of imported merchandise. These excess import freight costs include significantly higher rates paid per container to ocean carriers, as well as fees paid due to congested ports that we do not normally incur. In a normative operating environment, the Company would procure 70% to 80% of its needs for ocean freight under negotiated contract rates, with the balance procured in a brokered market, typically at no more than a 10% - 15% premium to our contract rates. Accordingly, we established a
standard cost (“standard cost”) assuming those contract capacities, established rates and typical premium in the brokered market for peak volume needs not covered under our contracts. Negotiation of our current contact rates were finalized in May 2021. In the current COVID-19 impacted operating environment, our contracted capacity has consistently not been met by our carriers, and rates paid on the open market have escalated to up to an average of nearly 200% above our contract rates and in some cases over 300% greater. The amount of excess import freight costs included as an adjustment to arrive at Adjusted EBITDA is calculated by subtracting, from our actual import freight costs, our standard cost for the applicable period. We are identifying these COVID-19 related excess import freight costs as a separate line item in the table below due to their magnitude and to distinguish them from other COVID-19 related costs we have previously excluded in calculating Adjusted EBITDA.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in our cash requirements for our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense and the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for replacement of assets that are being depreciated and amortized;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect non-cash compensation, which is a key element of our overall long-term incentive compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of certain cash charges or cash receipts resulting from matters we do not find indicative of our ongoing operations; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental information.
The following is a reconciliation of our net income (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
(1)“Depreciation and amortization” represents depreciation, amortization of intangible assets and amortization of content costs.
(2)“Debt related loss (gain)” represents losses and gains associated with debt repurchases below par and the write off of unamortized fees and original issue discount associated with debt refinancings.
(3)“Gain on sale leaseback” represents the gain attributable to the sale leaseback of our distribution center in Opelika, Alabama.
(4)“Strategic initiatives” represents non-recurring costs, such as third-party consulting costs and one-time start-up costs, that are not part of our ongoing operations and are incurred to execute differentiated, project-based strategic initiatives, including costs (i) to design a new prototype and assortment optimization process for store locations, (ii) related to our efforts to initially evaluate and implement opportunities to offset the
significant costs incurred due to the new U.S. tariffs on merchandise produced in China, (iii) to start up a new technology product that would traditionally be incurred by our vendors, (iv) to evaluate our opportunity in new potential lines of business, (v) to analyze improved supply chain capabilities and (vi) to establish our foreign sourcing office.
(5)As discussed in greater detail above, "Excess import freight costs" represents excess inbound freight costs (compared to our standard costs based on recently negotiated carrier rates) due to increasing freight rates, in particular the significant transitory impact of constrained ocean freight capacity and incremental domestic transportation costs incurred due to unprecedented congestion in U.S. ports arising from surging market demand for shipping capacity as economies begin to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic.
(6)“Other COVID-19 costs” represents premium pay for store location team members (including cleaning and store location capacity management labor), incremental seasonal clearance associated with store location closures, donations for our mask making initiative and additional store location cleaning supplies.
(7)“Technology development expense” represents one-time IT project management and implementation expenses, such as internal project management labor, third-party consulting fees and user fees incurred during the development period of a new software application, that are not part of our ongoing operations and are typically redundant during the initial implementation of software applications or other technology systems across different functional operations of our business before they are in productive use.
(8)Based on our evaluation for impairment of the carrying amount of goodwill and trade name on our balance sheet. Impairment recorded was driven predominantly by the result of negative total comparable sales and declining margins, primarily resulting from the incremental U.S. tariffs on Chinese imports, along with a weaker than expected peak selling season. See Note 8-Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
(9)“Sponsor management fee” represents management fees paid to our sponsor, LGP (or advisory affiliates thereof), in accordance with our management services agreement, which terminated upon the consummation our initial public offering. Following our offering, LGP does not provide managerial services to us in any form.
(10)“Other” represents the one-time impact of severance, certain legal matters, executive leadership transition and business transition activities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have three principal sources of liquidity: cash and cash equivalents on hand, cash from operations and available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents on hand, cash from operations and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to cover our working capital, capital expenditure and debt service requirement needs as well as dividend payments and share repurchases for the foreseeable future. Please refer to Note 2-Financing to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of the material terms of our Credit Facilities. As of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants under our Credit Facilities.
We define “Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA” as Adjusted EBITDA (as defined above) plus pre-opening and closing costs excluding loss on disposal of fixed assets, which is calculated consistently with our calculation of Adjusted EBITDA under our Revolving Credit Facility and Term Loan due 2028 (collectively “Credit Facilities”). We reference Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA because it is a measure that is calculated in accordance with our Credit Facilities and used to determine our compliance with certain ratios in our Credit Facilities, tested each quarter on the basis of the preceding four quarters. For example, we are permitted to prepay debt and make distributions on account of equity up to a certain amount under our Term Loan due 2028 if our ratio of consolidated net debt to Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA for the prior four quarters as of the quarterly test is not greater than 4.90 to 1.0 and our ratio of consolidated senior secured net debt to Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA for such period is not greater than 3.60 to 1.0. As of January 29, 2022, our ratio of consolidated net debt to Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA was 3.1 to 1.0, and of consolidated senior secured net debt to Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA was 3.1 to 1.0. Other provisions in our Credit Facilities utilize ratios including Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA for calculating permitted limits for us to incur additional debt and make certain investments. Additionally, our ratio of consolidated senior secured net debt to Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA is measured once per year following the completion of our annual Consolidated Financial Statements and determines what percentage of our excess cash flow (as defined in our Term Loan due 2028) we are required to apply for the repayment of principal on our Term Loan due 2028, ranging from 50% of excess cash flow for ratios in excess of 2.50x to 0% of excess cash flow for ratios of less than 2.00x. For fiscal 2022, no excess cash flow payment is required.
Accordingly, we believe that Credit Facility Adjusted EBITDA is material to an investor’s understanding of our financial condition and liquidity.
Our capital requirements are primarily for capital expenditures in connection with new store location openings, store location remodels, investments in information technology, other infrastructure investments and working capital requirements for seasonal inventory build. These requirements fluctuate during the year and reach their highest levels during the second and third fiscal quarters as we increase our inventory in preparation for our peak selling season during the months of September through December and complete most of our capital spending projects.
The following table provides a summary of our cash provided by (used for) operating, investing and financing activities:
Comparison of the 52 Weeks Ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021
Net cash (used for) provided by operating activities
Net cash used for operating activities was $23.6 million in fiscal 2022 compared with $327.1 million of net cash provided by operating activities in fiscal 2021. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to lower comparable sales results, changes in inventory due to lower balances in fiscal 2021 and increased import freight costs in fiscal 2022, the repayment of deferred cash payments negotiated with our landlords as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and payment of fiscal 2021 incentive compensation to salaried store support center and distribution center team members as well as store and district managers.
Net cash used for investing activities
Cash used for investing activities for fiscal 2022 consisted primarily of capital expenditures, the majority of which were focused on strategic initiatives including: new store location and distribution center openings, store location remodels and refreshes and information technology investments, particularly those supporting our omni-channel platforms and other customer facing systems. We also incurred capital outlays for equipment and facility management in our distribution centers, store locations and corporate offices. These uses of cash were partially offset by cash provided by the completion of the sale and leaseback of our Opelika, Alabama distribution center.
Investment for each refresh project is tailored to each store location’s needs and unit economics. We have four general levels of investment and project scope tailored to what would benefit each store location, with future investment expected to range from $150,000 for lightest-touch refreshes to $3 million for the relatively few but most-extensive refreshes. Over 80% of our existing store locations are refresh project targets over the next seven to ten years, and we expect investments in relation to these future refresh projects to remain consistent with our capital expenditures in connection with completed refresh projects.
Historical capital expenditures are summarized as follows:
Total capital expenditures, net of landlord contributions increased by $22.5 million in fiscal 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year. This increase was primarily related to the investment in our multi-purpose distribution center located in West Jefferson, Ohio and lower capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 as a result of restrictions related to COVID-19.
Net cash provided by (used for) financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $31.9 million in fiscal 2022 compared with $288.4 million of net cash used for financing activities in fiscal 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities for fiscal 2022 was the result of net proceeds received from our initial public offering and borrowings from the Revolving Credit Facility to repay all of the outstanding borrowings and accrued interest under the Term Loan due 2024 totaling $72.7 million. In addition, we refinanced our Term Loan due 2023 with a $675 million Term Loan due 2028, with excess proceeds used to reduce amounts borrowed under our Revolving Credit Facility and fund working capital needs. We used cash for financing activities to repurchase $20.0 million of common stock as part of our share repurchase program and to pay dividends totaling $12.6 million during fiscal 2022. Net cash used for by financing activities for fiscal 2021 was primarily the result of the repurchase of portions of the First Lien Facility and Second Lien Facility, as well as an increase in payments on the ABL Facility. As of January 29, 2022, we had the ability to borrow an additional $239.6 million under our Revolving Credit Facility subject to the facility’s borrowing base calculation.
Off-Balance Sheet Transactions
Our liquidity is currently not dependent on the use of off-balance sheet transactions other than letters of credit which are typical in a retail environment.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our future cash outflows resulting from contractual obligations and commitments as of January 29, 2022:
(1)Purchase commitments include agreements for technology and other purchases, in which minimum guaranteed payments are required.
(2)Operating leases include legally binding minimum lease payments of approximately $76.7 for leases entered in to but not yet commenced.
(3)Finance leases include legally binding minimum lease payments of approximately $11.6 million for leases entered in to but not yet commenced.
(4)We had $121.0 million in outstanding borrowings under our ABL Facility at January 29, 2022. Under our ABL Facility, we are required to pay a commitment fee of 0.20% per year on unutilized commitments. The amounts included in ABL Facility interest were based on these annual commitment fees.
(5)The First Lien Facility, which matures July 7, 2028 is with a syndicate of lenders and is secured by substantially all of our assets excluding the ABL Facility collateral and has a second priority security interest in the ABL Facility collateral. The First Lien Facility provides for mandatory quarterly repayments of $1.7 million on the last business day of each January, April, July and October. Interest payments are due either monthly or quarterly on approximately the 26th day of the month depending on the underlying LIBOR and are subject to variable interest rates. The amounts included in the First Lien Facility interest were based on the interest rate effective as of January 29, 2022.
Seasonality
Our business exhibits seasonality, which is typical for most retail companies. Our net sales are stronger in the second half of the year than the first half of the year. Net income is highest during the months of September through December when sales volumes provide significant operating leverage. Working capital needed to finance our operations fluctuate during the year and reach their highest levels during the second and third fiscal quarters as we increase our inventory in preparation for our peak selling season.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We strive to report our financial results in a clear and understandable manner. We follow GAAP in preparing our Consolidated Financial Statements. These principles require us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, expenses and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base our estimates on historical experience and on other assumptions that we believe to be relevant under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions and/or conditions. We continually evaluate the information used to make these estimates as our business and the economic environment change. The use of estimates is pervasive throughout our financial statements. The accounting
policies that involve estimates or assumptions that are material due to levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or are susceptible to change and we consider most critical are as follows:
Inventory Valuation
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value with cost determined on a weighted-average basis. Inventory valuation methods require certain management estimates and judgments, the most significant of which involves estimates of net realizable value on product designated for clearance, which affects the ending inventory valuation at cost, as well as the cost of sales reported for the year.
We estimate our reserve for clearance product based on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, quantities of slow-moving or carryover seasonal merchandise on hand, historical recovery statistics and future merchandising plans. The accuracy of our estimates can be affected by many factors, some of which are beyond our control, including changes in economic conditions and consumer buying trends. The corresponding adjustment to cost of sales is recorded in the period the decision is made. We do not believe that the assumptions used in our estimate will change significantly based on prior experience.
Our accrual for inventory shrink is estimated as a percent of sales. The percent used in the determination of the accrual is based on actual historical inventory shrink results of our store locations. This estimated percent is applied to sales of our store locations for the periods following each store location’s most recent physical inventory. In addition, we analyze our accrual using actual results as physical inventory counts are taken and reconciled to the general ledger. Substantially all of our store location physical inventory counts are taken in the first three quarters of each year. A majority of store locations that have been open one year or longer are physically inventoried once a year. See Note 1-Significant Accounting Policies to our audited financial statements-Inventories included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Impairment of Long-Lived and Operating Lease Assets
We evaluate recoverability of long-lived and operating lease assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable (for example, when a store location’s performance falls below minimum company standards). In the fourth quarter of each fiscal year or earlier if indicators of impairment exist, we review the performance of individual store locations. Underperforming store locations are selected for further evaluation of the recoverability of the store location’s net asset values. If the evaluation, done on an undiscounted cash flow basis, indicates that a store location’s net asset value may not be recoverable, the potential impairment is measured as the excess of carrying value over the fair value of the impaired asset. We estimate fair value based on a projected discounted cash flow method using a discount rate that is considered to be commensurate with the risk inherent in our current business model. Additional factors are taken into consideration, such as local market conditions and operating environment. See Note 1-Significant Accounting Policies to our audited financial statements-Impairment of Long-Lived and Operating Lease Assets included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite Lived Intangible Assets
We assess the carrying value of goodwill at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is the operating segment, or a business unit one level below that operating segment, for which discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by segment management.
Annually, as of the first day of the fourth quarter, and more frequently if circumstances indicate impairment may exist, the Company assesses qualitative factors to determine if it is more-likely-than-not that the fair values of reporting units are below their respective carrying values. If it is determined that this is more-likely-than-not, a quantitative assessment is performed. The quantitative assessment compares the fair value of a reporting unit to its current carrying value. The Company determines the estimated fair value of a reporting unit based on valuation techniques including discounted cash flows as well as a market comparable method. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that reporting unit, goodwill is not considered impaired.
Annually, as of the first day of the fourth quarter, and more frequently if circumstances indicate impairment may exist, the Company assesses qualitative factors to determine if it is more-likely-than-not that the fair values of the indefinite-lived intangible assets not subject to amortization (JOANN Trade Name and joann.com Domain Name) are below their respective carrying values. If it is determined that this is more-likely-than-not, a quantitative assessment is performed. The quantitative assessment compares the fair value of an intangible asset to its current carrying value. The Company determines the estimated fair value of an intangible asset based upon the relief from royalty method.
See Note 8-Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Self-Insurance Reserves
We are self-insured for certain losses relating to general liability, workers’ compensation and team member medical benefit claims. The ultimate cost of our workers’ compensation and general liability insurance accruals are recorded based on actuarial valuations and historical claims experience. Our team member medical insurance accruals are recorded based on medical claims processed, as well as historical medical claims experience for claims incurred but not yet reported. We maintain stop-loss coverage to limit the exposure to certain insurance-related risks. Management believes that the various assumptions developed, and actuarial methods used to determine our self-insurance reserves are reasonable and provide meaningful data and information that is used to make the best estimate of our exposure to these risks. Differences in estimates and assumptions could result in an accrual requirement materially different from the calculated accrual. Historically, such differences have not been significant.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are estimated for federal and each state jurisdiction in which we operate. This approach involves assessing the current tax exposure together with temporary differences, which result from differing treatment of items for tax and book purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are established based on these assessments. Deferred tax assets are evaluated for recoverability based on future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, taxable income in carryback years and tax-planning strategies. To the extent that recovery is deemed unlikely, a valuation allowance is recorded. Our valuation allowance was $3.9 million and $4.4 million as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively. The valuation allowance primarily relates to state net operating losses and credits that the Company is unlikely to use in the future. Many years of data have been incorporated into the determination of tax reserves and our estimates have historically proven to be reasonable.
Stock-Based Compensation
The fair value of stock-based awards is recognized as compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards. The fair value of stock options is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. Determining the fair value of options at the grant date requires judgment, including estimating the expected term that stock options will be outstanding prior to exercise and the associated volatility. The absence of an active market for our common stock prior to our public offering also required our board of directors to determine the fair value of our common stock for purposes of granting stock options. Following the listing of our common stock on Nasdaq, it is not necessary to determine the fair value of our common stock, as our shares are traded in the public market.
Expected stock price volatility is estimated using the historical volatility for industry peers based on daily price observations over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards. The risk-free interest rate is determined using an interest rate based on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon notes with terms consistent with the expected term. The expected term is determined using a simplified approach, calculated as the mid-point between the graded vesting period and the contractual term of the award. The Company determines the dividend yield by dividing the expected annual dividend on the Company's stock by the option exercise price. The Company accounts for forfeiture of non-vested options as they occur. Changes in assumptions can materially affect the estimate of fair value of stock-based awards and consequently, the related amount of expense recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
See Note 10-Stock-Based Compensation to our Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1-Significant Accounting Policies included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding recently issued and adopted accounting pronouncements.