ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements based upon current beliefs, plans and expectations related to future events and our future financial performance that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions, such as statements regarding our intentions, plans, objectives, expectations, forecasts and projections. Our actual results and the timing of selected events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of several factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company dedicated to enabling cures through hematopoietic stem cell therapy. We are focused on the development and commercialization of safer and more effective conditioning agents and stem cell engineering to allow for expanded use of stem cell transplantation and ex vivo gene therapy, a technique in which genetic manipulation of cells is performed outside of the body prior to transplantation.
Our drug development pipeline includes multiple product candidates designed to improve hematopoietic stem cell therapy. Our lead product candidate, JSP191, is in clinical development as a novel conditioning antibody that clears hematopoietic stem cells from bone marrow in patients prior to undergoing allogeneic stem cell therapy or stem cell gene therapy. We are also developing engineered hematopoietic stem cells (“eHSC”) product candidates reprogrammed using mRNA delivery and gene editing that have a competitive advantage over endogenous hematopoietic stem cells (“HSCs”) because they permit higher levels of engraftment without the need for toxic conditioning of the patient and with potentially lower risk of other serious complications seen with current stem cell transplants. We also plan to continue to expand our pipeline to include other novel stem cell therapies based on immune modulation, graft engineering or cell and gene therapies. Our goal is to expand the use of curative stem cell transplant and gene therapies for all patients, including children and the elderly.
Stem cell transplantation is among the most widely practiced forms of cellular therapy and has the potential to cure a wide variety of diseases, including cancers, genetic disorders and autoimmune diseases. A stem cell transplant procedure involves three main steps: (i) stem cells from the patient’s or donor’s bone marrow are collected; (ii) the patient’s bone marrow is cleared of any remaining stem cells in order to make space to receive new transplanted stem cells, which is known as conditioning; and (iii) the new stem cells are transplanted into the patient via infusion where they fasten to, or engraft in, the bone marrow and grow into the blood and immune cells that form the basis of reset and rebuilt blood and immune systems. Transplants are either allogeneic or autologous, depending on the source of the new stem cells for the transplant. In an allogeneic transplant, patients receive cells from a stem cell donor. In an autologous transplant, the patient’s own stem cells are used. Autologous transplants also include stem cell gene therapies, where cells are collected from the patient, edited to either enable a functioning gene or correct a defective gene, and then transplanted into the patient via infusion. Our programs span both allogeneic and gene therapy-based autologous transplants, with initial sponsored programs in JSP191 based on an allogeneic approach.
Currently, patients must receive highly toxic and potentially life-threatening conditioning agents to prepare their bone marrow for transplantation with either donor stem cells or their own gene-edited stem cells. Younger, fitter patients capable of surviving these toxic side effects are typically given myeloablative, or high-intensity, conditioning whereas older or less fit patients are typically given reduced intensity, but still toxic, conditioning which leads to less effective transplants. These toxicities include a range of acute and chronic effects to the gastrointestinal tract, kidneys, liver, lung, endocrine, and neurologic tissues. Depending upon the conditioning regimen, fitness of the patient, and compatibility between the donor and recipient, the risk of transplant-related mortality ranges from 10% to more than 50% in older patients. Less toxic ways to condition patients have been developed to enable transplant for older patients or those with major comorbidities, but these regimens risk less potent disease elimination and higher rates of disease relapse. Even though stem cell therapy can be one of the most powerful forms of disease cure, these limitations of non-targeted conditioning regimens have seen little innovation over the past decade.
Our lead product candidate, JSP191, is a monoclonal antibody designed to block a specific survival signal on stem cells and is in development as a highly targeted conditioning agent prior to stem cell therapy. We are developing JSP191 for severe combined immunodeficiency (“SCID”) for which we are currently conducting an open label Phase 1/2 clinical trial in two cohorts of SCID patients: patients with a history of a prior allogeneic transplant for SCID but with poor graft outcomes and newly diagnosed SCID patients. The primary endpoint in Phase 1 is to evaluate the safety and tolerability of JSP191. The two primary efficacy endpoints in Phase 2 are the proportion of subjects achieving adequate donor HSC engraftment and the proportion of subjects achieving naïve T cell production greater than or equal to 85 cells/uL, a level expected to provide immune reconstitution, during weeks 36 to 104 post-transplant. Based on preliminary results from our ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical trial, we believe JSP191 has demonstrated the ability as a single agent to enable engraftment of donor HSCs as determined by donor chimerism, or the percentage of bone marrow cells in the patient that are of donor origin after transplant. Six out of the first nine non-IL2RG patients with prior allogeneic transplant achieved donor engraftment, naïve donor T cell production and demonstrated clinical improvement. No JSP191 treatment-related serious adverse events (“SAEs”) have been reported to date and pharmacokinetics have been consistent with earlier studies in healthy volunteers. We expect to complete enrollment in this Phase 1/2 clinical trial by mid-2023.
The FDA has granted rare pediatric disease designation to JSP191 as a conditioning treatment for patients with SCID. In addition, the FDA granted orphan drug designation to JSP191 for conditioning treatment prior to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
We also are evaluating JSP191 in an open label Phase 1 clinical trial in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome (“MDS”) or acute myeloid leukemia (“AML”) that were transplant eligible but still had trace evidence of leukemic cells that can remain in a patient after chemotherapy, or minimal residual disease (“MRD”), as detected by cytogenetics, flow cytometry or next-generation sequencing. The primary endpoints are to evaluate the safety, tolerability and pharmacokinetic parameters of JSP191. In the initial dose finding Phase 1a portion of this clinical trial, 0.6 mg/kg JSP191-based conditioning was well tolerated in all six MDS/AML patients as of December 31, 2021. Furthermore, it led to successful engraftment as demonstrated by sustained blood neutrophil count of >500 x 10^6 / L (Wolff 2002) in all six patients. Additionally, five of the six patients demonstrated elimination of all diseased cells at day 90 (MRD) by multiple methods of detection, a secondary endpoint of the clinical study. The next portion of the clinical trial, a Phase 1b dose expansion cohort has completed enrollment. Initial results from the first seventeen patients show that 0.6 mg/kg JSP191-based conditioning was well tolerated with all seventeen patients achieving successful engraftment. These initial results also show that twelve of fifteen Phase 1a and 1b patients with MRD at screening achieved clearance of MRD. No JSP191 related serious adverse events have been reported. As of reporting of these initial results, four patients have come off study, two due to relapse or disease progression, one due to late onset Grade 3 acute Graft vs Host Disease (GvHD) and one due to secondary graft failure. We expect to present additional data from this study in the first half of 2022.
We have entered into a clinical collaboration with Stanford University to study JSP191-based conditioning in patients with Fanconi anemia. This study is currently open for patient recruitment. We are also collaborating with the National Institutes of Health to conduct clinical trials of JSP191-based conditioning in patients with sickle cell disease (“SCD”), with chronic granulomatous disease and with GATA-2 mutated MDS. We believe that JSP191 may also be useful for conditioning in allogenic transplant for other diseases beyond which we are currently studying, including autoimmune diseases. We also believe that targeted JSP191-based conditioning may improve the efficacy and safety of gene therapies. We are working with Graphite Bio, Inc. (“Graphite Bio”) for gene therapy in patients with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (“X-SCID”) first as a non-clinical collaboration with an option to expand to clinical trials,as well as with Aruvant Sciences GmbH (“Aruvant Sciences”) for gene therapy in patients with SCD and with AVROBIO Inc. (“Avrobio”) for gene therapy in patients with Gaucher disease.
We plan to evaluate JSP191 as a therapeutic for certain patients with proliferative disorders of the hematopoietic stem cell. MDS is a heterogeneous disorder of the bone marrow which typically occurs in an older population and can progress to AML. The Revised International Prognostic Scoring System (“IPSS-R”) is a clinical assessment tool used to evaluate risk and prognosis of newly diagnosed patients. Patients with IPSS-R scores of low or very low are not typically referred to stem cell transplant due to the risk of transplant-related toxicities from current conditioning regiments, infection and GvHD outweighing the patient’s expected survival with drug therapies. These patients typically suffer from anemia, thrombocytopenia or neutropenia and are given drug therapies such as an erythropoiesis stimulating agent (“ESA”) to stimulate production of new cells to correct their blood deficiency. However, these agents do not target the diseased hematopoietic stem cell and patients who become refractory to ESA are dependent on routine blood transfusions, which is associated with poor survival. ESA-refractory low-risk MDS patients have few treatment options and are a clinical unmet need.
JSP191 and other anti-CD117 monoclonal antibodies have been shown to deplete normal and diseased MDS human hematopoietic stem cells in clinical and pre-clinical studies. In studies of non-human primates and healthy volunteers, administration of a single dose of JSP191 resulted in depletion of healthy hematopoietic stem cells followed by recovery in approximately six weeks. Additional recent clinical data in MDS patients undergoing stem cell transplant showed depletion of hematopoietic stem cells after administration of JSP191 alone. By depleting diseased and healthy hematopoietic stem cells, we believe that JSP191 may allow for preferential recovery of healthy hematopoietic stem cells and restoration of normal hematopoiesis. We intend to study JSP191 monotherapy in low-risk MDS patients with documented cytopenia who are refractory to ESA therapy.
Our eHSC platform is designed to overcome key limitations of stem cell transplant and stem cell gene therapy. By using mRNA delivery and/or gene editing, we believe we can reprogram donor or gene corrected stem cells to have a transient proliferative and survival advantage over the patient’s existing cells. We believe initial preclinical experiments by Jasper demonstrate multiple different mRNAs can be used to improve engraftment of modified stem cells. One example are eHSCs that express certain variants of CXCR4 that may lead to improved stem cell homing and engraftment in the bone marrow. Another example includes expression of a modified stem cell factor receptor that can lead to cell line proliferation independent of stem cell factor (“SCF”) concentration, enabling our eHSCs to outcompete unmodified HSCs through better survival and engraftment. Also, since JSP191 only blocks signaling through the stem cell factor receptor, these eHSCs are not affected by JSP191 when used in combination. Other initial experiments have shown that mRNA can be used to express these receptor variants on the cell surface. We have also identified other potential receptor modifications that prevent the binding of JSP191 but retain the ability to bind SCF, therefore allowing the eHSCs to proliferate normally even in the presence of JSP191.
We intend to become a fully integrated discovery, development and commercial company in the field of hematopoietic stem cell therapy. We are developing our product candidates to be used individually or, in some cases, in combination with one another. As a result, we believe our pipeline could be tailored to the patient-specific disease so that a patient may receive more than one of our therapies as part of his or her individual allogeneic or gene-edited stem cell therapy. Our goal is to advance our product candidates through regulatory approval and bring them to the commercial market based on the data from our clinical trials and communications with regulatory agencies and payor communities. We expect to continue to advance our pipeline and innovate through our research platform.
We have an exclusive license agreement with Amgen Inc. (“Amgen”) for the development and commercialization of the JSP191 monoclonal antibody in all indications and territories worldwide. We also have an exclusive license agreement with Stanford for the right to use JSP191 in the clearance of stem cells prior to the transplantation of HSCs. We also entirely own the intellectual property for our eHSC platform, which has been internally developed.
AMHC was incorporated in the State of Delaware in August 2019. Old Jasper was incorporated in the State of Delaware in March 2018 and did not have any significant operations or research and development activities until November 2019, when it entered into a license agreement with Amgen for a license to certain patents and know-how related to Amgen’s proprietary monoclonal antibody known as AMG 191, which we later renamed as JSP191.
Since Old Jasper’s inception in March 2018, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to performing research and development, enabling manufacturing activities in support of our product development efforts, hiring personnel, acquiring and developing our technology and product candidates, performing business planning, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these activities. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing expenses and substantial losses for the foreseeable future as we continue our development of and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates and commercialize any approved products, seek to expand our product pipeline and invest in our organization. We expect to incur increased expenses associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, audit, accounting, regulatory, tax-related, director and officer insurance, investor relations and other expenses.
We have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we incurred net losses of $30.6 million and $31.7 million, respectively. We generated negative operating cash flows of $33.7 million and $18.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $67.5 million.
We had cash and cash equivalents of $84.7 million as of December 31, 2021. Given our recurring losses from operations and negative cash flows, and based on our current operating plan, these funds would not be sufficient to fund our operations in the foreseeable future and we will need to raise additional financing. As a result, we concluded that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date when our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K are issued. We expect to continue to incur substantial losses for the foreseeable future, and our transition to profitability will depend upon successful development, approval and commercialization of our product candidates and upon achievement of sufficient revenues to support our cost structure. We do not expect to generate any revenue from commercial product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for one or more of our product candidates. We may never achieve profitability, and unless we do and until then, we will need to continue to raise additional capital.
Our management plans to monitor expenses and raise additional capital through a combination of public and private equity, debt financings, strategic alliances, and licensing arrangements. Our ability to access capital when needed is not assured and, if capital is not available to us when, and in the amounts needed, we may be required to significantly curtail, delay or discontinue one or more of our research or development programs or the commercialization of any product candidate, or be unable to expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities, as desired, which could materially harm our business, financial condition and results of operations.
We expect our expenses will increase substantially in connection with our ongoing and planned activities, as we:
● advance product candidates through preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● procure the manufacture of supplies for our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● acquire, discover, validate, and develop additional product candidates;
● attract, hire and retain additional personnel;
● operate as a public company;
● implement operational, financial and management systems;
● pursue regulatory approval for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● establish a sales, marketing, and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval and related commercial manufacturing build-out; and
● obtain, maintain, expand, and protect our portfolio of intellectual property rights.
We do not currently own or operate any manufacturing facility. We rely on contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”) to produce our drug candidates in accordance with the FDA’s current good manufacturing practices (“cGMP”) regulations for use in our clinical studies. Under our license agreement with Amgen, we received a substantial amount of drug product to support initiation of our planned clinical trials of JSP191. Since November 2019, we have entered into development and manufacturing agreements with Lonza Sales AG (“Lonza”) relating to the manufacturing of JSP191 drug substance and drug product and product quality testing. The facility of Lonza in Slough, United Kingdom is responsible for production and testing of drug substance. The facility of Lonza in Stein, Switzerland is responsible for production and testing of drug product. Labelling, packaging and storage of finished drug product is provided by PCI Pharma Services, in San Diego, California.
Given our stage of development, we do not yet have a marketing or sales organization or commercial infrastructure. Accordingly, if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we also expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we are unable to predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate revenue from the sale of our product candidates, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and may be forced to reduce our operations.
Business Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the global COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. The global COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve rapidly, including with respect to the spread of variants, and we will continue to monitor it closely. While our operations to date have not been significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot at this time predict the specific extent, duration, or full impact that the continuing COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, financial condition and operations, including ongoing and planned clinical trials and clinical development timelines, particularly as we advance our product candidates to clinical development, the continued spread of COVID-19 and its variants, including Omicron, and the measures taken by the governmental authorities could disrupt the supply chain and the manufacture or shipment of drug substances and finished drug products for our product candidates for use in our clinical trials, impede our clinical trial initiation and recruitment and the ability of patients to continue in clinical trials, impede testing, monitoring, data collection and analysis and other related activities. The COVID-19 pandemic could also potentially affect the business of the FDA or other regulatory authorities, which could result in delays in meetings related to our ongoing and planned clinical trials. We experienced slower than anticipated patient enrollment in our SCID clinical trial in 2020 due to reluctance of these immunocompromised patients to travel and undergo hospitalization during the pandemic. We may continue to experience interruptions to our clinical trials due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial performance will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic, its impact on our clinical trial enrollment, trial sites, contract research organizations (“CROs”), CMOs, and other third parties with whom we do business, its impact on regulatory authorities and our key scientific and management personnel, progress of vaccination and related governmental advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our business may be materially adversely affected.
Business Combination Agreement
On September 24, 2021 (the “Closing Date”), we consummated the previously announced Business Combination pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of May 5, 2021 (the “BCA”), by and among AMHC, Merger Sub, and Old Jasper. Pursuant to the terms of the BCA, on the Closing Date, (i) Merger Sub merged with and into Old Jasper (the “Merger”), with Old Jasper as the surviving company in the Merger, and, after giving effect to the Merger, Old Jasper became a wholly-owned subsidiary of AMHC and changed its name to “Jasper Tx Corp.”, and (ii) AMHC changed its name to “Jasper Therapeutics, Inc.”.
In addition, as previously disclosed, concurrently with the execution of the BCA, on May 5, 2021, AMHC entered into Subscription Agreements with certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”), pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to subscribe for and purchase, and AMHC agreed to issue and sell to the PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 10,000,000 shares of AMHC’s Class A Common Stock at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate gross proceeds of $100.0 million (the “PIPE Financing”). The PIPE Financing was consummated concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination.
In accordance with the BCA, at the closing of the Business Combination, each share of Old Jasper common stock and Old Jasper redeemable convertible preferred stock outstanding immediately prior to the closing was automatically cancelled, extinguished and converted into a number of shares of our common stock or, in certain circumstances, our non-voting common stock, based on Old Jasper’s equity value of $275.0 million divided by $10.00. The exchange ratio agreed between the parties was one-for-0.282378 share of our common stock for all Old Jasper stockholders, except for Amgen. Amgen’s 100 shares of Old Jasper Series A-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock were converted into 2,200,000 shares of our voting common stock, which represented 8% of the Old Jasper equity value, as per the terms of the letter agreement with Amgen. Each vested and unvested option to purchase shares of Old Jasper common stock outstanding at the closing was converted into a comparable option to purchase shares of our common stock, with the same terms after giving effect of the exchange ratio of one-for-0.282378. Each unvested award of restricted shares of Old Jasper common stock outstanding immediately prior to the closing was converted into a comparable right to receive restricted shares of our common stock, after giving effect to the same exchange ratio.
In connection with the Business Combination, immediately prior to the closing, (i) Amplitude Healthcare Holdings LLC (the “Sponsor”) forfeited 200,000 shares of AMHC’s Class B Common Stock, (ii) each share of AMHC’s Class B Common Stock outstanding was converted into one share of AMHC’s Class A Common Stock, and (iii) following such conversion, an aggregate of 13,037,901 shares of AMHC’s Class A Common Stock (inclusive of 10,000,000 shares AMHC’s Class A Common Stock that were issued to the PIPE Investors) was converted into an equivalent number of shares of our common stock. In accordance with the Sponsor Support Agreement among us, the Sponsor and Old Jasper, dated May 5, 2021 and amended on September 24, 2021, 1,050,000 shares of our common stock held by the Sponsor were placed in escrow (the “Earnout Shares”) and will be released as follows: (a) 250,000 Earnout Shares will be released if, during the period from and after September 24, 2021 until the September 24, 2024 (the “Earnout Period”), over any twenty trading days within any thirty-day consecutive trading day period, the volume-weighted average price of our common stock (the “Applicable VWAP”) is greater than or equal to $11.50, (b) 500,000 Earnout Shares will be released if, during the Earnout Period, the Applicable VWAP is greater than or equal to $15.00, and (c) 300,000 Earnout Shares will be released if, during the Earnout Period, the Applicable VWAP is greater than or equal to $18.00.
We also have outstanding publicly traded warrants to purchase 4,999,883 shares of our common stock (the “Common Stock Warrants”), all of which were issued in connection with AMHC’s initial public offering, and entitle a holder to purchase one share of our common stock at an exercise price of $11.50 per share. The Common Stock Warrants are publicly traded and exercisable during the exercise period, which commenced on October 24, 2021 and ends on September 24, 2026, unless the Common Stock Warrants are redeemed or we extend the exercise period.
We are authorized to issue 490,000,000 shares of voting common stock, 2,000,000 shares of non-voting common stock, and 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, each with $0.0001 par value per share. There were 36,559,092 shares of voting common stock, 1,296,022 shares of non-voting common stock and no shares of preferred stock issued and outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
Refer to Note 3 in our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further details on the accounting for this transaction.
Amgen License Agreement
On November 21, 2019, we entered into a license agreement with Amgen (the “Amgen License Agreement”) pursuant to which we obtained an exclusive, sublicensable license for certain patents, data, and non-data know-how related to Amgen’s proprietary monoclonal antibody known as AMG191, as renamed to JSP191. Concurrently with the execution of the license agreement, Amgen assigned to us its rights and obligations under the Investigator Sponsored Research Agreement (“ISRA”) previously entered into in June 2013 between Amgen and The Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University (“Stanford”) related to the clinical study of JSP191.
Under the ISRA, we received an option to negotiate a definitive license with Stanford for rights to certain Stanford intellectual property related to the study of JSP191 in exchange for an option exercise fee of $1.0 million, payable over a two-year period (the “Option”). There are no other fees due under the ISRA. We exercised the Option in June 2020, and the definitive license with Stanford was executed in March 2021. Upon exercise of the Option, the $1.0 million option exercise fee was recognized as a research and development cost. In June 2020, we and Stanford agreed that the Investigational New Drug Application (“IND”) and control of the study related to this ISRA would be transferred to us. We paid $0.4 million related to the option exercise fee during each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Unpaid option fees liability of $0.2 million is included in current liabilities as of December 31, 2021.
As consideration for the rights granted to us under the Amgen License Agreement, we issued Amgen 100 shares of Old Jasper’s Series A-2 redeemable convertible preferred stock in November 2019, the fair value of which was estimated at $0.9 million, which was recognized as a research and development expense in the same period. These shares were converted into 2,200,000 shares of voting common stock upon the closing of the Business Combination.
The Amgen License Agreement terminates on the 10-year anniversary of the date on which the exploitation of the licensed products is no longer covered by a valid claim under a licensed patent in such country. On a country-by-country basis, upon the expiration of the term in each country with respect to the licensed products, the licenses granted to us by Amgen become fully paid and non-exclusive. We and Amgen have the right to terminate the agreement for a material breach as specified in the agreement.
Stanford License Agreement
In March 2021, we entered into a license agreement with Stanford (the “Stanford License Agreement”) following the exercise of the Option in June 2020. We received a worldwide, exclusive license with a right to sublicense for JSP191 in the field of depleting endogenous blood stem cells in patients for whom hematopoietic cell transplantation is indicated. Stanford transferred to us certain know-how and patents related to JSP191. Under the terms of the Stanford License Agreement, we agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to develop, manufacture, and sell licensed product and to develop markets for a licensed product. In addition, we agreed to use commercially reasonable efforts to meet the milestones as specified in the agreement over the next six years and must notify Stanford in writing as each milestone is met.
We will pay annual license maintenance fees, beginning on the first anniversary of the effective date of the Stanford License Agreement and ending upon the first commercial sale of a product, method, or service in the licensed field of use, as follows: $25,000 for each first and second year, $35,000 for each third and fourth year, and $50,000 at each anniversary thereafter ending upon the first commercial sale. We are also obligated to pay late stage clinical development milestones and first commercial sales milestone payments of up to $9.0 million in total. We will also pay low single-digit royalties on net sales of licensed products, if approved.
The Stanford License Agreement expires on a country-by-country basis on the last-to-expire valid claim of a licensed patent in such country. We may terminate the agreement by giving Stanford written notice at least 12 months in advance of the effective date of termination. We may also terminate the Stanford License Agreement solely with respect to any particular patent application or patent by giving Stanford written notice at least 60 days in advance of the effective date of termination. Stanford may terminate the Stanford License Agreement after 90 days written notice by Stanford, specifying a problem, including a delinquency on any report required pursuant to the agreement or any payment, missing a milestone or for a material breach, unless we remediate the problem in that 90-day period.
Other collaboration and clinical trial agreements
Collaboration with Stanford University
Effective September 2020, we entered into a sponsored research agreement with Stanford, pursuant to which Stanford will execute a Phase 1/2 clinical trial utilizing JSP191 to treat Fanconi Anemia patients in Bone Marrow Failure requiring allogeneic transplant with non-sibling donors at Stanford Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital. As consideration for the services performed by Stanford under this agreement, we will pay Stanford a total of $0.9 million over approximately three years upon the achievement of the first development and clinical milestone, including FDA filings and patients’ enrollment. As of December 31, 2020, we accrued $0.3 million related to the achievement of the first milestone under this agreement, which was paid in February 2021. In February 2022, the second milestone was achieved, and we accrued an additional $0.3 million. The third milestone is based on the progress of the clinical trials and will be recognized when achieved.
We have other collaboration and clinical trial agreements, including with Zai Lab Limited, Graphite Bio, Aruvant Sciences and Avrobio, to study JSP191 as targeted, non-toxic conditioning for investigational gene therapies. These collaborations are non-exclusive, and we have agreed with these collaborators to provide materials to use by the collaborators in their products’ development studies and clinical studies. We also have a clinical trial agreement with the National Cancer Institute (“NCI”) for the clinical development of JSP191 for the treatment of GATA2 deficiency, whereby NCI will perform the preclinical studies and submit an IND for this indication to the FDA, and we will provide materials to use in such studies.
We have also entered into clinical trial agreements with the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (“NHLBI”) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (“NIAID”), pursuant to which NHLBI and NIAID will serve as the IND sponsors of a Phase 1/2 clinical trial to evaluate JSP191 as a targeted, non-toxic conditioning regimen prior to allogeneic transplant for SCD and for chronic granulomatous disease, respectively. Each party incurs its own costs under these agreements.
In August 2021, we entered into a clinical trial agreement with the National Cancer Institute (“NCI”) for the clinical development of JSP191 for the treatment of GATA2 deficiency. NCI will perform the preclinical studies and submit an IND for this indication to the FDA. We will provide materials to use in such studies.
Components of Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
The largest component of our total operating expenses since our inception has been research and development activities, including the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. Research and development expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits for research and development employees, including stock-based compensation; expenses incurred under agreements with CROs and investigative sites that conduct preclinical and clinical studies; the costs of acquiring and manufacturing clinical study materials and other supplies; payments under licensing and research and development agreements; other outside services and consulting costs; and facilities, information technology and overhead expenses. Research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
External research and development costs include:
● costs incurred under agreements with third-party CROs, CMOs and other third parties that conduct preclinical and clinical activities on our behalf and manufacture our product candidates;
● costs associated with acquiring technology and intellectual property licenses that have no alternative future uses;
● consulting fees associated with our research and development activities; and
● other costs associated with our research and development programs, including laboratory materials and supplies.
Internal research and development costs include:
● employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense for our research and development personnel; and
● other expenses and allocated overheads incurred in connection with our research and development programs.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we advance our product candidates into and through preclinical studies and clinical trials, pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates and expand our pipeline of product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary preclinical and clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The actual probability of success for our product candidates may be affected by a variety of factors, including the safety and efficacy of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical programs, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or if, when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates, if approved.
Our future research and development costs may vary significantly based on factors, such as:
● the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of our discovery and preclinical development activities;
● the costs and timing of our chemistry, manufacturing and controls activities, including fulfilling cGMP-related standards and compliance, and identifying and qualifying suppliers;
● per patient clinical trial costs;
● the number of trials required for approval;
● the number of sites included in our clinical trials;
● the countries in which the trials are conducted;
● delays in adding a sufficient number of trial sites and recruiting suitable patients to participate in our clinical trials;
● the number of patients that participate in the trials;
● the number of doses that patients receive;
● patient drop-out or discontinuation rates;
● potential additional safety monitoring requested by regulatory agencies;
● the duration of patient participation in the trials and follow up;
● the cost and timing of manufacturing our product candidates;
● the phase of development of our product candidates;
● the efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates;
● the timing, receipt, and terms of any approvals from applicable regulatory authorities, including the FDA and non-U.S. regulators;
● maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of our product candidates following approval, if any, of our product candidates;
● significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
● changes in the standard of care on which a clinical development plan was based, which may require new or additional trials;
● the extent to which we establish additional strategic collaborations or other arrangements; and
● the impact of any business interruptions to our operations or to those of the third parties with whom we work, particularly in light of the current COVID-19 pandemic environment.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and expenses, including salaries, employee benefits, stock-based compensation for our executive and other administrative personnel; legal services, including relating to intellectual property and corporate matters; accounting, auditing, consulting and tax services; insurance; and facility and other allocated costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as we anticipate an increase in our personnel headcount to support expansion of research and development activities, as well as to support our operations generally. We also expect an increase in expenses associated with being a public company, including costs related to accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with applicable Nasdaq and SEC requirements; additional director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net includes foreign currency transactions gains and losses, interest income, changes in the fair value of our derivative tranche liabilities, which were settled in February 2021, changes in the fair value of common stock warrant liability and earnout liability, which were recorded at the closing of the Business Combination. These financial instruments were classified as liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets and re-measured at each reporting period end until they are exercised, settled or have expired.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased by $9.5 million, from $15.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $25.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021
External CRO, CMO and other third-party preclinical studies and clinical trials expenses increased by $6.5 million, from $8.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $15.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase is primarily related to an increase in our CRO expenses related to ongoing SCID and MDS/AML clinical trials and increased CMO product development and manufacturing expenses. Expenses related to professional consulting services increased by $0.4 million, from $2.8 million to $3.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The increase related to external consulting incurred to supplement our research and development personnel. Technology and intellectual property license and option expenses of $1.0 million for the year ended December 30, 2020 related to the option exercised under the ISRA with Stanford in June 2020. We did not incur any license expenses in the 2021 period. Other external research and development costs were $0.5 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and include purchases of laboratory materials and supplies, shipping, packaging and labeling and other miscellaneous costs.
Our external costs by program for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows (in thousands):
Employee payroll and related expenses increased by $2.5 million, from $2.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of hiring 9 additional employees in our research and development organization. Stock-based compensation expenses increased by $0.3 million, from $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Facilities and overheads include common facilities, human resources and information technology related expenses allocated to research and development.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expenses increased by $6.6 million, from $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Employee payroll and related expenses increased by $0.6 million, from $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of continued hiring of executives and administrative employees. Expenses related to professional consulting services increased by $4.0 million, from $2.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to significant consulting, legal, audit and accounting services incurred in connection with our increased operating activities and the closing of the Business Combination during the 2021 period as compared to the 2020 period. Rent expense increased by $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to rent expense for year ended December 31, 2020. Other expenses, including insurance, office supplies, subscriptions and other miscellaneous expenses, increased by $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020, as we continued expanding our operations to support our business strategy and product development.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Total other income (expense), net increased by $17.2 million, from $10.9 million net expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $6.2 million net income for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We recognized other expense related to the increase in the fair value of our derivative liability of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to an increase of $10.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This derivative liability was an obligation to issue additional Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred shares in two tranches, which was recorded at fair value and re-measured at each reporting period until it was settled. We settled the first tranche liability in October 2020 and the second tranche liability in February 2021. After that, we ceased to have any such outstanding derivative liability. This derivative liability was measured using the option pricing method by estimating the fair value using the Black-Scholes model. The significant inputs used in the Black-Scholes model include the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock, the risk-free interest rate, the expected volatility and the expected term when each tranche would be settled.
As of December 31, 2021, we have outstanding warrants to purchase an aggregate of 4,999,883 shares of our common stock, which were recognized upon the closing of the Business Combination on September 24, 2021. The warrants were concluded to be derivative financial instruments and are measured at fair value at each reporting period end until these are exercised, have expired or are redeemed. These warrants are publicly traded, and the fair value is estimated using the closing price of a warrant at the period end. We recognized $0.5 million of other income related to the decrease in the fair value of the common stock warrants for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Upon the closing of the Business Combination on September 24, 2021, we recognized earnout liability related to the Sponsor Earnout Shares placed in escrow. These shares will be released from escrow upon achieving agreed upon common stock price targets within the specified period. This liability is recorded at fair value using Monte Carlo simulation model and is re-measured at each period end until shares are released or forfeited. The significant inputs used in the Monte Carlo model include the expected volatility of our common stock and the expected term when shares will be released. We recognized $9.3 million of other income related to the decrease in the fair value of the earnout liability for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of the decrease in our common stock price, which decreased the estimated liability related to the earnout provision.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the closing of the Business Combination, we funded our operations primarily from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock shares and the issuance of convertible promissory notes. We received net cash proceeds of $95.3 million at the closing of the Business Combination, which includes the remaining cash in our trust account after redemptions and the payment of the closing costs and $100.0 million received from the PIPE Investors. As of December 31, 2021, we had $84.7 million of cash and cash equivalents.
Future Funding Requirements
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures related to our programs and, to a lesser extent, general and administrative expenditures. We anticipate that we will continue to incur significant expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue to advance our product candidates, expand our corporate infrastructure, operate as a public company, further our research and development initiatives for our product candidates, scale our laboratory and manufacturing operations, and incur marketing costs associated with potential commercialization. We are subject to all the risks typically related to the development of new drug candidates, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
We have incurred significant losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $67.5 million. Given our recurring losses from operations and negative cash flows, and based on our current operating plan, we have concluded that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the issuance date of these consolidated financial statements. We expect to finance our future cash needs through public or private equity or debt financings, collaborations or a combination of these approaches. The sale of equity or convertible debt securities may result in dilution to our stockholders, and, in the case of preferred equity securities or convertible debt, those securities could provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of our common stock. Debt financings may subject us to covenant limitations or restrictions on our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt or making capital expenditures. Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by negative global economic conditions and any disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide that may result from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic or other factors. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable or acceptable to us. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed or on terms favorable or acceptable to us, we may be forced to delay, reduce the scope of or eliminate one or more of our research and development programs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials, with CMOs for clinical supplies manufacturing and with other vendors for preclinical studies, supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice or may have a potential termination fee if a purchase order is cancelled within a specified time, and therefore are cancelable contracts. We do not expect any such contracts terminations and do not have any non-cancellable obligations under these agreements as of December 31, 2021.
We have contractual obligations and commitments as described in Note 9, Commitments and Contingencies, within our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of the Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Leases
In August 2020, we leased approximately 7,781 square feet of space for our headquarters in Redwood City, California. In January 2022, we amended our lease agreement and added 5,611 square feet, previously leased on a month-to-month basis, to our lease agreement. The lease expires in August 2026. We have an option to extend the term for an additional five years to August 2031. In addition to base rent, we pay our share of operating expenses and taxes. As of December 31, 2021, our rent commitments under the original lease agreement are $0.7 million within the next 12 months from December 31, 2021, and $2.7 million for the remainder of the lease term. We will pay additional monthly rent of $30,860 for the new space with a total commitment of $1.8 million.
Stanford Sponsored Research Agreement
Effective September 2020, we entered into a sponsored research agreement with Stanford for a research program related to the treatment of Fanconi Anemia patients in Bone Marrow Failure requiring allogeneic transplant with non-sibling donors at Stanford Lucile Packard Children’s Hospital (the “Research Project”) using JSP191. As consideration for the services performed by Stanford under this sponsored research agreement, we will pay Stanford a total of $0.9 million over approximately 3 years upon the achievement of development and clinical milestones, including FDA filings and patients’ enrollment. In February 2021, we paid $0.3 million related to the achievement of the first milestone under this agreement. In February 2022, the second milestone was achieved, and at that point we accrued an additional $0.3 million. The third milestone is based on the progress of the clinical trials and will be recognized when achieved.
Stanford License Agreement
In March 2021, we entered into the Stanford License Agreement, pursuant to which we are required to pay annual license maintenance fees, beginning on the first anniversary of the effective date of the agreement and ending upon the first commercial sale of a product, method, or service in the licensed field of use, as follows: $25,000 for each first and second year, $35,000 for each third and fourth year, and $50,000 at each anniversary thereafter ending upon the first commercial sale. We are also obligated to pay late-stage clinical development milestones and first commercial sales milestone payments of up to $9.0 million in total. We will also pay low single-digit royalties on net sales of licensed products. All products are in development as of December 31, 2021, and no such royalties were due as of such date and no milestones were achieved.
Our future financing requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the timing, scope, progress, results and costs of research and development, preclinical and non-clinical studies and clinical trials for our current and future product candidates;
● the number, scope and duration of clinical trials required for regulatory approval of our current and future product candidates;
● the outcome, timing and costs of seeking and obtaining regulatory approvals from the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory authorities for our product candidates, including any requirement to conduct additional studies or generate additional data beyond that which we currently expect would be required to support a marketing application;
● the costs of manufacturing clinical and commercial supplies of our current and future product candidates;
● the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
● any product liability or other lawsuits related to our product candidates;
● the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of any product candidates for which we may receive marketing approval;
● our ability to establish a commercially viable pricing structure and obtain approval for coverage and adequate reimbursement from third-party and government payers;
● the costs to establish, maintain, expand, enforce and defend the scope of our intellectual property portfolio, including the amount and timing of any payments we may be required to make, or that we may receive, in connection with licensing, preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing our patents or other intellectual property rights;
● expenses incurred to attract, hire and retain skilled personnel;
● the costs of operating as a public company; and
● the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, which may exacerbate the magnitude of the factors discussed above.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of our product candidates. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such change.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the periods presented (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $33.7 million and $18.3 million for the years ended December 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to our net loss for the period of $30.6 million adjusted by non-cash net gain charges of $4.7 million and a net change of $1.6 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of $6.3 million net gain related to the changes in fair value of a derivative liability, common stock warrant liability and the earnout liability, reduced by non-cash expenses, which included $1.0 million related to stock-based compensation expense, $0.4 million related to depreciation and amortization expense and $0.2 million related to non-cash lease expense. The changes in our net operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to an increase of $2.9 million in accounts payable due to the timing of payments to our vendors, an increase of $1.0 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities and a decrease of $0.6 million in other receivables, partially offset by $2.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets, a $0.3 million increase in other non-current assets, a decrease in other non-current liabilities of $0.2 million and a decrease in operating lease liability of $0.1 million.
Cash used in operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to our net loss for the year of $31.7 million adjusted by non-cash charges of $12.1 million and a net change of $1.3 million in our net operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consisted of $10.9 million related to changes in the fair value of the derivative tranche liabilities and $1.2 million related to stock-based compensation expense. The changes in our net operating assets and liabilities were primarily due to an increase of $1.2 million in accrued expenses and other current liabilities, an increase of $0.4 million in accounts payable, an increase of $0.3 million in other non-current assets, an increase of $0.2 million in other non-current liabilities, and an increase of $0.2 million in prepaid expenses, as we expanded our operations, started clinical trials and increased our research and development activities during 2020.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.4 million, which primarily consisted of purchases of the lab equipment and leasehold improvements.
We did not have cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $101.0 million, which consisted of $95.3 million net cash proceeds received at the closing of the Business Combination, which included the PIPE Financing, $10.8 million net proceeds received in February 2021 upon the issuance of Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock shares and $0.2 million of cash received from the exercise of stock options. Cash received was reduced by $5.3 million related to expenses paid by us related to the Business Combination.
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $11.3 million, which consisted primarily of net proceeds from the issuance of Series A-1 redeemable convertible preferred stock shares upon the settlement of the first tranche liability.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our critical accounting policies are disclosed in Note 2 of the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We have entered into various agreements with outsourced vendors, including CROs and CMOs. Research and development expenses are recognized as services are performed and as costs occur. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrual balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accruals. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different than the actual amounts incurred, such estimates for the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any one period. Our accrual is dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs, CMOs, and other third-party vendors. Variations in the assumptions used to estimate accruals including, but not limited to, the number of patients enrolled, the rate of patient enrollment and the actual services performed, may vary from our estimates, resulting in adjustments to clinical trial expenses in future periods. Payments made under these arrangements in advance of the performance of the related services are recorded as prepaid expenses and other current assets until the services are rendered. To date, there have been no material differences between estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Contingent Earnout Liability
Upon the closing of the Business Combination, we recognized Sponsor Earnout Shares placed in escrow as a contingent earnout liability. These contingently issuable shares are classified as a liability on the balance sheets and are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and at the settlement date. Any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We utilize the Monte Carlo simulation model, which uses a distribution of potential outcomes on a monthly basis over the earnout period prioritizing the most reliable information available. The assumptions utilized in the calculation are based on the achievement of certain stock price milestones, including our current common stock price, expected volatility, risk-free rate and expected term. We determine expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of the prices of shares of common stock of publicly traded peer companies. We estimate the risk-free interest rate by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve over the expected term. The expected term equals the remaining contractual term of the escrow, which ends on September 24, 2024. Common stock fair value equals the closing price of our common stock on the Nasdaq Capital Market at the valuation date. An increase or decrease in the common stock fair value and volatility assumptions will significantly increase or decrease the recorded liability, respectively.
At the closing of the Business Combination, the estimated fair value of the earnout liability was $15.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we estimated the fair value of the contingent earnout liability to be $5.7 million. We recognized $9.3 million of other income related to the decrease in the fair value of the earnout liability for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of the decrease in our common stock price, which decreased the estimated liability.
Derivative Tranche Liability
We determined that the obligation to issue additional shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock upon the occurrence of certain events, including a certain threshold number of patients being enrolled in clinical trials, or our Board’s consent, represents a freestanding financial instrument. The instrument is classified as a liability on the balance sheets and is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date and at the settlement date. Any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
We utilize the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which incorporates assumptions and estimates, to value redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability. On a quarterly basis, we assess these assumptions and estimates as additional information impacting the assumptions is obtained. Estimates and assumptions impacting the fair value measurement include the fair value of the preferred stock, the expected term when the tranche liability will be settled, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield.
We determine the fair value per share of the underlying preferred stock by taking into consideration our most recent sales of our preferred stock as well as additional factors that we deem relevant. We were a private company and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information of our stock. Therefore, we determined expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of the prices of shares of common stock of publicly-traded peer companies. We estimate the risk-free interest rate by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve for time periods approximately equal to the remaining contractual term of the outstanding tranche liability. We have assumed a 0% dividend considering that our Board has no history of declaring dividends and does not intend to declare any.
As of December 31, 2020, we had outstanding tranche liability of $8.2 million. The tranche liability was settled in February 2021.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based awards made to employees and non-employees based on the estimated fair values of the awards as of the grant dates using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The model requires management to make a number of assumptions including common stock fair value, expected volatility, expected term, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield.
Expected Volatility - Expected volatility is estimated by studying the volatility of the prices of shares of common stock of comparable public companies for similar terms.
Expected Term - Expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding and is determined using the simplified method.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issued in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of the option.
Expected Dividend - The Black-Scholes valuation model calls for a single expected dividend yield as an input. To date, we have not declared or paid any dividends.
We recognized stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is the period in which the related services are received. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The expense for stock-based awards with performance conditions is recognized when it is probable that a performance condition is met during the vesting period.
We recorded stock-based compensation expense of $1.0 million and $1.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, there was $1.5 million of total unrecognized compensation expense, which we expect to recognize over a remaining weighted-average period of 2.6 years. We expect to continue to grant equity-based awards in the future, and to the extent that we do, our stock-based compensation expense recognized in future periods will likely increase.
Fair Value of Common Stock and Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
Prior to the closing of the Business Combination, we determined the fair value of our common stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock using methodologies, approaches and assumptions consistent with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Our management’s approach to estimate the fair value considered a number of objective and subjective factors, including: valuations of our common stock performed with the assistance of independent third-party valuation specialists; our stage of development and business strategy, including the status of research and development efforts and the material risks relating to the business and industry; our results of operations and financial position, including levels of available capital resources; the valuation of publicly traded companies in the life sciences and biotechnology sectors, as well as recently completed mergers and acquisitions of peer companies; the lack of marketability of our common stock; the prices of convertible preferred shares sold to investors in arm’s length transactions; the rights, preferences and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; and the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for the holders of our common and redeemable convertible preferred stock, such as an initial public offering or a sale, given prevailing market conditions.
We do not have any outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock after the closing of the Business Combination. We estimate the fair value of our common stock based on the closing quoted market price of our common stock as reported on the Nasdaq Capital Market.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the consolidated financial statements or tax returns. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the consolidated financial statements and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse.
In evaluating the ability to recover our deferred income tax assets, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including our operating results, ongoing tax planning, and forecasts of future taxable income on a jurisdiction-by-jurisdiction basis. In the event we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred income tax assets in the future in excess of their net recorded amount, we would make an adjustment to the valuation allowance that would reduce the provision for income taxes. Conversely, if all or part of the net deferred tax assets are determined not to be realizable in the future, an adjustment to the valuation allowance would be charged to the provision of income taxes in the period when such determination is made. As of December 31, 2021, we recorded a full valuation allowance on the deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $53.1 million and $45.4 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any, for both federal and state income tax purposes, respectively. The federal net operating loss carryforwards do not expire, and the state net operating loss carryforwards begin expiring in 2038. As of December 31, 2021, we had research and development credit carryforwards of approximately $1.3 million and $1.0 million available to reduce future taxable income, if any, for both federal and California state income tax purposes, respectively. The federal research and development credit carryforwards begin expiring in 2040, and the California credits carryforward indefinitely.
On March 27, 2020, the President of the United States signed into law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The CARES Act, among other things, includes certain income tax provisions for individuals and corporations; however, these benefits do not impact our current tax provision.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as amended, registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”)) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have opted to take advantage of the exemption for complying with new or revised accounting standards within the same time periods as private companies, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our consolidated financial statements with another public company that is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company that has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following November 22, 2024, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common equity that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of its most recently completed second fiscal quarter; and (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.00 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period. References herein to “emerging growth company” have the meaning associated with it in the JOBS Act.