ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This annually report contains forward-looking statements. These statements relate to future events or our future financial performance. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may”, “should”, “expects”, “plans”, “anticipates”, “believes”, “estimates”, “predicts”, “potential” or “continue” or the negative of these terms or other comparable terminology. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our or our industry’s actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. Although we believe that the expectations reflected in the forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot guarantee future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements. Except as required by applicable law, including the securities laws of the United States, we do not intend to update any of the forward-looking statements to conform these statements to actual results.
Our unaudited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars (US$) and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annually report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed below and elsewhere in this annually report.
In this annually report, unless otherwise specified, all dollar amounts are expressed in United States dollars and all references to “common shares” refer to the common shares in our capital stock.
As used in this annually report and unless otherwise indicated, the terms “we”, “us”, “our”, “JUPW” and the “Company” mean Jupiter Wellness, Inc.
Company Overview
We were originally incorporated in the State of Delaware on October 24, 2018. Our principal business address is 725 N. Hwy A1A, Suite C-106, Jupiter, FL 33477.
Jupiter Wellness, Inc. is a cutting-edge developer of cannabidiol (CBD) based medical therapeutics and wellness products. The Company’s clinical pipeline of prescription CBD-enhanced skin care therapeutics address indications including eczema, burns, herpes cold sores, and skin cancer. We are in the early stage of manufacturing, distributing, and marketing a diverse line of consumer products infused with CBD. We have a proprietary, line of products: CaniSun, CaniSkin and CaniDermRX. Under the CaniSun brand, we are marketing patent pending CBD-infused sun care lotion formulas containing various sun protection factors, or SPFs. In addition, we are exploring the use of CBD with other prescription and/or over-the-counter, or OTC, consumer products that have potentially therapeutic and medical applications. Specifically, we are exploring the use of such topical solutions for the treatment of eczema, dermatitis (JW-100), and actinic keratosis (JW-_100), a non-prescription lotion/lip balm (JW-200) for the treatment of symptoms of cold sores, and a prescription product for the treatment of burns (JW-101). The CaniDermRX (JW-100) topical solution for the treatment of eczema dermatitis is the lead product candidate and will be further tested in humans as an investigational cosmetic ingredient followed by clinical trials subject to the regulations of the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) under an investigational new drug, or IND, application.
In February 2021, we announced the results of our novel Cannabidiol-Aspartame combination treatment JW-100 clinical trial which has shown it significantly Reduces ISGA Score in Eczema patients. A double blinded placebo controlled interventional study was conducted. Subjects were assigned to apply, at home, one of three treatments: JW-100 (a CBD and aspartame combination topical formulation), a CBD only topical formulation, or a placebo topical formulation. After 14 days, the average reduction in the Investigators Static Global Assessment (ISGA) score was calculated for each group. Additionally, the proportion of subjects achieving (ISGA) score 0 (clear) or 1 (almost clear) with at least 2 grade improvement from baseline was recorded for each arm of the study. 50% of subjects in the JW-100 arm achieved ISGA clear or almost clear (1 or 2) with at least a 2-grade improvement from baseline after treatment versus 20% and 15% in the CBD-only and placebo arms, respectively. The percentage of subjects achieving clear or almost clear with at least a 2-grade improvement from baseline was found to be statistically significant (p=0.028). JW-100, a novel topical formulation containing CBD and aspartame, was shown to significantly reduce ISGA score in atopic dermatitis patients after two weeks of use. The combination of CBD and aspartame was more effective at reducing ISGA scores than CBD alone. In parallel, we plan to initiate the development of other products. We originally anticipated developmental studies to be completed in 2020, however, these studies were delayed due to COVID-19. We are also actively seeking to acquire or license products in the OTC skin care market that can be infused with CBD and marketed under our CaniSkin and CaniDermRX brand names. There can be no assurances that we will acquire or enter into such partnership or licensing agreements.
In November 2021, Jupiter Wellness received an official written response from a Type B pre-Investigational New Drug (IND) meeting with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for JW-100, a topical drug the treatment of eczema. The main purpose of the pre-IND meeting was to evaluate the drug development plan for JW-100. Jupiter Wellness believes that the written response from the FDA supports the Company’s approach and its overall drug development strategy to enable the filing of an IND for its clinical studies on JW-100.
On November 16, 2021, Jupiter Wellness announced the results of a double-blinded placebo controlled clinical trial on JW-300 showing efficacy for the treatment of developing burns (sunburn).
The endocannabinoid system, which is a body system affected by CBD, plays a pivotal role in maintaining a healthy skin through modulating pain sensation, cell proliferation and inflammation. Our strategy for treatment of skin indications is, therefore, to focus on the use of CBD containing topical formulations and to explore potential combinations of CBD and other agents that may augment and act synergistically with CBD. We will explore this strategy by conducting controlled clinical trials to try to ultimately gain FDA approval for specific indications.
On November 30, 2020 the Company acquired SRM Entertainment, Limited, a Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China limited company (“SRM”). SRM has relationships with and supplies the amusement park industry with exclusive products that are often only available to consumers inside the relevant amusement park, entertainment venues and theme hotels in Orlando Florida, Beijing China, Japan and other places throughout the worldwide theme park industry.
CaniSun Brand
Under our CaniSun Brand, we developed a patent pending CBD-infused sunscreen with broad-spectrum SPF protection. We have completed lab testing for CBD solubility-infusing clear, colorless, odorless, and 99.5% pure CBD isolate with three different sun care active ingredients, homosalate, octisalate and octocrylene, which have already been approved by the FDA. The CBD-infused sun care market is fairly nascent in the United States; we believe that there are currently no major competitors in the category. We see an opportunity to become the leading manufacturer of CBD-infused sun care products, marketing the CaniSun brand through an extensive digital and social media awareness campaign. We announced the launch of our CaniSun sun care line of SPF 30, SPF 55 and SPF 50 face lotion on June 6, 2019. We also sell our CBD-infused lip balm and CBD-infused SPF 30 sunscreen spray on our website Canisun.com.
We currently have additional CaniSun products in various stages of development as follows:
i) CBD-infused SPF 30 Lip Balm, Peppermint and Acai Fragrance
ii) CBD-infused SPF 15 sunscreen daily lotion; and
iii) Mineral-based sunscreen lotions (SPF 30 and 50).
All of the products listed above are in the developmental stage, whereby we are finalizing the formula to be used in each product, respectively. For CBD-infused product candidates in development, such as our CBD-infused SPF 30 Lip Balm and CBD-infused SPF 15 sunscreen lotion, we have already identified the sun care active ingredient formula (which has already been FDA approved) to be infused with CBD. Once the respective formulas for each of our product candidates are created, the product candidates will undergo three months of stability testing. Provided that the product candidates pass the stability testing, we intend to sell the products on our CaniSun website. The formula for our mineral-based sunscreen lotion (SPF 30 and 50) (product iii) above) includes certain minerals instead of chemicals typically used in sunscreen lotions.
Overall, we believe that our currently offered sunscreen products comply with the FDA Final Rule for sunscreen products under 21 CFR 352 Sunscreen products for Over-the-Counter Human Use. Therefore, we believe that our sunscreen products fall within the FDA monograph. and that FDA premarket approval and testing is not required. Our products have been tested for SPF Evaluation (SPF rating), Critical Wave Length (Broad Spectrum claim) and Water Resistance, each of which is defined within the monograph and labeled accordingly.
All of the testing on these products is standard testing for suncare products. Such testing protocols are not intended to test for any effects of adding CBD. In addition to these tests that were conducted to support the claims on the package, each batch is also tested for appearance, color, odor, pH, viscosity, specific gravity, analytical for the sunscreen active ingredients, and microbial content testing.
Our products are tested each time they are manufactured. DCR Labs manufactures our products and has represented to us that it is compliant with the FDA’s Current Good Manufacturing Practice, or CGMP, regulations in accordance with 21 CFR 210/211 required for Over-the-Counter drug products. DCR Labs has self-imposed health and safety standards to ensure compliance with the FDA’s CGMPs.
We expect to continually update and expand upon our corporate website and further refine our online retail strategies on an ongoing basis. JupiterWellness.com is our primary corporate website, which will serve as the primary source of information about us for investors and contain press releases, clinical trial pipeline, lab reports, blog posts, and additional information about each of our brands. We anticipate that each brand will have its own front-facing website dedicated to retail sales and brand specific information. For example, our line of sun care products, CaniSun, has its own website at CaniSun.com and allows for online retail purchase of the entire product line. As we expand our brands (CaniSkin and CaniDermRX), we anticipate utilizing the same strategy and dedicating a new e-commerce website to each brand moving forward. We are also building a website dedicated to servicing our wholesale and larger distributor clients. This website will have more information about each product and provide a central location for larger retailers to find more in-depth information about all of our brands in one place.
We plan to leverage our websites with a social media presence across multiple platforms designed to utilize product reviews to increase brand loyalty, brand recognition and sales. The references to our website in this prospectus are inactive textual references only. The information on our website is neither incorporated by reference into this prospectus nor intended to be used in connection with this offering. We also see growth potential in developing retail locations. We intend to utilize cross-promotion marketing campaigns with our products and product category expansion that leverages our existing distribution channels. We have built an e-commerce platform designed to connect us directly to consumers. We use the platform to sell products, educate customers and build brand loyalty.
CaniSkin Brand and CaniDermRX Brand
We are currently developing other products such as CBD-infused skin care lotion under the CaniSkin brand. Specifically, a CBD-infused moisturizing face serum is under development. We must first finalize the formula to be used in the face serum, and, once approved, the product candidate will undergo stability testing. We intend to sell the product, provided it first passes stability testing, on our website for CaniSkin products. Additionally, we are developing innovative dermatological treatments under the CaniDermRX brand that are specialized to treat atopic dermatitis and other dermatological conditions such as burns, skin cancer and herpes cold sores, respectively. Subject to obtaining FDA approval, we intend for our experimental-stage product for the treatment of atopic dermatitis to compete with Dupixent, an FDA-approved product for treating atopic dermatitis, and for our experimental-stage product for the treatment of herpes cold sores to compete with Silvadene and Abreva, FDA-approved products for treating herpes cold sores. These products require more extensive testing to show both safety and efficacy.
In addition, we plan to seek acquisition opportunities in the branded consumer products space, including but not limited to other OTC therapeutic brands and skin care brands that can be developed, manufactured, marketed and distributed under our CaniSkin and CaniDermRX brand names.
We filed a provisional patent number 62/884,955 on 08/09/2019 on an Aspartame/CBD combination and intend to develop products containing a combination of CBD and Aspartame under the CaniDermRX name for the treatment of pain and inflammation. On February 11, 2021, the US Patent Published our US Patent Application 20210038513 and on April 5, 2021 we filed the International filing through PCT Application PCT/US 2020/045408. On April 6, 2021, we filed a PCT Application No.: PCT/US2021/025947* on CBD sunscreens.
We believe that our CaniDermRX product candidates have the potential to treat many skin indications such as atopic dermatitis, pruritis-itch, non-atopic dermatitis/eczema, psoriasis, dermatomyositis, scleroderma, seborrheic dermatitis, actinic keratosis, epidermolysis bullosa and cutaneous neoplasias. Aspartame is a rigorously tested food ingredient. Reviews by major governmental regulatory bodies have previously found the ingredient safe for consumption at higher levels than we contemplate using in our CaniDermRX product candidates. We believe that our formulations that include Aspartame, such as topical crème, lip balm, powder and dog treats, are well-tolerated by, and safe for, users. We believe that infusing CBD in our products may help alleviate irritation that may be caused by applying sun care products and may lead to reduced inflammation. In human skin, receptors of the endocannabinoid system are found in differentiated keratinocytes, hair follicle cells, sebaceous glands, immune cells, and sensory neurons. Activation of cannabinoid receptor type 2, or CB2, for which CBD is a ligand receptor in these cells has been shown to reduce pain and itch sensation, regulate keratinocyte differentiation and proliferation, decrease hair follicle growth, and modulate the release of damage-induced keratins and inflammatory mediators to control the homeostasis of the skin environment..
SRM Acquisition
On November 30, 2020, we entered into and closed the Exchange Agreement with SRM, a Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People’s Republic of China limited company and wholly owned subsidiary of Vinco, and SRM Shareholders, pursuant to which we acquired 100% of the SRM Common Stock from the SRM Shareholders in exchange for 200,000 shares of the Company’s common stock, the resale of which is subject to a leak out provision and escrow of 50,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. Upon closing, and pursuant to the Exchange Agreement, the Company delivered the 150,000 shares of its common stock to SRM and placed 50,000 shares in escrow (“Escrow Shares”). Pursuant to the Exchange Agreement, the Company shall release the Escrow Shares upon SRM generating $200,000 in cash receipts and revenue prior to January 15, 2021. The Escrow shares have not been released as of the date hereof. Pursuant to the Exchange Agreement, the Company assumed all of the financial obligations of SRM, as well as its employees and offices. As a result of the Exchange Agreement, SRM became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
SRM has relationships with and supplies the amusement park industry with exclusive products such as toys, lights, fans and other items that are sold in amusement parks. SRM has developed, manufactured and supplied the amusement park industry with exclusive products that are often only available to consumers inside the relevant amusement park, entertainment venues and theme hotels in Orlando Florida, Beijing China, Japan and other places throughout the worldwide theme park industry. . SRM has developed unique products in conjunction with suppliers of products for core licensed items for major well-known brands, themes, characters and movies.
Products developed by SRM are generally shipped directly to the theme park without warehousing at the Company’s facilities. SRM does not have long-term agreements with its customers, and instead develops products on an item-by-item basis subject to purchase orders from its customers.
Through SRM, we additionally intend to seek to sell our sun care products in the amusement parks. We are currently developing a line of non-CBD infused sun care products for sale in the amusement parks.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our unaudited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles, or U.S. GAAP, and the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission. The preparation of the financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported revenue generated, and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and any such differences may be material. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“US GAAP”) and are expressed in United States Dollars. Significant accounting policies are summarized below:
Revenue Recognition
The Company generates its revenue from the sale of its products directly to the end user or distributor (collectively the “customer”).
The Company recognizes revenues by applying the following steps in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Codification 606 “Revenue from Contracts with Customers” (“ASC 606”). Under ASC 606, revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services are transferred to a customer, in an amount that reflects the consideration that the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The Company applies the following five steps in order to determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized as it fulfills its obligations under each of its agreements:
● identify the contract with a customer;
● identify the performance obligations in the contract;
● determine the transaction price;
● allocate the transaction price to performance obligations in the contract; and
● recognize revenue as the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company’s performance obligations are satisfied when goods or products are shipped on an FOB shipping point basis as title passes when shipped. Our product is generally paid in advance of shipment or standard net 30 days and we offer no specific right of return, refund or warranty related to our products except for cases of defective products of which there have been none to date.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market. The Company periodically reviews the value of items in inventory and provides write-downs or write-offs of inventory based on its assessment of market conditions. Write-downs and write-offs are charged to cost of goods sold. Inventory is based upon the average cost method of accounting.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate long-lived assets (including intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable. An asset is considered impaired if its carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted future net cash flow the asset is expected to generate.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill is tested for impairment at a minimum on an annual basis. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level by first performing a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment, then the reporting unit’s carrying value is compared to its fair value. The fair values of the reporting units are estimated using market and discounted cash flow approaches. Goodwill is considered impaired if the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its fair value. The discounted cash flow approach uses expected future operating results. Failure to achieve these expected results may cause a future impairment of goodwill at the reporting unit.
Intangible assets consist of patents and trademarks, purchased customer contracts, purchased customer and merchant relationships, purchased trade names, purchased technology, and non-compete agreements. Intangible assets are amortized over the period of estimated benefit using the straight-line method and estimated useful lives ranging from one to twenty years. No significant residual value is estimated for intangible assets. We evaluate long-lived assets (including intangible assets) for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable. An asset is considered impaired if its carrying amount exceeds the undiscounted future net cash flow the asset is expected to generate.
Investments Held-to-Maturity
Investments that the Company’s management has the “positive intent and ability” to hold through maturity are classified and accounted for as hold-to-maturity investments (“HTM”). HTM investments are carried at amortized cost in the financial statements. For investments classified as HTM, no unrealized gains and losses will be recognized in financial statements.
Segment Reporting
The Company has two reportable segments: (i) sales and development of cannabidiol (CBD) based skin care and therapeutic products and (ii) sales of merchandise sold to theme parks.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed pursuant to section 260-10-45 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification. Basic net income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. If applicable, diluted earnings per share assume the conversion, exercise or issuance of all common stock instruments such as options, warrants, convertible securities and preferred stock, unless the effect is to reduce a loss or increase earnings per share. Warrants are not considered in the calculations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as the impact of the potential common shares would be to decrease the loss per share.
Cash
We consider all short-term investments with a maturity of three months or less when purchased to be cash and equivalents for purposes of the statement of cash flows. There were no cash equivalents as December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Foreign Currency Translation
Assets and liabilities in foreign currencies are translated using the exchange rate at the balance sheet date, while revenue and expense accounts are translated at the average exchange rates prevailing during the period. Equity accounts are translated at historical exchange rates. Gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and translation for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2010 and the cumulative translation gains and losses as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 were not material.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are generated from sales of the Company’s products. The Company provides an allowance for doubtful collections, which is based upon a review of outstanding receivables, historical collection information, and existing economic conditions. As of December 31, 2020 the Company recorded an allowance of $118,761 against accounts receivable acquired in connection with the acquisition of SRM Entertainment and as of December 31, 2021, the Company had recognized no additional allowance for doubtful collections.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The fair value of our assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under ASC Topic 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures,” approximates the carrying amounts represented in the accompanying balance sheet, primarily due to their short-term nature.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under ASC 740 Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). ASC 740 requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for both the expected impact of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for the expected future tax benefit to be derived from tax loss and tax credit carry forwards. ASC 740 additionally requires a valuation allowance to be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of deferred tax assets will not be realized.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in an enterprise’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more-likely-than-not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim period, disclosure and transition. Based on our evaluation, it has been concluded that there are no significant uncertain tax positions requiring recognition in our financial statements. Since we were incorporated on October 24, 2018, the evaluation was performed for 2018 tax year, which would be the only period subject to examination. We believe that our income tax positions and deductions would be sustained on audit and does not anticipate any adjustments that would result in a material changes to our financial position. Our policy for recording interest and penalties associated with audits is to record such items as a component of income tax expense.
The Company’s deferred tax asset at December 31, 2021 consists of net operating loss carry forwards calculated using federal and state effective tax rates equating to approximately $4,865,890 less a valuation allowance in the amount of approximately $4,865,890. Because of the Company’s lack of earnings history, the deferred tax asset has been fully offset by a valuation allowance in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and Development
The Company accounts for research and development costs in accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification subtopic 730-10, Research and Development (“ASC 730-10”). Under ASC 730-10, all research and development costs must be charged to expense as incurred. Accordingly, internal research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Third-party research and developments costs are expensed when the contracted work has been performed or as milestone results have been achieved. Company-sponsored research and development costs related to both present and future products are expensed in the period incurred. The Company incurred research and development expenses of $1,079,362 and $308,367 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Stock Based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs to employees under FASB Accounting Standards Codification 718 “Compensation - Stock Compensation” (“ASC 718”). Under ASC 718, companies are required to measure the compensation costs of share-based compensation arrangements based on the grant-date fair value and recognize the costs in the financial statements over the period during which employees are required to provide services. Share based compensation arrangements include stock options and warrants. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at their fair value. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the option grant.
On October 24, 2018, the inception date (“Inception”), we adopted ASU No. 2018-07 “Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting.” These amendments expand the scope of Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (which currently only includes share-based payments to employees) to include share-based payments issued to nonemployees for goods or services. Consequently, the accounting for share-based payments to nonemployees and employees will be substantially aligned.
The value of common stock issued or payable from Inception through December 31, 2020 were based upon the last sales price of our common stock to a third party. From January through September 2019, we had multiple sales of common stock at $0.25 per share. From September through October 2020, we sold our stock at $1.00 per share. Issuances and grants throughout 2019 and through October 2020 were all based upon the last sales price for sales of our stock for cash to third parties. All sales subsequent to October 2020 use our closing share price on the Nasdaq exchange as a basis for valuing our stock grants.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-07, which simplifies the accounting for nonemployee share-based payment transactions. The amendments specify that Topic 718 applies to all share-based payment transactions in which a grantor acquires goods or services to be used or consumed in a grantor’s own operations by issuing share-based payment awards. The Company has adopted this standard beginning January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and financial statement disclosures.
In February 2016, Topic 842, “Leases” was issued to replace the leases requirements in Topic 840, “Leases”. The main difference between previous GAAP and Topic 842 is the recognition of lease assets and lease liabilities by lessees for those leases classified as operating leases under previous GAAP. A lessee should recognize in the balance sheet a liability to make lease payments (the lease liability) and a right-of-use asset representing its right to use the underlying asset for the lease term. For leases with a term of 12 months or less, a lessee is permitted to make an accounting policy election by class of underlying asset not to recognize lease assets and lease liabilities. If a lessee makes this election, it should recognize lease expense for such leases generally on a straight-line basis over the lease term. The accounting applied by a lessor is largely unchanged from that applied under previous GAAP. Topic 842 will be effective for annual reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018, including interim periods within those annual periods and is to be retrospectively applied. The Company has adopted this standard beginning January 1, 2019. The adoption of this standard did not have a significant impact on our results of operations, financial condition, cash flows, and financial statement disclosures.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Results of Operations
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides selected financial data about us for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenues
We generated $2,876,273 in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,065,665 revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. The large increase is due to the Company having more nominal-like operations during 2021. In 2020, Covid had a negative impact on the revenues of the Company with the closure of beached and theme parks and which did not start opening until the end of the first quarter 2021..
Operating Expenses
We had total operating expenses of $28,635,730 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6,730,300 for the year ended December 31,2019.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaling $28,635,730 were in connection with our daily operations as follows: (i) marketing expenses of $522,893; (ii) research and development of $1,079,362 which included clinical trials; (iii) legal and professional expenses of $3,098,137 primarily for due diligence and legal work on two proposed mergers, along with corporate advisory services, registration statement preparation fees, general corporate governance fees; (iv) rent of $88,829; (v) depreciation and amortization of $187,917; (vi) general and administrative expenses of $2,941,550, consisting of payroll and related taxes, travel, meals and entertainment, office supplies and expense and other normal office and administration expenses; (vii) stock based compensation of $9,387,963 consisting primarily of the fair value of options and warrants; (viii) an impairment to a promissory note of $10,000,000; (ix) an impairment to intellectual Property of $300,000; (x) net interest expense of $1,728,783, which includes $1,446,530 fair value of warrants and (xi) net other income of $699,704, which includes a $669,200 gain from an Omnibus Settlement relating to Magical Beasts Acquidition.
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 were in connection with our daily operations as follows: (i) marketing expenses of $82,367; (ii) research and development of $308,367; (iii) legal and professional expenses of $837,698, consisting of corporate advisory services, registration statement preparation fees, general corporate governance fees; (iv) rent of $61,797; (v) depreciation and amortization of $103,392; (vi) general and administrative expenses of $1,784,456, consisting of payroll and related taxes, travel, meals and entertainment, office supplies and expense and other normal office and administration expenses; (vii) stock based compensation of $2,398,140; (viii) an impairment to Goodwill of $308,690; (ix) an impairment to Intangible Assets of $731,628 and (x) net interest expense of $113,765.
Income/Losses
Net losses were $28,100,245 and $6,289,205 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Impact of Inflation
We believe that inflation has had a negligible effect on operations since inception. We believe that we can offset inflationary increases in the cost of operations by increasing sales and improving operating efficiencies.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “variable interest entities.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company is in commercialization mode, while continuing to pursue the development of its next generation products as well as new products that are being developed.
We generally require cash to:
● launch sales initiatives,
● fund our operations and working capital requirements,
● develop and execute our product development and market introduction plans,
● fund research and development efforts, and
● pay any expense obligations as they come due.