ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
THREE-YEAR FINANCIAL SUMMARY
(Dollars in thousands, except share and per share data)
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
The information contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K contains forward looking statements (as such term is defined in the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and the regulations thereunder). These forward-looking statements may include projections of, or guidance on, the Corporation’s future financial performance, expected levels of future expenses, including future credit losses, anticipated growth strategies, descriptions of new business initiatives and anticipated trends in the Corporation’s business or financial results. When words such as "may”, "should”, "will”, "could”, "estimates”, "predicts”, "potential”, "continue”, "anticipates”, "believes”, "plans”, "expects”, "future”, "intends”, “projects”, the negative of these terms and other comparable terminology are used in this release, Juniata is making forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statement made by us in this document is based only on Juniata’s current expectations, estimates and projections about future events and financial trends affecting the financial condition of its business based on information currently available to us and speaks only as of the date when made. Juniata undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise forward looking information, whether as a result of new or updated information, future events, or otherwise. Forward-looking statements are not historical facts or guarantees of future performance. Because forward-looking statements relate to the future, they are subject to inherent uncertainties, risks and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict and many of which are outside of the Corporation’s control, and actual results may differ materially from this forward-looking information. Therefore, you should not unduly rely on any of these forward-looking statements. Many factors could cause our actual results and financial condition to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements, including, without limitation:
● the impact of adverse changes in the economy and real estate markets, including protracted periods of low-growth and sluggish loan demand;
● the effect of market interest rates and uncertainties, and relative balances of rate-sensitive assets to rate-sensitive liabilities, on net interest margin and net interest income;
● the effect of competition on rates of deposit and loan growth and net interest margin;
● increases in non-performing assets, which may result in increases in the allowance for credit losses, loan charge-offs and elevated collection and carrying costs related to such non-performing assets;
● other income growth, including the impact of regulatory changes which have reduced debit card interchange revenue;
● investment securities gains and losses, including other than temporary declines in the value of securities which may result in charges to earnings;
● the effects of changes in the applicable federal income tax rate;
● the level of other expenses, including salaries and employee benefit expenses;
● the impact of increased regulatory scrutiny of the banking industry;
● the impact of governmental monetary and fiscal policies, as well as legislative and regulatory changes;
● the results of regulatory examination and supervision processes;
● the failure of assumptions underlying the establishment of reserves for loan and lease losses, and estimates of collateral values and various financial assets and liabilities;
● the increasing time and expense associated with regulatory compliance and risk management;
● the ability to implement business strategies, including business acquisition activities and organic branch, product, and service expansion strategies;
● capital and liquidity strategies, including the impact of the capital and liquidity requirements modified by the Basel III standards;
● the effects of changes in accounting policies, standards, and interpretations on the presentation in the Company’s consolidated balance sheets and consolidated statements of income;
● the Company’s failure to identify and address cyber-security risks;
● the Company’s ability to keep pace with technological changes;
● the Company’s ability to attract and retain talented personnel;
● the Company’s reliance on its subsidiary for substantially all of its revenues and its ability to pay dividends;
● acts of war or terrorism;
● disruptions due to flooding, severe weather or other natural disasters;
● failure of third-party service providers to perform their contractual obligations; and
● the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, actions taken by governmental authorities in response to the pandemic and the direct and indirect impacts of the pandemic on the Company, its customers and third parties.
OVERVIEW
This discussion relates to Juniata Valley Financial Corp. (the “Company” or “Juniata”) and its wholly owned subsidiary, The Juniata Valley Bank (the “Bank”). Juniata is a bank holding company that delivers financial services within its market, primarily central and northern Pennsylvania. The Bank provides retail and commercial banking, trust, estate, and wealth management services through 16 branch offices in Juniata, Mifflin, Perry, Huntingdon, McKean, Potter and Centre Counties.
The overview is intended to provide a context for the following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements, including the notes thereto, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have attempted to identify the most important matters on which our management focuses in evaluating our financial condition and operating performance and the short-term and long-term opportunities, challenges and risks (including material trends and uncertainties) which we face. We also discuss the actions we are taking to address these opportunities, challenges and risks. The Overview is not intended as a summary of, or a substitute for review of, Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
ECONOMIC AND INDUSTRY-WIDE FACTORS RELEVANT TO JUNIATA
As a financial services organization, Juniata’s core business is most influenced by the level of, and movement of, interest rates. Lending and investing are done daily, using funding from deposits and borrowings, resulting in net interest income, the most significant portion of operating results. Using asset/liability management tools, the Company continually evaluates the effects that possible changes in interest rates could have on operating results and balance sheet growth. Using this information, along with analysis of competitive factors, management designs and prices its products and services.
General economic conditions are relevant to Juniata’s business. In addition, economic factors impact customers’ needs for financing, thus affecting loan growth. Additionally, changes in the economy can directly impact the credit strength of existing and potential borrowers.
The ongoing nature of the COVID-19 pandemic is also relevant to Juniata’s business. The pandemic has affected, and will likely continue to affect, various aspects of Juniata’s operations and financial condition for an undetermined period.
FOCUS OF MANAGEMENT
The management of Juniata believes that it is important to know who and what we are to be successful. We must be aligned in our efforts to achieve goals. We have identified the four characteristics that define the Company and the personnel that support it. We are Committed, Capable, Caring and Connected. Management seeks to be the preeminent financial institution in its market area and measures its success in achieving our goals by the five key elements described below.
SHAREHOLDER SATISFACTION
Above all else, management is committed to maximizing the value of our shareholders’ investment, through both stock value appreciation and dividend returns. Remaining connected to our communities will allow us to identify the financial needs of our market and to deliver those products and services capably. In doing so, we will seek to profitably grow the balance sheet and enhance earnings, while maintaining capital and liquidity levels that exceed all regulatory guidelines.
CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS
We are committed to maximizing customer satisfaction. We are sensitive to the expanding array of financial services and financial service providers available to our customers, both locally and globally. We are committed to fostering a complete customer relationship by helping clients identify their current and future financial needs and offering practical and affordable solutions to both. As our customers’ lifestyles change, the channels through which we deliver our services must change as well. One element of the Company’s strategic plan is to provide connection through every means available, wherever we are needed, whether through a stand-alone branch, in-store boutique, ATM or via online and mobile banking anywhere internet or cell phone signals can be received. In 2021, we continued to make advances in technological
resources, offering online account opening to consumers because we are committed to optimizing the customer experience.
BALANCE SHEET GROWTH
We are capable of profitable balance sheet growth. Rapid growth should not be a substitute for careful fiscal and strategic management. It is our goal to continue quality growth despite intense competition by paying careful attention to the needs of our customers. We will continue to maintain high credit standards, knowing that lending under the right circumstances is the proper way to maintain soundness and profitability. We believe we consistently pay fair market rates on all deposits and have invested wisely and conservatively in compliance with self-imposed standards, minimizing risk of asset impairment. We aspire to increase our market share within the current communities that we serve, and to expand in contiguous areas through acquisition and investment. As part of our strategic plan for growth, we continue to actively seek opportunities for acquisitions of branches or stakes in other financial institutions, similar to those that have occurred in prior years, and most recently in April 2018 with the acquisition of the remaining shares of the Liverpool Community Bank (“LCB”).
OPERATING RESULTS
We are capable of producing profitability ratios that exceed those of many of our peers. Recognizing that net interest margins have narrowed for banks in general and that these margins may not return to the ranges experienced in the past, we also focus on the importance of providing fee-generating services in which customers find value. Offering a broad array of services prevents us from becoming too reliant on one form of revenue. It has also been our philosophy to spend conservatively and to implement operating efficiencies where possible to keep non-interest expense from escalating in areas that can be controlled.
CONNECTION TO THE COMMUNITY
We are active corporate citizens, connected to the communities we serve. Although the world of banking has transitioned to global availability through electronics, we believe that our community banking philosophy is not only still valid, but essential. Despite technological advances, banking is still a personal business, particularly in the rural areas we serve. We believe that our customers shop for services and value a relationship with an institution involved in the same community, with the same interests in its prosperity. We have a foundation and a history in each of the communities we serve. Management takes an active role in local business and industry development organizations to help attract and retain commerce in our market area. We provide businesses, large and small, with financial tools and financing needed to grow and prosper. And though these tools are electronically driven, they are custom-designed by relationship managers who take time to understand the need. We have always been committed to responsible lending practices. We invest locally by including local municipal bonds in our investment portfolio and participating in funding for such projects as low income and elderly housing. We support charitable programs that benefit the local communities, not only with monetary contributions, but also through the personal involvement of our caring employees. We were privileged to support our local business clients with Paycheck Protection Loans, when they needed it most, and maintained a physical presence at service locations throughout the pandemic.
JUNIATA’S OPPORTUNITIES
SOUNDNESS AND STABILITY
Our financial condition is strong. We enjoy strong capital and liquidity ratios that significantly exceed regulatory guidelines. Our business model includes a plan for growth without sacrificing profitability or integrity. We believe an opportunity exists for banks such as ours to offer the trusted, personal service of a locally managed institution that has roots in the community reaching back over 150 years.
EXPANSION OF CUSTOMER BASE
Our strategic focus is based on leveraging our collective knowledge of the Company’s primary and contiguous markets to identify lending or fee-based opportunities consistent with our risk parameters and profitability targets. We continue to develop our sales team through mentoring and by making employee education paramount. We continually seek and implement back-room efficiencies. We recognize change is taking place in a world where convenience and mobility are priorities for consumers and businesses when choosing a financial institution with whom to do business. We offer full-featured secure mobile banking that includes remote check deposit for use on home computers and all mobile devices for
consumers. For businesses, we provide options for cash management and remote deposit. We offer identity protection to the families of our customers, which we believe to be a true value-added service, with features that go far beyond traditional banking services, and sets us apart from other financial institutions in our market area. With the acquisition of First National Bank of Port Allegheny (“FNBPA”) in 2015, we expanded our market into the northern tier region of Pennsylvania and integrated the JVB brand there and have since expanded our footprint in Perry County, Pennsylvania, through the consummation of the acquisition of remaining shares of LCB in April 2018.
DELIVERY SYSTEM ENHANCEMENTS
We seek to continually enhance our customer delivery system, both through technology and physical facilities. We actively seek opportunities to expand our branch network through acquisitions. We believe that it is imperative that our customers have convenient and easy access to personal financial services that complement their lifestyle, whether it is through electronic or personal delivery. We achieved an early entry into the mobile banking arena and have since expanded online delivery, offering consumer remote deposit and Touch ID, and most recently online consumer loan and deposit accounting opening. Through the www.JVBonline.com website, we offer a suite of online services including the convenience of online loan applications for residential mortgages, home equity, vehicle and other personal loans. Online and mobile banking features include full bill-pay and monetary transfers between internal and external accounts. Our ATM network is equipped with state-of-the art machines. Our Customer Care Center provides a dedicated service to address all customer inquiries, including expanded service times and on-line chat, and provides outreach through our social media sites. Our updated branch facilities feature a highly interactive and complete customer experience.
JUNIATA’S CHALLENGES
NET INTEREST MARGIN COMPRESSION
The low interest rate environment that has persisted in recent years has pressured the net interest margin for most banks, including Juniata. Loans have been originated, acquired or repriced at lower rates, reducing the average rate earned on those assets. While the average rate paid on interest bearing liabilities, such as deposits and borrowings, has also declined, the decline has not always occurred at the same pace as the decline in the average rate earned on interest-earning assets, which can result in a narrowing of the net interest margin. We believe that increasing the net interest margin will continue to be a challenge until general market rates rise.
COMPETITION
Each year, competition becomes more intense and global in nature. To meet this challenge, we attempt to stay in close contact with our customers, monitoring their satisfaction with our services through surveys, personal visits and networking in the communities we serve. We strive to meet or exceed our customers’ expectations and deliver consistent high-quality service. We believe that our customers have become acutely aware of the value of local service, and we strive to maintain their confidence.
RATE ENVIRONMENT
We intend to continue making what we believe to be rational pricing decisions for loans, deposits and non-deposit products. This strategy can be difficult to maintain, as many of our peers appear to continue pricing for growth, rather than long-term profitability and stability. We believe that a strategy of “growth for the sake of growth” results in lower profitability, and such actions by large groups of banks have had an adverse impact on the entire financial services industry. We intend to maintain our core pricing principles, which we believe protect and preserve our future as a sound community financial services provider, proven by results.
REGULATIONS
The Company is subject to banking regulation, as well as regulation by the SEC and, as such, must comply with many laws, including the USA Patriot Act, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”) and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act. Management has established a Disclosure Committee for Financial Reporting, an internal group at Juniata that seeks to ensure that current and potential investors in the Company receive full and complete information concerning our financial condition. Juniata has incurred direct and indirect costs associated with compliance with the SEC’s filing and reporting requirements imposed on public companies by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, as well as adherence to new and existing banking regulations and stronger corporate governance requirements. Regulatory burdens
continue to increase as evidenced by the provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act that impact the Company in the areas of corporate governance, capital requirements and restrictions on fees that may be charged to consumers.
APPLICATION OF CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared based upon the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), the most significant of which are described in Note 2 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies. Certain of these policies, particularly with respect to allowance for loan losses and the investment portfolio, require numerous estimates and economic assumptions, based upon information available as of the date of the consolidated financial statements. As such, over time, they may prove inaccurate or vary and may significantly affect the Company’s reported results and financial position in future periods.
The accounting policy for establishing the allowance for loan losses relies to a greater extent on the use of estimates than other areas and, as such, has a greater possibility of producing results that could be different from those currently reported. Changes in underlying factors, assumptions or estimates in the allowance for loan losses could have a material impact on the Company’s future financial condition and results of operations. The allowance for loan losses is maintained at a level believed adequate by management to absorb probable losses in the loan portfolio. Management’s determination of the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses is based upon an evaluation of individual credits in the loan portfolio, historical loan loss experience, current economic conditions and other relevant factors. This determination is inherently subjective, as it requires material estimates, including the amounts and timing of future cash flows expected to be received on impaired loans that may be susceptible to significant change.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
2021 AND 2020 FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OVERVIEW
Net income for Juniata in 2021 was $6,604,000, compared to net income of $5,602,000 for 2020. Earnings per share on a fully diluted basis increased from $1.10 in 2020 to $1.32 in 2021. Return on average assets (“ROA”) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was 0.81% and 0.76%, respectively, while the return on average equity (“ROE”) for 2021 was 8.97% compared to 7.37% in 2020.
The net interest margin, on a fully tax-equivalent basis, decreased from 3.00% in 2020 to 2.83% in 2021. The yield on earning assets decreased 34 basis points, to 3.21%, while the cost of funds decreased 22 basis points, to 0.58%, in 2021 compared to 2020.
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, Juniata implemented several initiatives to address the impact of the pandemic on its customers, employees and markets. Juniata participated in the PPP in both 2020 and 2021 to offer relief for its customers and those within its market area. Despite the effects of the economic downturn and supply chain disruptions during the pandemic, Juniata’s asset quality measures remained strong in 2021. As a result, Juniata recorded a credit of $769,000 to the allowance for loan losses in 2021 compared to an expense of $721,000 in 2020 when the outlook for inherent losses in the loan portfolio was very uncertain.
Juniata executed strategies to partially restructure its balance sheet in 2021 and 2020. In 2021, Juniata funded the prepayment of $15,000,000 in higher-cost long-term debt with proceeds from the sale of investment securities and the use of brokered deposits. In 2020, Juniata sold investment securities at a gain to offset a one-time prepayment penalty on the extinguishment of $10,000,000 in long-term debt.
Juniata strives to attain consistently satisfactory earnings levels each year by protecting the core (repeatable) earnings base through conservative growth strategies that seek to minimize shareholder and balance-sheet risk, while serving its rural Pennsylvania customer base. This approach has helped achieve solid performances year after year. The Company considers the return on assets ratio to be a key indicator of its success and constantly scrutinizes the broad categories of the income statement that impact this profitability indicator.
Summarized below are the components of net income and the contribution of each to ROA for 2021 and 2020.
NET INTEREST INCOME
Net interest income is the amount by which interest income on earning assets exceeds interest expense on interest bearing liabilities. Net interest income is the most significant component of revenue, comprising approximately 81% of total revenues (the total of net interest income and non-interest income, exclusive of gains on sales and calls of securities) for 2021. Interest spread measures the absolute difference between average rates earned and average rates paid. Because some interest earning assets are tax-exempt, an adjustment is made for analytical purposes to present all assets on a fully tax-equivalent basis. Net interest margin is the percentage of net return on average earning assets, on a fully tax-equivalent basis, and provides a measure of comparability of a financial institution’s performance.
Both net interest income and net interest margin are impacted by interest rate changes, changes in the relationships between various rates and changes in the composition of the average balance sheet. Additionally, product pricing, product mix and customer preferences dictate the composition of the balance sheet and the resulting net interest income. Table 1 shows average asset and liability balances, average interest rates and interest income and expense for the years 2021, 2020 and 2019. Table 2 further shows changes attributable to the volume and rate components of net interest income.
TABLE 1
AVERAGE BALANCE SHEETS AND NET INTEREST INCOME ANALYSIS
Notes:
(1) Average balances were calculated using a daily average.
(2) Includes interest bearing demand and money market accounts.
(3) Net margin on interest earning assets is net interest income divided by average interest earning assets.
(4) Interest on obligations of states and municipalities is not subject to federal income tax. In order to make the net yield comparable on a fully taxable basis, a tax equivalent adjustment is applied against the tax-exempt income using a federal tax rate of 21%.
TABLE 2
RATE/VOLUME ANALYSIS OF NET INTEREST INCOME
Notes:
(5) Non-accruing loans are included in the above table until they are charged off.
(6) The change in interest due to rate and volume has been allocated to volume and rate changes in proportion to the relationship of the absolute dollar amounts of the change in each.
(7) Includes net unrealized gains (losses) on securities available for sale: $137,000 in 2021, $4,298,000 in 2020 and ($486,000) in 2019.
(8) Interest income includes loan fees of $1,140,000, $463,000 and $70,000 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
On average, total loans outstanding increased $10,034,000, or 2.4%, in 2021 compared to 2020. Average loans in 2021 included average PPP loan balances of $23,813,000 compared to $21,421,000 in 2020. Average total loans outstanding increased $4,931,000, or 1.2%, in 2020 compared to 2019. Average yields on loans decreased by 6 basis points in 2021 compared to 2020, which was 50 basis points less than 2019. PPP loan activity added 6 basis points to loan yields in 2021 versus lowering the overall loan yield in 2020 by 11 basis points. As shown in Table 2, Rate - Volume Analysis of Net Interest Income, the decrease in yield in 2021 lowered interest income on loans by approximately $239,000, while the increase in volume raised interest income by $452,000 compared to 2020, resulting in a net increase in interest recorded on loans of $213,000. During 2020, the decrease in yield lowered interest income on loans by approximately $2,160,000, while the increase in volume partially offset this decline by $349,000 compared to 2019, resulting in a net decrease in interest recorded on loans of $1,811,000. The 150 basis point decline in the prime rate in 2020, ending at 3.25%, impacted the yield on loans.
During 2021 and 2020, cash flows from maturities, sales and repayments of investment securities were reinvested into the securities portfolio, as were the additional funds from the growth in interest bearing liabilities and non-interest bearing demand deposits. As a result, average balances of investment securities increased by $72,432,000, or 28.2%, during 2021
compared to 2020, which increased by $81,246,000, or 46.2%, compared to 2019. The increases in volume accounted for a $1,391,000 increase in interest income in 2021 compared to 2020, which increased $1,982,000 compared to 2019. Average yields on investment securities decreased by 39 basis points in 2021 compared to 2020, which was 49 basis points less than 2019. The decline in yield on investment securities in 2021 decreased net interest income by $1,280,000, while volume increases added $1,391,000, resulting in an aggregate increase in interest recorded on investment securities of $111,000 in 2021 compared to 2020.
In total, yield on earning assets in 2021 was 3.21% compared to 3.55% in 2020 and 4.31% in 2019. On a fully tax equivalent basis, the yield on earning assets decreased 34 basis points to 3.25% in 2021, from 3.59% in 2020, which decreased 78 basis points from 4.37% in 2019.
Average interest bearing liabilities increased by $55,451,000, or 11.0%, in 2021 compared to 2020, which increased $60,400,000 compared to 2019. Within the categories of interest bearing liabilities, deposits increased on average by $79,592,000 in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to government stimulus payments and the addition of brokered demand deposits that averaged $14,165,000 in 2021. The repayment of short-term borrowings and long-term debt led to a decline in average borrowings of $24,141,000 in 2021 compared to 2020. During 2020, average deposits increased by $26,744,000 and average borrowings increased by $33,656,000 compared to 2019. Changes in the volume and rate of other interest bearing liabilities, in the aggregate, decreased interest expense by $819,000 in 2021 compared to 2020, while the aggregate changes in volume and rate in 2020 decreased interest expense by $671,000 compared to 2019. The percentage of average interest earning assets funded by average non-interest bearing demand deposits was approximately 23.4% in 2021, compared to 22.7% in 2020 and 21.4% in 2019. The total cost to fund earning assets (computed by dividing the total interest expense by the total average earning assets) in 2021 was 0.42%, compared to 0.59% in 2020 and 0.79% in 2019.
Net interest income was $21,335,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. An increase in volume contributed $2,154,000 to net interest income in 2021, which was partially offset by a decline of $1,065,000 due to rate, resulting in an overall increase of $1,089,000, or 5.4%, when compared to year end December 31, 2020.
PROVISION FOR LOAN LOSSES
Juniata’s provision for loan losses is determined as a result of an analysis of the adequacy level of the allowance for loan losses. In order to closely reflect the potential losses within the current loan portfolio based upon current information known, the Company carries no unallocated allowance. Using the process of analysis described in “Application of Critical Accounting Policies” earlier in this discussion, the Company determined that a provision credit of $769,000 was appropriate for 2021, compared to a provision expense of $721,000 recorded in 2020, as Juniata’s asset quality remained strong, and the pandemic-related risks that drove the provision expense in 2020 did not materialize. The discussion included in the Loans and Allowance for Loan Losses section below titled “Financial Condition” explains the information and analysis used to derive the credit to the loan loss provision for 2021.
NON-INTEREST INCOME
The Company remains committed to providing comprehensive services and products to meet the current and future financial needs of its customers. Juniata believes its responsiveness to customers’ needs surpasses that of many of its competitors and measures its success by the customer acceptance of fee-based services. The Company continually explores avenues to enhance product offerings in areas beneficial to its customers, such as adding new features and services for its electronic banking clientele. Fraud protection services are made available to all consumer depositors. Juniata offers a variety of options for financing to home-buyers that includes a mortgage referral program, providing significant fee income. Juniata also provides alternative investment opportunities through an arrangement with a broker-dealer that integrates the delivery of non-traditional products with Juniata’s Trust and Wealth Management Division. This arrangement enables Juniata to meet the investment needs of a varied customer base and to better identify its clients’ needs for traditional trust services.
Non-interest income was $5,154,000 in 2021 compared to $5,320,000 in 2020. Most significantly impacting the comparative year-end periods was an $834,000 decrease in the net gain on the sales and calls of securities recorded in 2021 compared to 2020. The recorded net gain in 2020 was due in part to the execution of a balance sheet strategy in the second quarter of 2020 that produced securities gains of $549,000 which offset a $524,000 prepayment penalty on the
extinguishment of long-term debt, as well as to the restructuring of the debt securities portfolio in 2020 to reduce Juniata’s overall premium exposure resulting in a net gain of $283,000 on the sales of securities.
Fee-generated non-interest income consists of customer service fees derived from deposit accounts, trust relationships and sales of non-deposit products. In 2021, revenues from these services totaled $2,168,000, representing an increase of $78,000, or 3.7%, from 2020 revenues. Customer service fees decreased by $21,000, or 1.5%, due to a decline in overdraft fee income. Fees from estate settlements increased by $23,000, while non-estate trust fees increased by $14,000 in 2021 versus 2020. Variances in fees from estate settlements arise because estate settlements occur sporadically and are not necessarily consistent year to year. Non-estate fees are repeatable revenues that generally increase and decrease in relation to movements in interest rates as market values of trust assets under management increase or decrease and as new relationships are established. Commissions from sales of non-deposit products increased in 2021, in comparison to 2020, by $62,000, or 20.3%, as sales increased.
Fees generated by debit card activity increased by $290,000, or 19.8%, in 2021 compared to the prior year due to increased debit card usage, while earnings on bank-owned life insurance and annuities declined by $17,000, or 6.5%, in 2021 compared to 2020 caused by a decline in earnings resulting from the lower rate environment.
Other non-interest-related fees derived from loan activity increased by $143,000, or 48.0%, when comparing 2021 to 2020, primarily due to increased revenues generated from title insurance fees and Juniata’s loan referral program. Additionally, the change in value of equity securities increased $204,000, or 384.9%, in 2021 compared to 2020 resulting from an increase in bank stock market values.
As a percentage of average assets, non-interest income (excluding securities gains/losses on sales or calls of securities and change in value of equity securities) was 0.61% in both 2021 and 2020.
NON-INTEREST EXPENSE
Management strives to control non-interest expense where possible in order to improve operating results. Non-interest expense was $20,370,000 in 2021 compared to $19,293,000 in 2020, an increase of 5.6%. Most significantly impacting the comparative year-end periods was a $570,000, or 7.3%, increase in employee compensation expense as staffing levels returned to pre-pandemic levels in 2021 in comparison to 2020 when some employees were furloughed due to temporary branch closures resulting from Pennsylvania’s mandates during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Data processing expense increased by $399,000, or 17.4%, during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 predominantly due to expenses incurred from the launch of Juniata’s new online deposit account opening platform at the end of 2020, as well as other technology enhancements.
Professional fees increased by $126,000, or 17.6%, during 2021 compared to 2020 predominantly due to higher consulting expenses in 2021. Additionally, long-term debt prepayment penalties increased by $167,000, or 31.9%, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year end December 31, 2020 as $15,000,000 in long-term FHLB advances were prepaid in 2021, resulting in prepayment penalties of $691,000, compared to the prepayment of $10,000,000 in long-term FHLB advances in 2020, resulting in a prepayment penalty of $524,000. The prepayments were part of balance sheet strategies enacted to partially restructure the balance sheet.
Partially offsetting these increases was a $189,000 decline in equipment expense due to declines in depreciation, maintenance expenses and small office equipment. Also, a net gain on sales of other real estate owned of $64,000 was realized in 2021, while no such activity was recorded in 2020.
As a percentage of average assets, non-interest expense was 2.49% in 2021 as compared to 2.61% in 2020. Excluding the prepayment penalty on long-term debt, non-interest expense as a percentage of average assets was 2.41% in 2021 compared to 2.54% in 2020.
INCOME TAXES
Income tax expense for 2021 was $284,000 versus a benefit of $50,000 in 2020. Both periods included the effect of a tax credit of $902,000. The tax credit was available to the Company as a result of an equity investment in two low-income housing projects.
Exclusive of the tax credit, the Company recorded income tax expense of $1.2 million in 2021, compared to $852,000 in 2020. The tax expense for 2020 included a $57,000 benefit resulting from a provision in the CARES Act, which allowed the carryback of net operating losses from the acquired Liverpool Community Bank to a year in which the statutory tax rate was higher. Juniata’s effective tax rate in 2021 was 4.1% versus (0.9)% in 2020. See Note 13 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on income taxes.
FINANCIAL CONDITION
BALANCE SHEET SUMMARY
Juniata functions as a financial intermediary and, as such, its financial condition can be best analyzed in terms of changes in its uses and sources of funds and can also be analyzed in terms of changes in daily average balances. The table below sets forth average daily balances for the last two years and the dollar change and percentage change for the past year.
TABLE 3
CHANGES IN USES AND SOURCES OF FUNDS
Overall, total average assets increased by $76,878,000, or 10.4%, for the year 2021 compared to 2020. The increase in 2021 was primarily due to an increase in interest bearing demand and savings deposits, which were used to fund loans and purchase debt securities during the year. The ratio of average earning assets to total average assets increased from 92.3% in 2020 to 93.5% in 2021. The ratio of average interest bearing liabilities to total average assets increased in 2021 to 68.4% from 68.0% in 2020. Although Juniata’s investment in low income elderly housing projects and its bank owned life insurance and annuities are not classified as interest-earning assets, income is derived directly from those assets. These instruments represented 2.4% and 2.7% of total average assets in 2021 and 2020, respectively. A more detailed discussion
of the Company’s earning assets and interest bearing liabilities will follow in the Sections titled “Loans”, “Investments” and “Deposits”.
LOANS
Loans outstanding at the end of each year consisted of the following:
From year-end 2020 to year-end 2021, total loans outstanding decreased by $4,358,000. Included in the commercial, financial and agricultural class were PPP loans of $10,132,000 at December 31, 2021 compared to $28,715,000 at December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes how the ending balances changed in each of the last two years.
The following table presents the maturity distribution and amount of loans with fixed and variable interest rates as of December 31, 2021.
The loan portfolio was comprised of approximately 32.6% consumer loans (real estate - mortgage and personal loans) and 67.4% commercial loans (commercial, financial and agricultural, real estate - commercial and construction, and obligations of states and political subdivisions) on December 31, 2021 compared to 34.9% consumer loans and 65.1% commercial loans on December 31, 2020. Management believes that diversification in the loan portfolio is important and performs a loan concentration analysis on a quarterly basis. The highest loan concentration by activity type in 2021 was real estate - commercial loans secured by income-producing property, with debt service on this category of loans being reliant upon the cash flow generated by the property. In the aggregate, loans in this category had outstanding balances of $116,229,000 at December 31, 2021, or 165.41% of the Bank’s capital. Components of this concentration group with balances considered for general reserve purposes are as follows:
Given the reserves allocated to this sector over the years and the continued economic and market uncertainty, management continues to assess a concentration risk factor to this group of loans when analyzing the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses. See Note 6 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
During 2021, real estate - commercial loans increased, but were offset by declines in all other loan categories. The decrease in commercial, financial and agricultural loans in 2021 was due to Juniata’s participation in the PPP as SBA loan forgiveness accounted for $18,583,000 of the decline between periods, whereas the decline in the real estate - construction class was mainly due to the transfer of two large relationships to the real estate - commercial loan class for permanent financing during 2021. In 2020, the growth in commercial, financial and agricultural loans, as well as real estate - construction loans and obligations of states and political subdivisions, was partially offset by a decline in the other loan categories. The overall increase in total loans was largely due to Juniata’s participation in the PPP, as well as the growth in real estate - construction loans. Juniata’s business model closely aligns lenders and community office managers’ efforts to effectively develop referrals and existing customer relationships. Continued emphasis is placed on responsiveness and personal attention given to customers, which management believes, differentiates the Bank from its competition. Nearly all commercial loans are either variable or adjustable rate loans, while non-mortgage consumer loans generally have fixed rates for the duration of the loan.
Juniata strives to offer fair, competitive rates and to provide optimal service to attract loan growth and will continue to place emphasis on attracting the entire customer relationship of our borrowers.
The loan portfolio carries the potential risk of past due, non-performing or, ultimately, charged-off loans. The Bank attempts to manage this risk through credit approval standards and aggressive monitoring and collection efforts. Where prudent, the Bank secures commercial loans with collateral consisting of real and/or tangible personal property. The Company maintains a dedicated credit administration division, in response to the need for heightened credit review, both in the loan origination process and in the ongoing risk assessment process. Juniata’s lending strategy and credit standards stress quality growth, diversified by product. A standardized credit policy is in place throughout the Company, and the credit committee of the Board of Directors reviews and approves all loan requests for amounts that exceed management’s approval levels. The Company makes credit judgments based on a customer’s existing debt obligations, collateral, ability to pay and general economic trends. See Note 2 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
The allowance for loan losses is set at an amount calculated to provide for probable losses on existing loans. A quarterly provision or credit is charged or credited to earnings to maintain the allowance at adequate levels. Charge-offs and recoveries are recorded as adjustments to the allowance. The allowance for loan losses on December 31, 2021 was 0.84% of total loans, net of unearned interest, compared to 0.97% of total loans, net of unearned interest, at the end of 2020.
Loans that Juniata acquired through mergers and acquisitions, such as those acquired from Liverpool in 2018 and from FNBPA in 2015, are recorded at fair value with no carryover of the related allowance for loan losses. Acquired loans subsequently deemed to be impaired are included in the allowance for loan losses as impaired loans. Through loan amortization and other scheduled payments, the excluded balances become a smaller percentage of total outstanding loans over time, contributing to the increase in the allowance as a percentage of total loans. As of December 31, 2021, the allowance decreased $586,000 when compared to December 31, 2020, due to a provision credit resulting from a decline in the qualitative risk factors for all loan segments in the loan portfolio. This decline was due to Juniata’s continued strong asset quality in 2021, and overall performance of the loan portfolio; all borrowers placed on COVID deferral returned to contractual debt service, and those in the hospitality and entertainment industries have continued to perform. Juniata recorded a loan loss provision credit of $769,000 in 2021 compared to a provision expense of $721,000 in 2020. Net recoveries for 2021 were 0.04% of average loans outstanding compared to net recoveries of 0.10% in 2020.
At December 31, 2021, non-performing loans (as defined in Table 4 below), as a percentage of the allowance for loan losses, were 6.4%, compared to 10.8% at December 31, 2020. Non-performing loans were 0.05% of loans as of December 31, 2021, and 0.11% of loans as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in nonperforming loans in 2021 compared to 2020 was predominantly due to a $281,000 decline in non-accrual loans in 2021 due to payoffs and loans returned to accruing status. All non-performing loans were collateralized with real estate at December 31, 2021.
TABLE 4
NON-PERFORMING LOANS
Loans on which the accrual of interest has been discontinued are designated as non-accrual loans. Accrual of interest on loans is generally discontinued when the contractual payment of principal or interest has become 90 days past due or reasonable doubt exists as to the full, timely collection of principal or interest. However, it is the Company’s policy to continue to accrue interest on loans over 90 days past due if (1) they are guaranteed or well secured and (2) there is an effective means of timely collection in process. When a loan is placed on non-accrual status, all unpaid interest credited to income in the current year is reversed against current period income, and unpaid interest accrued in prior years is charged against the allowance for loan losses. Interest received on non-accrual loans generally is either applied against principal or reported as interest income, according to management’s judgment as to the collectability of principal. Generally, accruals are resumed on loans only when the obligation is brought fully current with respect to interest and principal, has performed in accordance with the contractual terms for a reasonable period and the ultimate collectability of the total contractual principal and interest is no longer in doubt. The Company’s non-accrual and charge-off policies are the same, regardless of loan type. During 2021, gross interest income that would have been recorded if loans on non-accrual status had been current was $49,000, of which $40,000 was collected and included in net income.
ALLOWANCE FOR LOAN LOSSES
The amount of allowance for loan losses is determined through a critical quantitative and qualitative analysis performed by management that includes significant assumptions and estimates. It is maintained at a level deemed adequate to absorb probable estimated losses within the loan portfolio and supported by detailed documentation. To assess potential credit weaknesses, it is important to analyze observable trends that may be occurring.
Management systematically monitors the loan portfolio and the adequacy of the allowance for loan losses on a quarterly basis to provide for probable losses inherent in the portfolio. The Bank’s methodology for maintaining the allowance is highly structured and contains two components: 1) specific allowances allocated to loans evaluated for impairment under the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s Accounting Standards Codification ("FASB ASC") Section 310-10-35; and 2) allowances calculated for pools of loans evaluated for impairment under FASB ASC Subtopic 450-20 (Contingencies).
Component for impaired loans:
A loan is considered impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that the Company will be unable to collect the scheduled payments of principal or interest when due according to the contractual terms of the loan agreement. Factors considered by management in determining impairment include payment status, collateral value and the probability of collecting scheduled principal and interest payments when due. Loans that experience insignificant payment delays and payment shortfalls generally are not classified as impaired. Management determines the significance of payment delays and payment shortfalls on a case-by-case basis, taking into consideration all the circumstances surrounding the loans and the borrower, including the length of the delay, the reasons for the delay, the borrower’s prior payment record and the amount of the shortfall in relation to the principal and interest owed. Impairment is measured on a loan by loan basis by the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, the loan’s observable market price or the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent.
The estimated fair values of substantially all the Company’s impaired loans are measured based on the estimated fair value of the loan’s collateral. For commercial loans secured with real estate, estimated fair values are determined primarily through third-party appraisals. When a real estate secured loan becomes impaired, a decision is made regarding whether an updated certified appraisal of the real estate is necessary. This decision is based on various considerations, including the age of the most recent appraisal, the loan-to-value ratio based on the current appraisal and the condition of the property. Appraised values may be discounted to arrive at the estimated selling price of the collateral, which is considered the estimated fair value. The discounts also include the estimated costs to sell the property. For commercial loans secured by non-real estate collateral, estimated fair values are determined based on the borrower’s financial statements, inventory reports, aging accounts receivable, equipment appraisals or invoices. Indications of value from these sources are generally discounted based on the age of the financial information or the quality of the assets. For such loans that are classified as impaired, an allowance is established when the discounted cash flows (or collateral value or observable market price) of the impaired loan is lower than the carrying value of that loan. The Company generally does not separately identify individual consumer segment loans for impairment analysis unless such loans are subject to a restructuring agreement.
Loans whose terms are modified are classified as troubled debt restructurings if the Company grants borrower’s concessions and it is deemed that those borrowers are experiencing financial difficulty. Concessions granted under a troubled debt restructuring generally involve a below-market interest rate based on the loan’s risk characteristics or an extension of a loan’s stated maturity date. Non-accrual troubled debt restructurings are restored to accrual status if principal and interest payments, under the modified terms, are current for a sustained period after modification. Loans classified as troubled debt restructurings are designated as impaired.
As of December 31, 2021, 22 loans, with aggregate outstanding balances of $5,699,000, were evaluated for impairment. A collateral analysis was performed on each of these 22 loans to establish a portion of the reserve needed to carry impaired loans at no higher than fair value. As a result of this analysis, one loan for $69,000 was determined to have insufficient collateral and, therefore, a $2,000 specific reserve was established. Loans acquired with credit impairment are considered impaired loans but are not included with this component for consideration in the allowance, and they were carried at fair value of $838,000 as of December 31, 2021.
Component for pooled loan contingencies:
A contingency is an existing condition, or set of circumstances, involving uncertainty as to possible gain or loss to the Company that will ultimately be resolved when one or more future events occur or fail to occur. These conditions may be considered in relation to individual loans or in relation to groups of similar types of loans. If the conditions are met, a provision is made even though the loans that are uncollectible may not be identifiable.
In accordance with FASB ASC Subtopic 450-20, when measuring estimated credit losses, these loans are grouped into homogenous pools with similar characteristics and evaluated collectively considering both quantitative measures, such as historical loss, and qualitative measures, in the form of environmental adjustments.
These pools are established by general loan type, or "class" as follows:
● Commercial, financial and agricultural
● Real estate - commercial
● Real estate - construction
● Real estate - mortgage
● Obligations of states and political subdivisions
● Personal
Some portfolio segments are further disaggregated and evaluated collectively for impairment based on "class segments," which are largely based on the type of collateral underlying each loan. For commercial, financial and agricultural loans, class segments include commercial loans secured by other-than real estate collateral. Real estate - commercial class segments include loans secured by farmland, multi-family properties, owner-occupied non-farm, non-residential properties and other nonfarm non-residential properties. Real estate - construction loan class segments include loans secured by commercial real estate, loans to commercial borrowers secured by residential real estate and loans to individuals secured by residential real estate. Real estate - mortgage includes loans secured by first and junior liens on residential real estate. Obligations of states and political subdivision loan class segment primarily includes tax-anticipation notes to local municipalities and other tax-exempt organizations. Personal loan class segments include direct consumer installment loans, indirect automobile loans and other revolving and unsecured loans to individuals.
Quantitative factor determination:
An average annual loss rate is calculated for each pool through an analysis of historical losses over a five-year look-back period. Using data for each loan, a loss emergence period is determined within each segmented class pool. The loss emergence period reflects the approximate length of time from the point when a loss is incurred (the loss trigger event) to the point of loss confirmation (the date of eventual charge-off). The loss emergence period is applied to the average annual loss to produce the quantitative factor for each pooled class segment.
Qualitative factor determination:
Historical loss rates computed in the quantitative component reflects an estimate of the level of incurred losses in the portfolio based on historical experience. Management considers that the current conditions may deviate from those that prevailed over the historical look-back period. Thus, the quantitative rates are an imperfect estimate, necessitating an evaluation of qualitative considerations to incorporate these risks.
Management considered qualitative risk factors including:
● National, regional and local economic and business conditions, and developments that affect the collectability of the portfolio, including the condition of various market segments;
● Changes in the volume and severity of past due loans, the volume of non-accrual loans, and the volume and severity of adversely classified loans;
● Changes in the nature and volume of the portfolio and terms of loans;
● Changes in the experience, ability and depth of lending and credit management and other relevant staff;
● Existence and effect of any concentrations of credit and changes in the level of such concentrations;
● Changes in the quality of the loan review system;
● Changes in lending policies and procedures including changes in underwriting standards and collection, charge-off and recovery practices;
● Changes in the value of underlying collateral for collateral-dependent loans; and
● Effect of external influences, including competition, legal and regulatory requirements.
Within each loan segment, an analysis was performed over a ten-year look-back period to discover peak historical losses, and with this data, management established ranges of risk from minimal to very high, for each risk factor, to produce a supportable anchor for risk assignment. Based on the framework for risk factor evaluation and range of adjustments established through the anchoring process, a risk assessment and corresponding adjustment was assigned for each portfolio segment as of December 31, 2021. Adjustments to the factors are supported through documentation of changes in conditions in a narrative accompanying the allowance for loan loss calculation.
The combination of quantitative and qualitative factors was applied to year-end balances in each pooled segment to establish the overall allowance.
A summary of activity in the allowance for loan losses for the last five years is shown below. The Company recorded net recoveries of $183,000 in 2021. With a provision credit, in addition to net recoveries, the allowance for loan losses at December 31, 2021 decreased by 14.3% over the allowance at December 31, 2020. Management’s analysis indicated that the allowance for loan losses of $3,508,000 at December 31, 2021 was adequate.
Because of the Company’s low rate of charge-offs, disaggregated ratios of net charge-offs to average loans outstanding are not provided.
The following tables show how the allowance for loan losses is allocated among the various types of outstanding loans and the percent of loans by type to total loans.
INVESTMENTS
Total investments, defined to include all interest earning assets except loans (i.e. debt securities available for sale at fair value), equity securities, federal funds sold, interest bearing deposits, restricted investment in bank stock and other interest-earning assets), totaled $339,997,000 on December 31, 2021, representing an increase of $18,580,000, or 5.8%, compared to year-end 2020. The increase in 2021 was mainly the result of an overall increase in available funds from deposits, as well as from PPP loan forgiveness.
The following table summarizes how the ending balances changed annually in each of the last two years.
The investment area is managed according to internally established guidelines and quality standards. Juniata can separate its investment securities portfolio into two classifications: those held to maturity and those available for sale. Juniata classifies all new marketable investment securities as available for sale, and currently holds no securities in the held to maturity or trading classifications. At December 31, 2021, the market value of the entire securities portfolio was less than amortized cost by $4,801,000 compared to December 31, 2020, when the market value was greater than amortized cost by $4,508,000. The weighted average life of the investment portfolio was 6.7 years on December 31, 2021 and 4.8 years on December 31, 2020. The weighted average maturity has remained short to achieve a desired level of liquidity.
The following table sets forth the maturities of securities and the weighted average yields of such securities by contractual maturities or call dates. Yields on obligations of states and public subdivisions are presented on a tax-equivalent basis.
BANK OWNED LIFE INSURANCE AND ANNUITIES
The Company periodically ensures the lives of certain bank officers to provide split-dollar life insurance benefits to some key officers and to offset the cost of providing post-retirement benefits through non-qualified plans. Some annuities are also owned to provide cash streams that match certain post-retirement liabilities. See Note 7 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The following table summarizes how the cash surrender values of these instruments changed annually in each of the last two years.
GOODWILL AND INTANGIBLE ASSETS
Branch Acquisition
On September 8, 2006, the Company acquired a branch office in Richfield, PA. Goodwill recorded on that acquisition was $2,046,000 and is measured annually for impairment.
FNBPA Acquisition
On November 30, 2015, the Company completed its acquisition of FNBPA. Goodwill recorded on the acquisition was $3,402,000 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition, a core deposit intangible in the amount of $303,000 was recorded and is being amortized over a ten-year period using a sum of the year’s digits basis. Core deposit intangible amortization expense recorded in 2021 was $27,000 and, for the succeeding four years beginning 2022, is estimated to be
$22,000, $16,000, $10,000 and $5,000 per year, respectively. The core deposit intangible will be fully amortized in 2025. Core deposit and other intangible assets, net of amortization, was $53,000 as of December 31, 2021 and $80,000 as of December 31, 2020.
LCB Acquisition
On April 30, 2018, Juniata completed the acquisition of LCB and, as a result, recorded goodwill of $3,599,000 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. In addition, a core deposit intangible of $289,000 was recorded and will be amortized over a ten-year period using a sum of the years’ digits basis. Core deposit intangible expense recorded in 2021 was $39,000, and for the succeeding five years beginning 2022, is estimated to be $33,000, $28,000, $23,000, $17,000 and $12,000 per year, respectively, and $9,000 in total for years after 2026. Core deposit intangible, net of amortization, was $122,000 as of December 31, 2021 and $161,000 as of December 31, 2020.
Mortgage Servicing Rights
Due to a strategic shift in focus to a new mortgage product, which is increasing fees derived from loan activity, the Company did not originate and sell residential mortgage loans to the secondary market in 2021 or 2020; however, the Company retained the servicing rights on loans originated and sold in prior years. The mortgage servicing rights are valued based on the present value of estimated future cash flows on pools of mortgages stratified by rate and maturity date. The computed value is carried as an intangible asset. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the fair value of mortgage servicing rights was $120,000 and $158,000, respectively.
DERIVATIVES
The Company entered into rate swap agreements as part of its asset liability management strategy to help manage interest rate risk. The notional amount of the interest rate swaps does not represent amounts exchanged by the parties. The amount exchanged is determined by reference to the notional amount and the other terms of the individual interest rate swap agreements. The notional amount of the Company’s interest rate swaps as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $40,000,000, and the interest rate swaps were determined to be fully effective during both year-end periods. As such, no amount of ineffectiveness has been included in net income. The aggregate fair value of the swaps is recorded in either other assets or other liabilities on the Consolidated Statements of Condition with changes in fair value recorded in other comprehensive income. The Company expects the hedges to remain fully effective during the remaining terms of the swaps. See Note 22 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
DEFERRED TAXES
The Company accounts for income taxes under the asset/liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as operating loss and tax credit carryforwards, if applicable. A valuation allowance is established against deferred tax assets when, in the judgment of management, it is more likely than not that such deferred tax assets will not become realizable. Management established a valuation allowance of $34,000 in 2019 for a capital loss carryforward for which the tax benefit was not likely to be realized and carried that allowance until December 31, 2021 when the capital loss carryforward period ended. As of December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a net deferred tax asset of $1,743,000, which was carried as a non-interest earning asset. As of December 31, 2020, the Company recorded a net deferred tax liability of $54,000, which was carried as a non-interest bearing liability. See Note 13 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
OTHER NON-INTEREST EARNING ASSETS
The following table summarizes the components of the non-interest earning asset category, and how the ending balances changed over the last two years.
DEPOSITS
As of December 31, 2021, total deposits were $708,447,000, an increase of $85,581,000 compared to the previous year end, due primarily to government stimulus payments and the addition of $30,003,000 in brokered demand deposits. The brokered demand deposits are issued with three-month rolling maturities. Juniata had $104,951,000 and $86,429,000 in uninsured deposits as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table summarizes how the ending balances changed over the last two years.
The following table shows the comparison of average transaction deposits and average time deposits as a percentage of total deposits for the last two years.
Average deposits increased $103,704,000, or 17.8%, to $686,588,000 in 2021. Transaction accounts increased by 24.9% in 2021. The largest dollar and percentage increase in 2021 compared the previous year was in interest bearing demand accounts, which increased by $44,944,000, or 41.4%. Included in interest bearing demand in 2021 was $14,165,000 in average brokered demand deposits, while there were no brokered demand deposits in 2020.
Maturities of time deposits of $250,000 or more outstanding at December 31, 2021 are summarized as follows:
The consumer continues to have a need for transaction accounts, and the Bank is continuing to focus on that need to build deposit relationships. Products are geared toward low-cost convenience and ease for the customer. The Company’s strategy is to aggressively seek to grow customer relationships by staying in touch with customers’ changing needs and new methods of connectivity, in an effort to increase deposit (and loan) market share. The Bank offers identity protection services as an option for all consumer demand depositors. We believe this product to be a valuable and essential tool necessary to combat the upsurge in fraud and identity theft. This product is a unique benefit to our customers as there are no other banks in our immediate market that offer a similar service.
In addition to deposit products, Juniata provides alternatives to customers through the sale of wealth management (non-deposit) products. The Bank competes in the marketplace with many sources that offer products that directly compete with traditional banking products. In keeping with our desire to provide our customers with a full array of financial services, we supplement the services traditionally offered by our Trust Department by staffing our community offices with wealth management consultants that are licensed and trained to sell variable and fixed rate annuities, mutual funds, stock brokerage services and long-term care insurance. Although the sale of these products can reduce the Bank’s deposit levels, these products offer solutions for our customers that traditional bank products cannot and allow us to service our customer base more completely. Fee income from the sale of non-deposit products (primarily annuities and mutual funds) was $368,000 and $306,000 in 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing approximately 7.1% and 5.8%, respectively, of total non-interest income.
OTHER INTEREST BEARING LIABILITIES
Juniata funds its needs primarily with local deposits and, when necessary, relies on external funding sources for additional funding. External funding sources include credit facilities at correspondent banks and the FHLB of Pittsburgh. Juniata’s average balances for all borrowings decreased by $24,141,000 in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to the repayment of the remaining FRB advances from Juniata’s participation in the Federal Reserve Bank’s PPPLF, as well as the $20,000,000 FHLB three-month advance previously allocated to Juniata’s cash flow hedge. Additionally, Juniata prepaid $15,000,000 in long-term debt at the end of 2021.
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY
Total stockholders’ equity decreased by $5,307,000, or 6.9%, in 2021 compared to 2020. The Company was well-capitalized and had the capacity to maintain its typical dividend level in 2021. The Company’s net income exceeded dividends paid by $2,202,000. Stock based compensation expense recorded pursuant to the Company’s Long-Term Incentive Plan added $158,000 to stockholders’ equity in 2021, while treasury stock issued for stock plans increased shareholders’ equity by $77,000. Treasury stock purchases during the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased stockholders’ equity by $861,000, as did the $6,883,000 adjustment to accumulated other comprehensive income (“AOCI”) to record the change in fair value of debt securities and cash flow hedges.
The following table summarizes how the components of equity changed in the last two years.
Average stockholders’ equity in 2021 was $73,638,000, a decrease of 3.2% from $76,056,000 in 2020, and was $70,771,000 in 2019. At December 31, 2021, Juniata held 162,737 shares of stock in treasury versus 125,838 at December 31, 2020. Return on average equity increased to 8.97% in 2021 from 7.37% in 2020 partially due to higher income in 2021 compared to 2020, as well as the decline in average equity resulting primarily from the decrease in AOCI. See the discussion in the 2021 Financial Overview section.
The Company periodically repurchases shares of its common stock under the share repurchase program approved by the Board of Directors. In November of 2021, the Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of an additional 200,000 shares of its common stock through its share repurchase program. The program will remain authorized until all approved shares are repurchased, unless terminated by the Board of Directors. Repurchases have typically been accomplished through open market transactions and have complied with all regulatory restrictions on the timing and amount of such repurchases. Shares repurchased have been added to treasury stock and accounted for at cost. These shares may be reissued for stock option exercises, employee stock purchase plan purchases, restricted stock awards, to fulfill dividend reinvestment program needs and to supply shares needed as consideration in an acquisition. During 2021 and 2020, 50,482 and 87,712 shares, respectively, were repurchased in conjunction with this program. There were also 200 and 565 restricted share awards forfeited in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Treasury shares of 13,783 and 4,459 were also redeemed for stock purchase plan purchases in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The treasury shares remaining authorized for repurchase in the program were 209,307 as of December 31, 2021 as the board of directors authorized an additional 200,000 shares in November 2021.
Juniata declared dividends of $0.88 per common share in each of 2021 and 2020 (See Note 14 of The Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements regarding restrictions on dividends from the Bank to the Company). The dividend payout ratio was 66.66% and 79.71% in 2021 and 2020, respectively. The dividend payout ratio in 2021 was less than 2020 due to higher net income in 2021 compared to 2020. In January 2022, the Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.22 per share to stockholders of record on February 15, 2022, payable on March 1, 2022.
Juniata’s book value per share at December 31, 2021 was $14.29 as compared to $15.23 at December 31, 2020. Juniata’s average equity to assets ratio for 2021 and 2020 was 9.01% and 10.28%, respectively. Refer also to the Capital Risk section in the Asset / Liability management discussion that follows.
ASSET / LIABILITY MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES
Management believes that optimal performance is achieved by maintaining overall risks at a low level. Therefore, the objective of asset/liability management is to control risk and produce consistent, high quality earnings independent of changing interest rates. The Company has identified five major risk areas discussed below:
● Liquidity Risk
● Capital Risk
● Interest Rate Risk
● Investment Portfolio Risk
● Economic Risk
Liquidity Risk
Through liquidity risk management, we seek to maintain our ability to readily meet commitments to fund loans, purchase assets and other securities and repay deposits and other liabilities. Liquidity management also includes the ability to manage unplanned changes in funding sources and recognize and address changes in market conditions that affect the quality of liquid assets. Juniata has developed a methodology for assessing its liquidity risk through an analysis of its primary and total liquidity sources. Juniata relies on three main types of liquidity sources: (1) asset liquidity, (2) liability liquidity and (3) off-balance sheet liquidity.
Asset liquidity refers to assets that we are quickly able to convert into cash, consisting of cash, federal funds sold and securities. Short-term liquid assets generally consist of federal funds sold and securities maturing over the next twelve months. The quality of our short-term liquidity is very good; as federal funds are unimpaired by market risk and as bonds approach maturity, their value moves closer to par value. Liquid assets tend to reduce earnings when there is not an immediate use for such funds, since normally these assets generate income at a lower rate than loans or other longer-term investments.
Liability liquidity refers to funding obtained through deposits. The largest challenge associated with liability liquidity is cost. Juniata’s ability to attract deposits depends primarily on several factors, including sales effort, competitive interest rates and other conditions that help maintain consumer confidence in the stability of the financial institution. Large certificates of deposit, public funds and brokered deposits are all acceptable means of generating and providing funding. If the cost is favorable or fits the overall cost structure of the Bank, then these sources have many benefits. They are readily available, come in large block size, have investor-defined maturities and are generally low maintenance.
Off-balance sheet liquidity is closely tied to liability liquidity. Sources of off-balance sheet liquidity include Federal Home Loan Bank borrowings, repurchase agreements and federal funds lines with correspondent banks. These sources provide immediate liquidity to the Bank. They are available to be deployed when a need arises. These instruments also come in large block sizes, have investor-defined maturities and generally require low maintenance.
“Available liquidity” encompasses all three sources of liquidity when determining liquidity adequacy. It results from the Bank’s access to short-term funding sources for immediate needs and long-term funding sources when the need is determined to be permanent. Management uses both on-balance sheet liquidity and off-balance sheet liquidity to manage its liquidity position. The Company’s liquidity strategy seeks to maintain an adequate volume of high-quality liquid instruments to facilitate customer liquidity demands. Management also maintains sufficient capital, which provides access to the liability and off-balance sheet sides of the balance sheet for funding. An active knowledge of debt funding sources is important to liquidity adequacy.
Contingency funding management involves maintaining contingent sources of immediate liquidity. Management believes that it must consider an array of available sources in terms of volume, maturity, cash flows and pricing. To meet demands in the normal course of business or for contingency, secondary sources of funding such as public funds deposits, collateralized loans, sales of investment securities or sales of loan receivables are considered.
It is the Company’s policy to maintain both a primary liquidity ratio and a total liquidity ratio greater than 10% of total assets. The primary liquidity ratio equals liquid assets divided by total assets, where liquid assets equal the sum of cash and due from banks, federal funds sold, interest bearing deposits with other banks and available for sale securities. Total
liquidity is comprised of all components noted in primary liquidity plus securities classified as held-to-maturity, if any. If either of these liquidity ratios falls below 10%, it is the Company’s policy to increase liquidity in a timely manner to achieve the required ratio.
It is the Company’s policy to maintain available liquidity greater than 10% of total assets and contingency liquidity greater than 7.5% of total assets.
Juniata is a member of the FHLB of Pittsburgh, which provides short-term liquidity and a source for long-term borrowings. The Bank uses this vehicle to satisfy temporary funding needs throughout the year. In 2020, the Company executed a three-year cash flow hedge on $20,000,000 in rolling three-month advances from the FHLB. In 2021, the Company replaced the $20,000,000 FHLB three-month advance with brokered interest bearing demand deposits of the same amount. The Company had no short-term borrowings on December 31, 2021 and $20,000,000 on December 31, 2020.
The Bank’s maximum borrowing capacity with the FHLB was $182,573,000 at December 31, 2021. To borrow additional amounts, the FHLB would require the Bank to purchase additional FHLB Stock. The FHLB is a source of both short-term and long-term funding. The Bank must maintain sufficient qualifying collateral to secure all outstanding advances.
Juniata needs to have liquid resources available to fulfill contractual obligations that require future cash payments.
Capital Risk
The Company maintains sufficient core capital to protect depositors and shareholders and to take advantage of business opportunities while ensuring that it has resources to absorb the risks inherent in the business. Federal banking regulators have established capital adequacy requirements for banks and bank holding companies based on risk factors, which require more capital backing for assets with higher potential credit risk than assets with lower credit risk.
The Bank is subject to risk-based capital standards by which banks are evaluated in terms of capital adequacy. These regulatory capital requirements are administered by the federal banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can result in certain mandatory and possibly additional discretionary actions by regulators that, if undertaken, could have a direct material effect on the consolidated financial statements. Under capital adequacy guidelines and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of the Bank’s assets, liabilities, and certain off-balance sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The Bank’s capital and classification are also subject to qualitative judgments by the regulators. Management believes that, as of December 31, 2021, the Bank met all capital adequacy requirements to which it is subject.
Prompt corrective action regulations provide five classifications: well-capitalized, adequately capitalized, undercapitalized, significantly undercapitalized, and critically undercapitalized, although these terms are not used to represent overall financial condition. If adequately capitalized, regulatory approval is required to accept brokered deposits. If undercapitalized, capital distributions are limited, as is asset growth and expansion, and capital restoration plans are required. At year-end 2021 and 2020, the most recent regulatory notifications categorized the Bank as well-capitalized under the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action. There are no conditions or events since that notification that management believes have changed the institution’s category.
In December 2010, the Basel Committee released its final framework for strengthening international capital and liquidity regulation, officially identified by the Basel Committee as “Basel III”. In July 2013, the FRB approved final rules to implement the Basel III capital framework which revises the risk-based capital requirements applicable to bank holding companies and depository institutions. The new minimum regulatory capital requirements established by the U.S. Basel III Capital Rules were fully phased in on January 1, 2019 and require financial institutions to maintain: (a) Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) to risk-weighted assets ratio of at least 4.5%; (b) a minimum ratio of tier 1 capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 6.0%; (c) a minimum ratio of total (that is, tier 1 plus tier 2) capital to risk-weighted assets of at least 8.0%; and (d) a minimum leverage ratio of 3.0%, calculated as the ratio of tier 1 capital balance sheet exposures plus certain off-balance sheet exposures (computed as the average for each quarter of the month-end ratios for the quarter). However, unless the Bank maintains an additional 2.5% “capital conservation buffer” above the percentages stated above in (a) - (c), the Company may be unable to obtain capital distributions from it, which could negatively impact the Company’s ability to pay dividends, service debt obligations or repurchase common stock. In addition, such a failure could
result in a restriction on the Company’s ability to pay certain cash bonuses to executive officers, negatively impacting the Company’s ability to retain key personnel.
In 2019, the federal banking agencies jointly issued a final rule providing an optional, simplified measure of capital adequacy, the community bank leverage ratio framework (“CBLR framework”), for qualifying community banking organizations, consistent with Section 201 of the Economic Growth Act. The final rule became effective on January 1, 2020 and was elected by the Bank in 2020. In April 2020, the federal banking agencies issued an interim final rule temporarily change the CBLR framework, pursuant to section 4012 of the CARES Act, and a second interim final rule providing a graduated increase in the community bank leverage ratio requirement after the expiration of the temporary changes implemented pursuant to section 4012 of the CARES Act.
The community bank leverage ratio removes the requirement for qualifying banking organizations to calculate and report risk-based capital, but rather only requires compliance with a Tier 1 to average assets (“leverage”) ratio. Qualifying banking organizations that elect to use the CBLR framework and that maintain a leverage ratio of greater than required minimums will be considered to have satisfied the generally applicable risk-based and leverage capital requirements in the agencies’ capital rules (generally applicable rule) and, if applicable, will be considered to have met the well-capitalized ratio requirements for purposes of Section 38 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act. Under the interim final rules, the community bank leverage ratio minimum requirement is 8.0% as of December 31, 2020, 8.5% for calendar year 2021, and 9.0% for calendar year 2022 and beyond. The interim rule allows for a two-quarter grace period to correct a ratio that falls below the required amount, provided the Bank maintains a leverage ratio of 7.0% as of December 31, 2020, 7.5% for calendar year 2021, and 8.0% for calendar year 2022 and beyond.
Under the final rule, an eligible banking organization can opt out of the CBLR framework and revert back to the risk-weighting framework without restriction. As of December 31, 2021, the Bank was a qualifying community banking organization as defined by the federal banking agencies but elected to revert back to the risk-weighting framework under the Basel III capital requirements at year-end 2021. See Note 14 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Rate Risk
For most financial institutions, including Juniata, interest rate risk primarily reflects exposures to changes in interest rates. Interest rate fluctuations affect earnings by changing net interest income and other interest-sensitive income and expense levels. Interest rate changes also affect capital by changing the net present value of a bank’s future cash flows, and the cash flows themselves, as rates change. Accepting this risk is a normal part of banking and can be an important source of profitability and enhancing shareholder value. However, excessive interest rate risk can threaten a bank’s earnings, capital, liquidity and solvency. The Company’s sensitivity to changes in interest rate movements is continually monitored by the Asset Liability Management Committee (“ALCO”). At December 31, 2021, the Company’s cumulative repricing gap analysis indicated a liability-sensitive balance sheet through one year when measured on a static basis.
Investment Portfolio Risk
Management considers its investment portfolio risk as the amount of appreciation or depreciation the investment portfolio will sustain when interest rates change. The securities portfolio will decline in value when interest rates rise and increase in value when interest rates decline. Securities with long maturities, excessive optionality (because of call features) and unusual indexes tend to produce the most market risk during interest rate movements. Rate shocks of minus 100 and plus 100, 200, 300 and 400 basis points were applied to the securities portfolio to determine how Tier 1 capital would be affected if the securities portfolio had to be liquidated and all gains and losses were recognized. The test revealed that, as of December 31, 2021, capital levels would remain adequate under these scenarios.
Economic Risk
Economic risk is the risk that the long-term or underlying value of the Company will change if interest rates change. Economic value of equity (“EVE”) represents the change in the value of the balance sheet without regard to business continuity. Rate shocks are applied to all financial assets and liabilities, using parallel and non-parallel rate shifts of 100 to 400 basis points to estimate the change in EVE under the various hypothetical scenarios. As of December 31, 2021, in a rising rate environment, the modeling results for a 100 and 200 basis point rate increase indicated the Company’s liabilities would increase in value slightly more than assets would lose value, while a 300 and 400 basis point rate increase indicated the Company’s liabilities would increase in value slightly less than assets would lose in value. A non-parallel
200 basis point increase shock in rates produced an estimated 1.1% increase in EVE, indicating a stable value well within Juniata’s policy guidelines.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
The Company has numerous off-balance sheet loan obligations that exist to meet the financing needs of its customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, unused lines of credit and letters of credit. Because many commitments are expected to expire without being drawn upon, the total commitment amounts do not necessarily represent future cash requirements. These instruments involve, to varying degrees, elements of credit and interest rate risk that are not recognized in the consolidated financial statements. The Company does not expect that these commitments will have an adverse effect on its liquidity position.
Exposure to credit loss in the event of non-performance by the other party to the financial instrument for commitments to extend credit and financial guarantees written is represented by the contractual notional amount of those instruments. The Company uses the same credit policies in making these commitments as it does for on-balance sheet instruments.
The Company had outstanding loan origination commitments aggregating $94,349,000 and $81,997,000 on December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase was mainly due to a participation loan closed at the end of 2021 in which the Company had a $10,000,000 outstanding commitment. In addition, the Company had $12,714,000 and $13,092,000 outstanding in unused lines of credit commitments extended to its customers on December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Letters of credit are instruments issued by the Company that guarantee payment by the Bank to the beneficiary in the event of default by the Company’s customer in the non-performance of an obligation or service. Most letters of credit are extended for a one-year period. The credit risk involved in issuing letters of credit is essentially the same as that involved in extending loan facilities to customers. The Company holds collateral supporting those commitments for which collateral is deemed necessary. The amount of the liability as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 for guarantees under letters of credit issued is not material.
The maximum undiscounted exposure related to these guarantees on December 31, 2021 was $5,724,000, and the approximate value of underlying collateral upon liquidation that would be expected to cover this maximum potential exposure was $33,517,000.
In 2017 and 2021, the Company executed renewal agreements for technology outsourcing services through two outside service bureaus. Both agreements provide for termination fees if the Company cancels the services prior to the end of the commitment periods that run through May 31, 2024 and May 31, 2026, respectively. At December 31, 2021, potential termination fees on the two contracts were estimated to be approximately $1,405,000 and $1,272,000, respectively. Since the Company does not expect to terminate these services with either vendor prior to the end of the commitment periods, no liability has been recorded as of December 31, 2021.
EFFECTS OF INFLATION
The performance of a bank is affected more by changes in interest rates than by inflation; therefore, the effect of inflation is normally not as significant to the Company as it is to other businesses and industries. During periods of high inflation, the money supply usually increases, and banks normally experience above average growth in assets, loans and deposits. A bank’s operating expenses may increase during inflationary times as the price of goods and services increase.
A bank’s performance is also affected during recessionary periods. In times of recession, a bank usually experiences a tightening on its earning assets and on its profits. A recession is usually an indicator of higher unemployment rates, which could mean an increase in the number of nonperforming loans because of continued layoffs and other deterioration of consumers’ financial condition.