Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
(Dollar and share amounts in millions, except per share amounts and where noted otherwise)
The following MD&A provides a narrative of our financial performance and is intended to promote understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. MD&A is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, Item 8: Financial Statements and Supplementary Data and generally discusses the results of operations for fiscal year 2021 compared with 2020. For our comparison and discussion of 2020 and 2019, see Item 7: Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II of our 2020 Annual Report. The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements and should also be read in conjunction with Item 1A: Risk Factors as well as other cautionary statements and risks described elsewhere in this 2021 Annual Report, before deciding to purchase, hold or sell shares of our common stock.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 23
OVERVIEW
We made progress this year on our strategic initiatives and met our 2021 financial targets, giving us line of sight to achieving our Investor Event targets in the near term. We continue to work with urgency to build additional capabilities to better serve customers, expand market share and deliver greater profitability.
For the year, net earnings were $178, or $1.10 per diluted share, which included an after-tax debt refinancing charge of $65, or $0.40 per diluted share. While net sales decreased 5% compared with 2019, we saw sequential improvement in sales each quarter after taking into account an approximately 200 basis point impact due to the timing shift of this year’s Anniversary Sale between the second and third quarter.
We ended the year laser focused on three key areas: improving Nordstrom Rack performance, increasing profitability and optimizing our supply chain and inventory flow.
•For Nordstrom Rack, we posted a sequential sales improvement of 320 basis points in the fourth quarter. Though we are in the early stages of implementation, Nordstrom Rack results and improving store customer satisfaction scores reaffirm our confidence in our plans to optimize the customer experience and improve our performance.
•In terms of profitability, we delivered significant improvement in merchandise margin this quarter.
•We expect supply chain optimization workstreams we began implementing in the fourth quarter will enhance the customer experience and drive topline growth while also driving efficiencies in labor and fulfillment in 2022.
We also continue to make progress in the key strategic growth priorities we laid out at our Investor Event last year: winning in our most important markets, broadening the reach of Nordstrom Rack and increasing our digital velocity.
Winning in our most important markets: Our market strategy links our omni-channel capabilities at the local market level, allowing us to drive customer engagement through better service and greater access to product no matter how customers choose to shop. This platform is a unique differentiator, delivering unmatched convenience and enabling us to provide customers with four times more product available for next-day pickup, a one-day reduction in average shipping time and the ability to pick up orders at the Nordstrom, Nordstrom Local or Nordstrom Rack location of their choice.
We continue to scale the enhanced options we launched in 2020, like the expansion of order pickup and ship-to-store to all Nordstrom Rack stores, with order pickup reaching a record high 11% of Nordstrom.com sales in the fourth quarter. One-third of fourth quarter next-day Nordstrom.com demand was picked up at Nordstrom Rack stores, demonstrating the power of integrating capabilities across our two brands and across our digital and physical platforms. Increasing “Buy Online Pick Up In Store” utilization is advantageous as it is both our highest satisfaction customer experience and most profitable customer journey.
We also continue to evolve our approach to get closer to our customers than ever before, building deeper connections through our loyalty program and differentiated service model. Our Nordy Club loyalty program is a powerful engagement driver, with 67% sales penetration in 2021. Our core customers remain highly engaged with loyalty customer counts exceeding 2019 levels.
We are advancing our digital tools, including virtual styleboards and style links, to allow our salespeople to offer our customers highly relevant recommendations, both in store and digitally. In 2021, remote selling sales volume increased 63% versus last year. We are encouraged by the results of this program with very high customer satisfaction scores and average customer spend over six times that of an average Nordstrom customer.
Broadening the reach of Nordstrom Rack: Nordstrom Rack has a unique mix of premium brands with limited distribution in the off-price sector. Customers are drawn to Nordstrom Rack to purchase sought after brands at a terrific price. While many retailers are dealing with macro-related supply chain disruptions, Nordstrom Rack faces a heightened challenge as off-price procurement of the same top brands we carry at Nordstrom is particularly difficult in the current environment with lower levels of clearance product. As a result, we are executing a multi-layered plan to both expand our offerings of the most coveted brands we carry, as well as source from new vendors to ensure we have the selection our customers want.
As we improve our supply of premium brands and fine tune our assortment to better align with customer needs, we expect to achieve a better balance of price points at Nordstrom Rack. Through this set of actions, as well as strengthening Nordstrom Rack brand awareness and driving traffic, we seek to drive continued improvement in Nordstrom Rack performance throughout 2022.
Increasing our digital velocity: We maintained strong growth at Nordstrom.com and NordstromRack.com in 2021, with digital sales increasing 24% compared with 2019. With continued growth in digital, our total penetration has increased by 10 percentage points over the past two years to 42%. In the fourth quarter, we also saw record high mobile app usage, with mobile users representing approximately 70% of total digital traffic.
Though we still have work to do on our transformation, the progress we have made gives us confidence in our strategic plans and business outlook for 2022. We believe there is a meaningful opportunity ahead for us to better serve customers by improving Nordstrom Rack performance and transforming our supply chain, leading to increased profitability and shareholder value creation. We have line of sight to achieving the financial targets outlined at our 2021 Investor Event while building the capabilities to profitably grow market share beyond that.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
In our ongoing effort to enhance the customer experience, we are focused on providing a seamless retail experience across our Company. We invested early in integrating our operations, merchandising and technology across our stores and online, and in both Nordstrom and Nordstrom Rack banners. By connecting our digital and physical assets across Nordstrom and Nordstrom Rack, we are able to better serve customers when, where and how they want to shop. We have one Retail reportable segment and analyze our results on a total Company basis, using customer, market share, operational and net sales metrics.
Due to the extraordinary impact of COVID-19 on our results in fiscal year 2020, we analyzed fiscal year 2021 net sales through EBIT against fiscal years 2020 and 2019 to provide useful supplemental comparability.
We monitor a number of key operating metrics to evaluate our Company performance. In addition to net sales, net income (loss) and other results under GAAP, two other key operating metrics we use are GMV and inventory turnover rate.
•GMV: Our GMV represents the total dollar value of items sold through our digital platforms and stores. GMV includes net sales from inventory we own, as well as the value of merchandise sold under our alternative partnership models with our vendors. We use GMV as an indicator of the scale and growth of our operations and the impact of our alternative partnership models.
•Inventory Turnover Rate: Inventory turnover rate is calculated as the trailing 4-quarter cost of sales and related buying and occupancy costs divided by the trailing 4-quarter average inventory. Inventory turnover rate is an indicator of our success in optimizing inventory volumes in accordance with customer demand.
Net Sales
The following table summarizes net sales:
Net Sales (2021 vs. 2020)
Total Company net sales increased compared with 2020. This increase primarily resulted from the impacts of COVID-19 and the related temporary store closures for approximately three months during 2020. During the year, we opened one and closed three Nordstrom Rack stores. The top-performing merchandise categories were Men’s Apparel, Designer and Active compared with 2020. Total Company GMV increased 40% compared with 2020. Total Company net sales in the Southern markets, including Southern California, outperformed the Northern markets compared with 2020. Digital sales, Nordstrom net sales and Nordstrom Rack net sales increased compared with 2020.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 25
Net Sales (2021 vs. 2019)
Total Company net sales decreased 4.8% compared with 2019. The decrease is primarily from the first half of 2021 as we saw sequential quarterly improvement during the year as we recovered from the impacts of COVID-19. The top-performing merchandise categories were Home, Active and Designer compared with 2019. Total Company GMV decreased 4% compared with 2019. Total Company net sales in the Southern markets, including Southern California, outperformed the Northern markets, and suburban locations outperformed our urban locations compared with 2019. Digital sales increased 24%, Nordstrom net sales decreased 3.0% and Nordstrom Rack net sales decreased 8.2% compared with 2019.
See Note 2: Revenue in Item 8 for information about disaggregated revenues.
Credit Card Revenues, Net
Credit card revenues, net include our portion of the ongoing credit card revenue, net of credit losses, pursuant to our program agreement with TD. TD is the exclusive issuer of our consumer credit cards and we perform the account servicing functions.
Credit Card Revenues, Net (2021 vs. 2020)
Credit card revenues, net increased $29 compared with 2020, primarily as a result of higher interchange fees due to increased spend on credit cards and lower losses from bad debt.
Credit Card Revenues, Net (2021 vs. 2019)
Credit card revenues, net decreased $5 compared with 2019, primarily as a result of lower finance charges due to lower outstanding balances.
Gross Profit
The following table summarizes gross profit:
Gross Profit (2021 vs. 2020)
Gross profit increased $2,301 and 8 percentage points as a rate of net sales, compared with 2020, primarily due to reduced markdowns and increased leverage on buying and occupancy costs.
Ending inventory as of January 29, 2022 increased 23% versus a 23% increase in sales in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared with 2020. The change in inventory levels compared with 2020 was due to planned investments to support improved in-stock levels, as well as decreased inventory levels in 2020 that aligned with lower sales from the impacts of COVID-19. Higher inventory levels in 2021 led to a decrease in inventory turnover rate compared with 2020.
Gross Profit (2021 vs. 2019)
Gross profit decreased $142 compared with 2019, due to lower sales volume, partially offset by reduced markdowns. Gross profit rate increased 75 basis points for the same period, primarily due to reduced markdowns, partially offset by deleverage on lower sales volume.
Ending inventory as of January 29, 2022 increased 19%, compared with February 1, 2020, versus a 1% decrease in sales in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared with 2019. Approximately half of the inventory increase compared with 2019 was due to planned investments to support improved in-stock levels.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A is summarized in the following table:
SG&A (2021 vs. 2020)
SG&A increased $791 in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to higher variable expenses associated with higher sales volume and labor cost pressure, partially offset by the impact of COVID-19 related charges that occurred in the first half of 2020. SG&A rate decreased 6 percentage points primarily as a result of leverage on higher sales volume and COVID-19 related charges that occurred in the first half of 2020.
SG&A (2021 vs. 2019)
SG&A increased $145 and 3 percentage points as a rate of net sales during 2021, compared with 2019, primarily due to fulfillment and labor cost pressures, partially offset by the continued benefits from resetting the cost structure in 2020.
Earnings (Loss) Before Interest and Income Taxes
EBIT is summarized in the following table:
EBIT (2021 vs. 2020)
EBIT increased $1,539 and 14 percentage points as a rate of net sales in 2021, compared with 2020, as a result of reduced markdowns, higher sales volume and the impact of COVID-19 related charges in the first half of 2020.
EBIT (2021 vs. 2019)
EBIT decreased $292 and 2 percentage points as a rate of net sales in 2021, compared with 2019, primarily due to lower sales volume and fulfillment and labor cost pressures, partially offset by the continued benefits from resetting the cost structure in 2020.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net is summarized in the following table:
Interest expense, net increased $65 in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to debt refinance charges of $88, partially offset by decreased interest related to the redemption of the Secured Notes in the first quarter of 2021.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense is summarized in the following table:
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 27
The following table illustrates the components of our effective tax rate:
1 We reclassified immaterial prior year amounts that were included in the other, net category to conform with current period presentation.
The decrease in the effective tax rate for 2021 compared with 2020 was primarily due to the CARES Act that allowed us to carry back 2020 losses at the higher tax rate applicable in previous years.
Earnings (Loss) Per Share
EPS is as follows:
Earnings (loss) per diluted share increased $5.49 in 2021 compared with 2020, during which stores were temporarily closed for approximately three months of 2020. This increase was primarily due to reduced markdowns and higher sales volumes, partially offset by higher taxes and $0.40 per diluted share for an interest expense charge related to the redemption of the Secured Notes in the first quarter of 2021. In 2020, we incurred COVID-19 related charges, which reduced EPS for 2020 by $1.22 per share.
2022 Outlook
We have provided the following financial outlook for fiscal 2022:
•Revenue growth, including retail sales and credit card revenues, of 5% to 7% versus fiscal 2021
•EBIT margin of 5.6% to 6.0% of sales
•Income tax rate of approximately 27%
•Earnings per share of $3.15 to $3.50, excluding the impact of share repurchase activity, if any
•Leverage ratio of approximately 2.5 times by year-end
Adjusted ROIC (Non-GAAP financial measure)
We believe that Adjusted ROIC is a useful financial measure for investors in evaluating the efficiency and effectiveness of the capital we have invested in our business to generate returns over time. In addition, we have incorporated it in our executive incentive measures and we believe it is an important indicator of shareholders’ return over the long term.
Adjusted ROIC is not a measure of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, return on assets, net earnings, total assets or other GAAP financial measures. Our method of calculating a non-GAAP financial measure may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The financial measure calculated under GAAP which is most directly comparable to Adjusted ROIC is return on assets. The following is a reconciliation of return on assets to Adjusted ROIC:
1 We add back the operating lease interest to reflect how we manage our business. Operating lease interest is a component of operating lease cost recorded in occupancy costs.
2 Estimated income tax (expense) benefit is calculated by multiplying the adjusted net operating profit (loss) by the effective tax rate for the trailing twelve month periods ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021. The effective tax rate is calculated by dividing income tax expense (benefit) by earnings (loss) before income taxes for the same trailing twelve month periods.
3 For leases with property incentives that exceed the ROU assets, we reclassify the amount from assets to other current liabilities and other liabilities and reduce average total assets, as this better reflects how we manage our business.
4 COVID-19 related charges for the four quarters ended January 30, 2021 negatively impacted return on assets by approximately 200 basis points and Adjusted ROIC by approximately 280 basis points.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 29
LIQUIDITY
We strive to maintain a level of liquidity sufficient to allow us to cover our seasonal cash needs and to maintain appropriate levels of short-term borrowings. In the short term, our ongoing working capital and capital expenditure requirements and any dividend payments or share repurchases are generally funded primarily through cash flows generated from operations. In addition, we have access to the commercial paper market and can draw on our revolving credit facilities for working capital, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. Over the long term, we manage our cash and capital structure to maximize shareholder return, maintain our financial position, manage refinancing risk and allow flexibility for strategic initiatives. We regularly assess our debt and leverage levels, capital expenditure requirements, debt service payments, dividend payouts, potential share repurchases and other future investments.
We ended fiscal year 2021 with $322 in cash and cash equivalents and $800 of additional liquidity available on our Revolver. The decrease in cash and cash equivalents in 2021 compared with 2020 reflects payments for long-term debt and higher merchandise purchases. We believe that our operating cash flows are sufficient to meet our cash requirements for the next 12 months and beyond. Our cash requirements are subject to change as business conditions warrant and opportunities arise and we may elect to raise additional funds in the future through the issuance of either debt or equity.
The following is a summary of our cash flows by activity:
Operating Activities
The majority of our operating cash inflows are derived from sales. We also receive cash payments for property incentives from developers and vendors. Our operating cash outflows generally consist of payments to our merchandise vendors (net of vendor allowances) and shipping carriers, payments to our employees for wages, salaries and other employee benefits and payments to our landlords for rent. Operating cash outflows also include payments for income taxes and interest payments on our short-term and long-term borrowings.
Cash from operating activities increased $1,053 between 2021 and 2020 primarily due to an improvement in net earnings and receipt of the income tax refund related to the loss carryback provision of the CARES Act, partially offset by an increase in inventory purchased.
Investing Activities
Our investing cash outflows include payments for capital expenditures, including technology, stores and supply chain improvements and technology costs. Our investing cash inflows are generally from proceeds from sales of property and equipment. Activity also includes the purchase and sale of financial interests.
Net cash used in investing activities increased $174 between 2021 and 2020 primarily due to increased spend for technology, the payment of the majority of our final installment related to Nordstrom NYC and our investment in ASOS.com Ltd.
Capital Expenditures
Our capital expenditures, net are summarized as follows:
1 Deferred property incentives are included in our cash provided by operations in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows in Item 8. We operationally view the property incentives we receive from our developers and vendors as an offset to our capital expenditures.
1 Rates represent 2022 forecasted amounts.
Capital expenditures as a percentage of net sales in 2021 were in-line with our outlook and decreased compared with 2020 primarily due to a decrease in supply chain and technology spend as a percentage of net sales. Going forward, through 2025, we expect capital expenditure requirements on average to range from 3% to 4% of net sales, and primarily support investments in technology and our Supply Chain Network. Approximately $40 of our purchase obligation commitments relate to capital expenditures, of which about 60% is expected to impact our liquidity in the next year (see Note 13: Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8).
Financing Activities
The majority of our financing activities include long-term debt or Revolver proceeds and/or payments, dividend payments and repurchases of common stock.
Cash from financing activities decreased $1,074 between 2021 and 2020 primarily due to paying down the Secured Notes and the 4.0% senior unsecured notes due in October 2021.
In 2020, in response to uncertainty from the COVID-19 pandemic, we announced the suspension of our quarterly dividend payments beginning in the second quarter of 2020 and the immediate suspension of our share repurchase program. We remain committed to these programs over the long term and anticipate that we will be in a position to resume returning cash to shareholders in the first quarter of 2022 subject to the completion of certain year-end certification requirements with our bank group. We intend to resume share repurchases when appropriate.
Share Repurchases
In determining the sizing and timing of share repurchases, we analyze a number of different factors, including our liquidity position, current market and economic conditions, as well as alternative uses of capital, including those used to offset anticipated dilution from equity incentive plans. Share repurchases are made as conditions warrant, in the open market and are then retired. We repurchased no shares of our common stock in 2021 and had $707 remaining in share repurchase capacity as of January 29, 2022. The actual timing, price, manner and amounts of future share repurchases, if any, will be subject to the discretion of the Board of Directors, contractual commitments, market and economic conditions and applicable SEC rules (see Note 11: Shareholders’ Equity in Item 8).
Dividends
In determining the dividends to pay, we analyze our dividend payout ratio and dividend yield, while taking into consideration our current and projected operating performance and liquidity, subject to our Revolver covenants (see Note 5: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8). In 2021, we paid no dividends, compared with $58, or $0.37 per share, in 2020 (see Note 11: Shareholders’ Equity in Item 8).
Cash Requirements
We have various commitments and other executory contracts that are disclosed in the following Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8:
•Note 4: Leases
•Note 5: Debt and Credit Facilities
•Note 7: Self-Insurance
•Note 8: Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan
•Note 12: Income Taxes
•Note 13: Commitments and Contingencies
Other commitments include $77 for deferred compensation and other accrued benefits, $11 of which is payable within one year.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In connection with our workers’ compensation programs, we have standby letters of credit issued on our behalf with $13 available and $2 outstanding as of January 29, 2022 (see Note 7: Self-Insurance in Item 8). In management’s opinion, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have a material current or future effect on our financial condition or financial statements.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 31
Free Cash Flow (Non-GAAP financial measure)
Free Cash Flow is one of our key liquidity measures and, when used in conjunction with GAAP measures, we believe it provides investors with a meaningful analysis of our ability to generate cash from our business.
Free Cash Flow is not a measure of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, operating cash flows or other financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our method of calculating a non-GAAP financial measure may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The financial measure calculated under GAAP which is most directly comparable to Free Cash Flow is net cash provided by (used in) operating activities. The following is a reconciliation of net cash provided by (used in) operating activities to Free Cash Flow:
Adjusted EBITDA (Non-GAAP financial measure)
Adjusted EBITDA is one of our key financial metrics and, when used in conjunction with GAAP measures, we believe it provides investors with a meaningful analysis of our ability to generate pre-tax earnings and cash flow from our operations. Adjusted EBITDA excludes significant items which are non-operating in nature in order to evaluate our core operating performance against prior periods. The financial measure calculated under GAAP which is most directly comparable to Adjusted EBITDA is net earnings.
Adjusted EBITDA is not a measure of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, net earnings, overall change in cash or liquidity of the business as a whole. Our method of calculating a non-GAAP financial measure may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The following is a reconciliation of net earnings (loss) to Adjusted EBITDA:
CAPITAL RESOURCES
Borrowing Capacity and Activity
Our Revolver has a maximum borrowing capacity of $800, which expires in September 2023. Provided that we obtain written consent from our lenders, we have the option to increase the Revolver by up to $200, to a total of $1,000, and two options to extend the Revolver by one year. Our $800 commercial paper program has the effect of reducing available liquidity under the Revolver by an amount equal to the principal amount of commercial paper outstanding. Conversely, borrowings under our Revolver have the effect of reducing the available capacity of our commercial paper program by an amount equal to the amount outstanding. As of January 29, 2022, we had no borrowings outstanding under our Revolver and no issuances outstanding under our commercial paper program. For more information about our credit facilities, see Note 5: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8.
The following represents our principal long-term debt and Revolver activity:
During 2020, we recorded debt issuance costs in other financing activities, net in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows (see Note 5: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8).
Impact of Credit Ratings and Revolver Covenants
Changes in our credit ratings may impact our costs to borrow, whether our personal property secures our Revolver and whether we are permitted to pay dividends or repurchase shares.
For our Revolver, the interest rate applicable to any borrowings we may enter into depends upon the type of borrowing incurred plus an applicable margin, which is determined based on our credit ratings. At the time of this report, our credit ratings and outlook were as follows:
Should the ratings assigned to our long-term debt improve, the applicable margin associated with any borrowings under the Revolver may decrease, resulting in a lower borrowing cost under this facility. Conversely, should the ratings assigned to our long-term debt worsen, the applicable margin associated with any borrowings under the Revolver may increase, resulting in a higher borrowing cost under this facility.
As of January 29, 2022, we were in compliance with all our Revolver covenants. Under our current Revolver covenant structure, if our Leverage Ratio is greater than four or our unsecured debt is rated below BBB- with a stable outlook at Standard & Poor’s or Baa3 with a stable outlook at Moody’s, any outstanding borrowings under our Revolver will be secured by substantially all our personal property.
As of January 29, 2022, our Leverage Ratio was less than 3.75, thus we met the requirements under our Revolver amendment to pay dividends or repurchase shares. For more information about our Revolver covenants, see Note 5: Debt and Credit Facilities in Item 8.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 33
Adjusted Debt to EBITDAR (Non-GAAP financial measure)
Adjusted Debt to EBITDAR is one of our key financial metrics and we believe that our debt levels are best analyzed using this measure, as it provides a reflection of our creditworthiness which could impact our credit rating and borrowing costs. This metric is calculated in accordance with our Revolver covenant and is a key component in assessing whether our revolving credit facility is secured or unsecured, as well as our ability to make dividend payments and share repurchases. Our goal is to manage debt levels to maintain an investment-grade credit rating while operating with an efficient capital structure.
Adjusted Debt to EBITDAR is not a measure of financial performance under GAAP and should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for, debt to net earnings, net earnings, debt or other GAAP financial measures. Our method of calculating a non-GAAP financial measure may differ from other companies’ methods and therefore may not be comparable to those used by other companies. The following is a reconciliation of debt to net earnings to Adjusted Debt to EBITDAR:
1 Based upon the estimated lease liability as of the end of the period, calculated as the trailing four quarters of rent expense multiplied by six, a method of estimating the debt we would record for our leases that are classified as operating if they had met the criteria for a capital lease or we had purchased the property and is calculated under the previous lease standard (ASC 840), consistent with our Revolver covenant calculation requirements. The estimated lease liability is not calculated in accordance with, nor an alternative for, GAAP and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitution for our results reported under GAAP.
2 Rent expense, net of amortization of developer reimbursements, is added back for consistency with our Revolver covenant calculation requirements, and is calculated under the previous lease standard (ASC 840).
3 Other adjusting items to reconcile net earnings to Adjusted EBITDAR as defined by our Revolver covenant include interest income and certain non-cash charges where relevant.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that we make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities during the reporting period. Uncertainties regarding such estimates and assumptions are inherent in the preparation of financial statements and actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions. The following discussion highlights the estimates we believe are critical and should be read in conjunction with the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8. Our management has discussed the development and selection of these critical accounting estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of our Board of Directors, and the Audit and Finance Committee has reviewed our disclosures that follow.
Sales Return Reserve
We reduce sales and cost of sales by an estimate of future customer merchandise returns, which is calculated based on historical and expected return patterns, and record a sales return allowance and an estimated returns asset. We record the impact of the sales return allowance in our separate Nordstrom and Nordstrom Rack banners. The majority of our returns from both digital and physical sales come through our stores. As a result of COVID-19 and the related change in customer buying trends, we experienced declines in 2020 in our online return rates, which historically are higher than our overall average return rates. In 2021, we saw increases in our online return rates, although they were still lower than rates in 2019. Accordingly, we adjusted our estimates of future return rates to reflect recent trends. Estimating future returns requires substantial judgment based on current and historical trends and actual returns may vary from our estimates. A 10% change in the sales return allowance net of the estimated returns asset would have approximately $22 impact on our EBIT for the year ended January 29, 2022. Due to the continued volatility surrounding COVID-19, we may not anticipate changes in return trends or the impact of the sales return reserve accurately in our results.
The Nordy Club Loyalty Program and Gift Cards
We record breakage revenue on unused points, unredeemed Nordstrom Notes and gift cards based on expected customer redemption. We estimate breakage for The Nordy Club and gift cards based on historical and expected trends. Actual redemptions may vary from our estimates. We have experienced a reduction in redemption rate trends of gift cards, leading to increased breakage rates. For The Nordy Club, we have seen an increase in redemption rates, leading to decreased breakage rates. A one percentage point change in our gift card breakage rate would impact our EBIT by approximately $41 for the year ended January 29, 2022.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventories are stated at the lower of cost or market value using the retail inventory method. Under the retail method, the valuation of inventories is determined by applying a calculated cost-to-retail ratio to the retail value of ending inventory. Inherent in the retail inventory method are certain management judgments that may affect the ending inventory valuation as well as gross profit. To determine if the retail value of our inventory should be marked down, we consider current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, age of the merchandise and fashion trends. We record reserves for excess and obsolete inventory based on historical trends and specific identification.
We take physical inventory counts at our stores and Supply Chain Network locations and adjust for differences between recorded amounts and counted amounts. Following each physical inventory cycle and using the most recent physical inventory count and historical results, we record an estimate for shrink, based on a percentage of sales, until the next physical inventory count.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
When facts and circumstances indicate the carrying values of buildings, equipment and ROU assets may be impaired, we compare the carrying value to the related projected future cash flows, among other quantitative and qualitative analyses. Cash flow analysis requires judgment regarding many factors, such as revenues, growth rates, expenses and capital expenditures.
These projections are inherently subject to uncertainties and while we believe the inputs and assumptions utilized in our future cash flows are reasonable, our estimates may change in the near term based on our current and future performance.
Income Taxes
We pay income taxes based on the tax statutes, regulations and case law of the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Our income tax expense and deferred tax assets and liabilities reflect our best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. Tax expense may be affected by numerous items, such as changes in tax law, changes in business operations, the results of tax audits and changes to our forecasts of income and loss due to economic and other conditions, such as COVID-19. Significant judgments and estimates are required in determining consolidated tax expense.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities arise from differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities and for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. The deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated using the enacted tax rates and laws expected to be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. In evaluating the likelihood of realizing the benefit of our deferred tax assets, we consider all available evidence, including historical results and projected future taxable income. The assumptions about future taxable income require the use of significant judgment and are consistent with the plans and estimates we are using to manage the underlying business.
Nordstrom, Inc. and subsidiaries 35
We recorded a valuation allowance against certain foreign deferred tax assets as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021 and intend to maintain the valuation allowance until there is sufficient evidence to support its reversal. We believe there is a reasonable possibility within the next 12 months sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to reach a conclusion the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. Release of the valuation allowance would result in the recognition of certain foreign deferred tax assets and decrease our income tax expense for the period the release is recorded.
The benefits of uncertain tax positions are recorded in our financial statements only after determining it is more likely than not the uncertain tax positions would sustain challenge by taxing authorities. We are periodically audited by federal, state and foreign tax authorities related to our tax filing positions and allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. Although we believe our liabilities for uncertain tax positions are reasonable, because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in an outcome that is materially different from our current estimated liability. Furthermore, we are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of related future cash payments. Any differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period of resolution.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
In November 2020, the SEC adopted the final rule under SEC Release No. 33-10890, Management’s Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary Financial Information, which eliminates the requirement for selected financial data, streamlines certain disclosures in MD&A and eliminates duplicative disclosures with the intention of simplifying reporting compliance. This final rule was effective for us beginning in the first quarter of 2021, and we elected to early adopt the amendments to provision 301, Selected financial data and provision 302, Supplementary financial information in the fourth quarter of 2020. The adoption of this final rule did not have a material effect on our Consolidated Financial Statements.