Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in Delaware on January 14, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, which we refer to as our initial business combination. We are an early-stage emerging growth company and, as such, subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies. Our sponsor is KKR Acquisition Sponsor I LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (our “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement for our Initial Public Offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) became effective on March 16, 2021. On March 19, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of through the issuance and sale of 138,000,000 units consisting of shares of our Class A common stock and one-fourth of one redeemable warrant to purchase one share of Class A common stock (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A common stock included in the Units offered, the “Public Shares”) at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of approximately $1.4 billion, and incurring offering costs of approximately $77.4 million (net of reimbursement from underwriters of $13.8 million), of which $48.3 million was for deferred underwriting commissions. Each whole redeemable warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Public Share at a price of $11.50 per share (a “Public Warrant”).
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 21,733,333 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) to our Sponsor at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, generating proceeds of $32.6 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, approximately $1.4 billion ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. government securities with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or March 19, 2023 (as such period may be extended by our stockholders in accordance with the Certificate of Incorporation, the “Combination Period”), we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds in the Trust Account (net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish the public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and our board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception through December 31, 2021 related to our formation, the preparation for the Initial Public Offering, and since the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the search for a prospective initial business combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of gain on investment (net), dividends and interest held in Trust Account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses related to prospective business combination candidates. There can be no assurance that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
For the period from January 14, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $2.7 million, which consisted of:
•a loss from operations of approximately $2.9 million;
•non-operating income of approximately $7.7 million for changes in fair value of derivative liabilities;
•income from investments held in the Trust Account of approximately $85,000;
•a non-operating expense of approximately $2.2 million for offering costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities.
The loss from operations consisted of approximately $2.7 million of general and administrative expenses and approximately $190,000 in franchise tax expense.
Liquidity and Capital Resources; Going Concern Considerations
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $1.4 billion consisting of cash and U.S. government securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes, and to pay up to $100,000 of any dissolution expenses. Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from the Sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Class B ordinary shares, a loan from the Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note (see Note 4 to our audited financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K) (the "Promissory Note"), and the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust Account. The Company repaid the Promissory Note during 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had current liabilities of $2.7 million and approximately $1.6 million in our operating bank account. We do not have sufficient liquidity to meet our anticipated obligations over the next year from the date of issuance of the financial statements included in this report. In connection with the Company's assessment of going concern considerations
in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity's Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” our management has determined that if the Company is unsuccessful in consummating an initial business combination, the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. We have access to funds from the Sponsor that are sufficient to fund the working capital needs of the Company until a potential business combination or up to the mandatory liquidation date as stipulated in the certificate of incorporation. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loan (see Note 4 to our audited financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). As of December 31, 2021, the Company had a $1.7 million payable outstanding to a related party of the Sponsor for the reimbursement of operating expenses incurred on behalf of the Company. Management further intends to close an initial business combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
We continue to evaluate the impact of both the COVID-19 pandemic and Russia's invasion of Ukraine and have concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of December 31, 2021. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities, other than a contingent obligation to pay the underwriters for our Initial Public Offering $48.3 million in the aggregate for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
This management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to the fair value of financial instruments and accrued expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") Accounting Standards Codification ("ASC") Topic 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The 34,500,000 Public Warrants issued as part of the Units sold in connection with the Initial Public Offering and exercise of the over-allotment and the 21,733,333 Private Placement Warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants is measured at fair value using a Black-Scholes valuation model, while the Public Warrants were valued using a Monte-Carlo simulation model as of March 31, 2021 and the fair value of the Public Warrants is based on their quoted market price as of December 31, 2021.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our
control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our outstanding Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, all 138,000,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Please refer to Note 2 to our audited financial statements contained elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our accounting policies.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 14, 2021. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an “emerging growth company,” we rely on exemptions that permit us to not (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation, among other things. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.