ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The statements in the discussion and analysis regarding industry outlook, our expectations regarding the performance of our business and the forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risks and uncertainties described in “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. You should read the following discussion together with the sections entitled “Risk Factors”,” “Business” and the audited consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report. All references to years, unless otherwise noted, refer to our fiscal years, which end on December 31.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on September 15, 2020. We were incorporated for the purpose of acquiring, engaging in a share exchange, share reconstruction and amalgamation, contractual control arrangement with, purchasing all or substantially all of the assets of, or engaging in any other similar initial business combination with one or more businesses or entities which we refer to throughout this Annual Report as our initial business combination. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Kismet Sponsor Limited, a British Virgin Islands company. The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on February 17, 2021. On February 22, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 23,000,000 units, including 3,000,000 additional units to cover the underwriters’ over-allotment option, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13.1 million, of which approximately $8.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 4,400,000 warrants, at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant with our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $6.6 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $7,000.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, $230.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the initial public offering and a portion of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in a trust account, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a business combination. Our initial business combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the trust account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable, if any, on the income accrued on the trust account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial business combination. However, we will only complete a business combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the outstanding voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a business combination by February 22, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes that were paid by us or are payable by us, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii) to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $64,000 in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $193,000.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the founder Shares, a loan of approximately $111,000 from the sponsor pursuant to a promissory note originally issued on September 23, 2020 and amended on January 22, 2021 (the “Note”) and a portion of the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. We repaid the Note in full on February 24, 2021. Subsequent to the repayment, the facility was no longer available to us. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us loans in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that it will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination. However, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” we have determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after February 22, 2023. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Contractual Obligations
Administrative Services Agreement
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, except that, commencing on February 17, 2021, through the earlier of consummation of the initial business combination and the liquidation, we agreed to pay an affiliate of the sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial support and administrative services. Such fees for the year ended December 31, 2021, were waived by the sponsor’s affiliate.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our formation and the initial public offering, and since the completion of the initial public offering, the search for business combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination at the earliest.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $3.1 million, which consisted of approximately $4.9 million in change in the fair value of derivative assets and liabilities and approximately $39,000 of net gain on the investments held in trust account, partially offset by approximately $1.4 million general and administrative expenses and approximately $395,000 in offering costs associated with issuance of warrants.
For the period from September 15, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $13,000, consisting solely of general and administrative expenses.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, private placement warrants, and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated February 17, 2021. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Pursuant to the forward purchase agreement (described below), we agreed to use our commercially reasonable efforts (i) to file within 30 days after the closing of the initial business combination a registration statement with the sec for a secondary offering of the forward purchase shares and the forward purchase warrants (and underlying Class A ordinary shares), (ii) to cause such registration statement to be declared effective promptly thereafter but in no event later than sixty (60) days after the initial filing, and (iii) to maintain the effectiveness of such registration statement until the earliest of (A) the date on which the sponsor or its assignees cease to hold the securities covered thereby and (B) the date all of the securities covered thereby can be sold publicly without restriction or limitation under Rule 144 under the Securities Act. In addition, the forward purchase agreement provides for “piggy-back” registration rights to the holders of forward purchase securities to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us.
Forward Purchase Agreement
In connection with the consummation of the initial public offering, we entered into a forward purchase agreement with the sponsor, which provides for the purchase of $20.0 million of forward purchase units, which at the option of the sponsor can be increased to $50.0 million, with each forward purchase unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-third of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, for a purchase price of $10.00 per forward purchase unit, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of the initial business combination. The purchase under the forward purchase agreement is required to be made regardless of whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the public shareholders. The forward purchase securities will be issued only in connection with the closing of the initial business combination. The proceeds from the sale of forward purchase securities may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in the initial business combination, expenses in connection with the initial business combination or for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from February 17, 2021 to purchase up to 3,000,000 additional units at the initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On February 22, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $4.6 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $8.1 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
Derivative Assets and Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
We account for our warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering and private placement and forward purchase units as derivative assets/liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant and forward purchase units as assets/liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering was initially measured using Monte-Carlo simulation and subsequently been measured on the market price of such warrants when separately listed and traded at each measurement date. The fair value of warrants issued in connection with the private placement was initially measured using Black-Scholes Option Pricing Model and subsequently using the market value of the public warrants. The fair value of the forward purchase units has been measured using the John C Hull’s Options, Futures and Other Derivatives model at each measurement date.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 23,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity (deficit) section of the Company’s balance sheets. As of December 31, 2020, there were no Class A ordinary shares issued and outstanding.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Effective with the closing of the initial public offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 12,066,667 Class A ordinary shares because their exercise is contingent upon future events. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Share-based Compensation
We comply with the accounting and disclosure requirement of ASC Topic 718, “Compensation - Stock Compensation.” We record share- based compensation to employees and non-employees over the requisite service period based on the estimated grant-date fair value of the awards. Share-based awards with graded-vesting schedules are recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period for each separately vesting portion of the award. We recognize the expense for share-based compensation awards subject to performance-based milestone vesting over the remaining service period when management determines that achievement of the milestone is probable. Management evaluates when the achievement of a performance-based milestone is probable based on the expected satisfaction of the performance conditions at each reporting date. Share-based compensation will be recognized in general and administrative expense in the statements of operations. We issued option awards that contain both a performance condition and service condition. The option awards vest upon the consummation of the initial business combination and will expire in five years after the date on which they first become exercisable. We have determined that the consummation of an initial business combination is a performance condition subject to significant uncertainty. As such, the achievement of the performance is not deemed to be probable of achievement until the consummation of the event, and therefore no compensation has been recognized for the period from inception to December 31, 2021.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or JOBS Act, contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.