Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Kairos Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this
Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on August 26, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
Our sponsor is Kairos Alpha Acquisition LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our registration statements for the initial public offering became effective on January 5, 2021. On January 8, 2020, we consummated our initial public offering of 24,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $240.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13.3 million, inclusive of approximately $8.4 million in deferred underwriting commissions. Our underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full and on January 12, 2020, purchased an additional 3,600,000 units (the “Over-Allotment Units”), generating additional gross proceeds of $36.0 million (the “Over-Allotment”), and incurring additional offering costs of approximately $2.0 million, inclusive of approximately $1.3 million of deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 7,300,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7.3 million. In connection with the consummation of the sale of additional units pursuant to the underwriters’ over-allotment option on January 12, 2020, we sold an additional 720,000 private placement warrants to our sponsor at $1.00 per private placement warrant generating additional gross proceeds of approximately $0.7 million received us on January 8, 2021.
Upon the closing of our initial public offering, the Over-Allotment, and the private placement, $276.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and certain of the proceeds of the private placement were placed in the trust account located in the United States, with Continental acting as trustee, and will be invested by the trustee only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, until the earlier of (i) the completion of a business combination and (ii) the distribution of the trust account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating an initial business combination.
If we are unable to complete a business combination by January 8, 2023 or an Extension Period thereafter, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then issued and outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from August 26, 2020 (inception) through January 6, 2021, was in preparation for an initial public offering, and since the consummation of our initial public offering on January 6, 2021 through December 31, 2021, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of approximately $8.2 million, which consisted of $11.1 million in change in fair value of derivative warrant liabilities, approximately $9,000 in change in fair value of the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan, and approximately $17,000 in interest income from investments held in trust account, partially offset by approximately $2.1 million of general and administrative expenses inclusive of administrative expenses with related party of 240,000, approximately $777,000 of financing costs associated with derivative warrant liabilities, and approximately $1,000 of interest expense on the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $36,000, which consisted solely of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $132,000 in cash and working capital of approximately $209,000.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover for certain expenses on behalf of us in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares, and a loan of approximately $280,000 pursuant to such note issued to our sponsor. We fully repaid such note to our sponsor on January 8, 2021. Subsequent to the closing of our initial public offering and Over-Allotment, the proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account have been used to satisfy our liquidity. In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor could, but is not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans (as defined below).
On November 16, 2021, we entered into an unsecured promissory note, namely, the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan in the principal amount up to $1,500,000 to HS Chronos. Interest accrues on the unpaid principal balance of this HS Chronos Working Capital Loan at the rate of eleven percent (11%) per annum and is repayable in full on the earlier of (i) date on which we consummate the initial business combination or (ii) January 8, 2023. If we do not complete an initial business combination, the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan shall not be repaid and all amounts owed under it will be forgiven except to the extent that we have funds available to it outside of its trust account established in connection with its initial public offering. Upon the consummation of an initial business combination, HS Chronos shall have the option, but not the obligation, to convert the principal balance of the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan, in whole or in part, to warrants of our Company equal to: the portion of the principal amount of the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan being converted divided by $1.00, rounded down to the nearest whole number of warrants. At December 31, 2021, $188,000 was drawn under the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan, presented at fair value of approximately $179,000, leaving approximately $1.3 million of availability.
In addition, in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, other initial shareholders, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the trust account. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post business combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, there were no other Working Capital Loans other than the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan described above.
Based on the foregoing, our management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity from the HS Chronos Working Capital Loan and from our initial shareholders or an affiliate of our initial shareholders, or certain of our officers and directors to meet our needs through an initial business combination. However, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” our management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 8, 2023. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In February 2022, the Russian Federation and Belarus commenced a military action with the country of Ukraine. As a result of this action, various nations, including the United States, have instituted economic sanctions against the Russian Federation and Belarus. The impact of this action and related sanctions on the world economy is not determinable as of the date of this Report. Further, the specific impact of this action on our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows is also not determinable as of the date of this Report.
Other Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants, and securities that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans, if any, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. These holders will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, these holders will have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of our initial business combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional units at our initial public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 12, 2020, the underwriters fully exercised the over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, excluding 1,980,000 units purchased by HS Chronos, or approximately $5.1 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of our initial public offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate is payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Contingent Fee Arrangement
We have entered into fee arrangements with an advisor in connection with our search for a prospective initial business combination. A portion of the fees in connection with the services rendered as of December 31, 2021, amounting to approximately $1.6 million only become due and payable upon the closing of a business combination, and therefore not included as liabilities on the accompanying balance sheets.
Administrative Support Agreement
We agreed to pay our sponsor a total of $20,000 per month, commencing on the effective date of our initial public offering, for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support, of which Mr. de St. Paer, our Chief Financial Officer, will be paid $10,000
per month. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred approximately $240,000 and $0, for expenses in connection with the Administrative Support Agreement, included as administrative expenses - related party on the accompanying statements of operations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were $20,000 and $0 payable for such expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies
Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021 and 2020, 27,600,000 and -0- shares of Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, respectively, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Effective with the closing of our initial public offering (including exercise of the over-allotment option), we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount, which resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Income (Loss) per Ordinary Shares
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units sold in the initial public offering (including the consummation of the Over-Allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 21,820,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events.
We have considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from the weighted average number of basic shares outstanding as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we have included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
HS Chronos Working Capital Loan
We elected the fair value option to account for our HS Chronos Working Capital Loan as defined and more fully described in Note 4. As a result of applying the fair value option, we record each draw at fair value with a gain or loss recognized at issuance, and subsequent changes in fair value are recorded as change in the fair value of HS Chronos Working Capital Loan on the statements of operations. The fair value is based on prices or valuation techniques that require inputs that are both unobservable and significant to the overall fair value measurement. These inputs reflect management’s and, if applicable, an independent third-party valuation firm’s own assumption about the assumptions a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including our warrants to purchase ordinary shares, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is re-assessed at the end of each reporting period.
The public warrants and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The fair value of the public warrants was initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently measured based on the listed market price of such warrants as of December 31, 2021. The fair value of the private placement warrants has been estimated initially and subsequently as of December 31, 2021, using a modified version of the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The determination of the fair value of the warrant liability may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative warrant liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued the ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As such, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s
compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.