Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. These statements are often identified by the use of words such as “may,” “will,” “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “could,” “estimate,” or “continue,” and similar expressions or variations. These statements are based on the belief and assumptions of our management based on information currently available to management, reflecting our current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of certain events may differ materially from those discussed or implied in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the impact of the current COVID-19 pandemic on our business and future financial performance, and those set forth in the section entitled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the risk factors for a more complete understanding of the risks associated with an investment in our securities. For further information regarding forward-looking statements, please refer to the “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our fiscal year end is April 30, and references throughout this Annual Report to a given fiscal year are to the twelve months ended on that date.
Management Overview
We are a clinical stage pharmaceutical company focused on the discovery, development and commercialization of small molecule protease inhibitors for diseases with significant unmet need. We apply our insights into the chemistry and biology of proteases to develop orally delivered, small molecule inhibitors with high selectivity, potency and bioavailability that we believe will make them successful treatments for diseases. We have used these capabilities to develop a proprietary portfolio of novel, small molecule plasma kallikrein inhibitors targeting hereditary angioedema (“HAE”) and diabetic macular edema (“DME”). We also are conducting preclinical development of a novel, oral Factor XIIa (“Factor XIIa”) inhibitor program, which initially is being advanced to provide a next generation of HAE therapeutics and which also offers the opportunity for expansion into other high unmet need indications in the future.
Our most advanced program for HAE is sebetralstrat, which is being developed as a potential on-demand oral therapy for treatment of HAE attacks. In March 2022 we initiated the KONFIDENT trial, a Phase 3 clinical study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of sebetralstat as a potential on-demand therapy for HAE attacks. Data from this study is anticipated in the second half of 2023. KVD824 is our next oral program to be developed as a twice-daily potential oral prophylactic treatment for HAE. We are currently conducting the KOMPLETE clinical trial, which is a Phase 2 study to evaluate the safety and efficacy of KVD824 as a potential therapy for HAE prophylaxis. Data for this study is currently anticipated in mid-2023. Our oral Factor XIIa program is currently expected to file the first IND for this novel target in 2023.
We have devoted substantially all our efforts to research and development, including clinical trials of our product candidates. We have not completed the development of any product candidates. Pharmaceutical drug product candidates, like those being developed by us, require approvals from the FDA or foreign regulatory agencies prior to commercial sales. There can be no assurance that any product candidates will receive the necessary approvals and any failure to receive approval or delay in approval may have a material adverse impact on our business and financial results. We are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties similar to those of other life science companies developing new products, including, among others, the risks related to the necessity to obtain adequate additional financing, to successfully develop product candidates, to obtain regulatory approval of product candidates, to comply with government regulations, to successfully commercialize our potential products, to the protection of proprietary technology and to our dependence on key individuals.
The COVID-19 pandemic and its adverse effects continue to affect the locations where we, our manufacturers, suppliers or third-party business partners conduct business. Although we have continued our operations and clinical trials to date, we have experienced, and if there are renewed or continued closures of business in the European Union, the United States or the United Kingdom, or other impacted areas, we may continue to experience, further delays in our preclinical studies or planned clinical trials, which could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods. In addition, we may experience impact from changes in how we and companies worldwide conduct business due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to continued restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, delays in future site activations and future enrollment of clinical trials, prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic effort, delays in review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies, and disruptions in our supply chain for our product candidates. As of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition, results of operations or guidance is uncertain. The effect of the COVID-19 pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See the section entitled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this report for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
On May 21, 2021, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (the “Sales Agreement”), which established an at-the-market offering program pursuant to which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock from time to time. The Sales Agreement provides for the sale of shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million.
We have funded operations primarily through the issuance of capital stock. As of April 30, 2022, we had an accumulated deficit of $250.2 million and $166.2 million of cash, cash equivalents and available for sale securities. Our working capital is anticipated to fund our operations for at least the next twelve months from the date the audited consolidated financial statements are issued.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We have not generated any revenue in the current fiscal year. To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sale of products, and we do not have any products that have been approved for commercialization. We do not expect to generate product revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for, and commercialize, one of our current or future product candidates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with our research activities, including the preclinical and clinical development of product candidates. We contract with clinical research organizations to manage our clinical trials under agreed upon budgets for each study, with oversight by our clinical program managers. All research and development costs are expensed as incurred.
Costs for certain research and development activities, such as manufacturing development activities and clinical studies are recognized based on the contracted amounts adjusted for the percentage of work completed to date. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the contractual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected on the consolidated balance sheets as prepaid or accrued expenses. We defer and capitalize non-refundable advance payments made for research and development activities until the related goods are delivered or the related services are performed.
We expect to continue to incur substantial expenses related to development activities for the foreseeable future as we conduct clinical development, manufacturing and toxicology studies. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials, additional drug manufacturing requirements, and later stage toxicology studies such as carcinogenicity studies. The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The probability of success for each product candidate is affected by numerous factors, including preclinical data, clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. Accordingly, we may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates.
Completion dates and costs for clinical development programs as well as our research program can vary significantly for each current and future product candidate and are difficult to predict. As a result, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs associated with development of our product candidates at this point in time. We anticipate making determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific success of early research programs, results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into collaborative agreements with respect to programs or potential product candidates, as well as ongoing assessments as to the commercial potential of each current or future product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of the costs associated with general management, obtaining and maintaining our patent portfolio, professional fees for accounting, auditing, consulting and legal services, and general overhead expenses.
We expect ongoing general and administrative expenses to increase in the future as we expand our operating activities, maintain and expand the patent portfolio and incur additional costs associated with the management of a public company and maintain compliance with exchange listing and requirements of the SEC. These potential increases will likely include management costs, legal fees, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums and expenses associated with investor relations, among others.
Other Income
Other income consists of bank and investment interest, research and development tax credits from the United Kingdom government’s tax incentive programs set up to encourage research and development in the United Kingdom, realized and unrealized exchange rate gains/losses on cash held in foreign currencies and transactions settled in foreign currencies, and realized gains and losses from sales of marketable securities.
Income Taxes
We historically have incurred net losses and had no corporation tax liabilities. We file U.S. Federal tax returns, as well as certain state returns. We also file tax returns in the United Kingdom. Under the U.K. government’s research and development tax incentive scheme, we have incurred qualifying research and development expenses and filed claims for research and development tax credits in accordance with the relevant tax legislation. The research and development tax credits are paid out to us in cash and reported as other income.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of our financial statements and the reported revenue and expenses during the reported periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments, including those described below, on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, contractual milestones and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. See also Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which discusses the significant assumptions used in applying our accounting policies. Those accounting policies and estimates that we deem to be critical are as follows:
Preclinical and Clinical Trial Accruals
We base our accrued expenses related to clinical trials on estimates of patient enrollment and related expenses at clinical investigator sites as well as estimates for services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us and based on contracted amounts applied to the level of patient enrollment and activity according to the clinical trial protocol. If timelines or contracts are modified based upon changes in the clinical trial protocol or scope of work to be performed, we modify our estimates of accrued expenses accordingly on a prospective basis.
If we do not identify costs that we have begun to incur, or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Results of Operations
This section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal years 2022 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2022 and 2021. Discussions of fiscal years 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal years 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K can be found in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended April 30, 2021, which was filed with the SEC on July 13, 2021.
Year Ended April 30, 2022 Compared to Year Ended April 30, 2021
The following table sets forth the key components of our results of operations for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021:
Revenue. No revenue was recognized in the years ended April 30, 2022 or 2021.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses were $70.2 million in the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to $41.3 million in the prior year. The increase of $28.9 million was primarily due to increases in spending on sebetralstat of $11.0 million, KVD824 of $3.6 million, personnel costs of $7.5 million, and preclinical activities of $6.9 million. The impact of exchange rates on research and development expenses was an increase of approximately $1.4 million compared to the prior year, which is reflected in the figures above.
Research and development expenses by major programs or categories were as follows:
Expenses for the KVD001 program were consistent with the prior year. We anticipate that expenses will remain at a low rate as we determine next steps for the KVD001 program.
Expenses for the sebetralstat program increased primarily due to the initiation of the Phase 3 KONFIDENT trial in March 2022. We anticipate that these expenses will increase above current levels as the Phase 3 clinical trial of sebetralstat progresses.
Expenses for the KVD824 program increased primarily due to the activities related to the ongoing Phase 2 KOMPLETE clinical trial. We anticipate that these expenses will increase above current levels as this clinical trial progresses.
Personnel expenses increased primarily due to higher research and development and medical headcount compared to the prior year. We anticipate that these expenses will continue to increase to support the growth of the ongoing clinical trials, preclinical activity and commercial planning activities.
Expenses for preclinical activities increased primarily due to additional projects compared to the prior year. We anticipate that expenses will continue to increase as we continue to progress our oral Factor XII inhibitor program and conduct other preclinical activities.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses were $26.4 million in the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to $16.6 million in the prior fiscal year. The increase of $9.8 million was primarily due to increases of $4.5 million in compensation related expenses, $1.9 million in professional fees, $1.8 million in commercial strategy expenses, $1.0 million in facility and other administrative costs, and $0.6 million in travel and insurance expenses, compared to the prior year. We anticipate that expenses will continue at or above current levels as we continue to support the growth of the Company.
Other Income. Other income was $14.3 million for the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to $11.7 million in the prior fiscal year. The increase of $2.6 million was primarily due to an increase of $5.5 million in income from research and development tax credits and an increase of $0.2 million in interest income, offset by an increase in foreign currency exchange rate losses of $2.4 million from transactions denominated in foreign currencies in our U.K. subsidiary and an increase in realized losses from available for sale securities of $0.7 million, compared to the prior year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and have incurred losses since inception and cash outflows from operating activities for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021. As of April 30, 2022, we had an accumulated deficit of $250.2 million and cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaling $166.2 million. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates, which are in various phases of preclinical and clinical development, and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any products for the foreseeable future, and will continue to incur net losses as we continue the research and development efforts on our product candidates, hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, operational, and financial and management personnel.
Sources of Liquidity
On May 21, 2021, the Company filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3 pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell securities having an aggregate public offering price of up to $300 million. In connection with the filing of the Registration Statement, the Company also entered into a Controlled Equity Offering Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (the “2021 Sales Agreement”), through which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock under an at-the-market offering program having an aggregate offering of up to $100.0 million through Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., as our sales agent. We will pay the sales agents a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of sales made through the 2021 Sales Agreement. During the twelve months ended April 30, 2022, we did not offer or sell any shares under the 2021 Sales Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table shows a summary of the net cash flow activity for the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021:
Net cash used in operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $78.1 million for the year ended April 30, 2022 and primarily consisted of a net loss of $82.4 million adjusted for stock-based compensation of $11.1 million, an increase in the research and development tax credit receivable of $5.2 million, and other changes in net working capital. The research and development tax credit receivable increased due to higher eligible spending compared to the prior year. Net cash used in operating activities was $30.2 million for the year ended April 30, 2021 and primarily consisted of a net loss of $46.2 million adjusted for stock-based compensation of $7.1 million, cash flow favorable increases from the research and development tax credit receivable of $7.5 million, and other changes in net working capital. The increase in cash used in operating activities was due to increased spending, primarily on research and development activities during the year ended April 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year.
Net cash provided by (used in) investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $57.9 million for the year ended April 30, 2022 and consisted of sales and maturities of marketable securities of $195.7 million offset by purchases of marketable securities of $136.9 million and acquisitions of property and equipment of $0.9 million. Net cash used in investing activities was $147.7 million for the year ended April 30, 2021 and consisted of purchases of marketable securities of $201.2 million and acquisitions of property and equipment of $0.1 million offset by sales and maturities of marketable securities of $53.6 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $1.6 million for the year ended April 30, 2022 and primarily consisted of the issuance of common stock from equity incentive plans. Net cash provided by financing activities was $212.1 million for the year ended April 30, 2021 and primarily consisted of the net proceeds received in the February 2021 public offering of common stock.
Operating Capital Requirements
To date, we have not generated any revenues from the sale of products, and we do not have any products that have been approved for commercialization. We do not expect to generate significant product revenue unless and until we obtain regulatory approval for, and commercialize, one of our current or future product candidates. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for the foreseeable future, and we expect the losses to increase as we continue the development of, and seek regulatory approvals for, product candidates, and begin to commercialize any approved products. We are subject to all of the risks inherent in the development of new therapeutic products, and we may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other unknown factors that may adversely affect our business. We currently anticipate that, based upon our operating plans and existing capital resources, we have sufficient funding to operate for at least the next 12 months.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity and debt financings, collaborations, strategic partnerships and licensing arrangements. To the extent that additional capital is raised through the sale of stock or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these newly issued securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of common stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include increased fixed payment obligations and covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures, declaring dividends, selling or licensing intellectual property rights and other operating restrictions that could adversely impact our ability to conduct business. Additional fundraising through collaborations, strategic partnerships or licensing arrangements with third parties may require us to relinquish valuable rights to product candidates, including our other technologies, future revenue streams or research programs, or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable. If we are unable to raise additional funds when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and commercialize other product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and commercialize such product candidates internally.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.