ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations ("MD&A") is intended to provide readers of our consolidated financial statements with the perspectives of management. MD&A presents in narrative form information regarding our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and certain other factors that may affect our future results. This should allow the readers of this report to obtain a comprehensive understanding of our businesses, strategies, current trends and future prospects. MD&A should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and related Notes included in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW OF BUSINESS
Kaman Corporation ("the Company") conducts business through three business segments:
•The Engineered Products segment serves the aerospace and defense, industrial and medical markets providing sophisticated, proprietary aircraft bearings and components; super precision, miniature ball bearings; and proprietary spring energized seals, springs and contacts.
•The Precision Products segment serves the aerospace and defense markets providing precision safe and arming solutions for missile and bomb systems for the U.S. and allied militaries; subcontract helicopter work; restoration, modification and support of our SH-2G Super Seasprite maritime helicopters; manufacture and support of our heavy lift K-MAX® manned helicopter, the TITAN UAV aerial system and the KARGO UAV unmanned aerial system, a purpose built autonomous medium lift logistics vehicle.
•The Structures segment serves the aerospace and defense and medical end markets providing sophisticated complex metallic and composite aerostructures for commercial, military and general aviation fixed and rotary wing aircraft, and medical imaging solutions.
Executive Summary
In the year ended December 31, 2021, consolidated net sales from continuing operations decreased by 9.6% to $709.0 million due to a 7.3% decrease in organic sales and $19.8 million in lower sales due to the sale of our UK Composites business in early 2021. Gross margin was 33.4% compared to 31.3% in the prior year period. This performance was driven by improved performance on our seals, springs and contacts and the absence of losses from the UK Composites business. Selling, general and administrative expenses ("S,G&A") decreased by 10.0%, primarily driven by lower employee-related costs and the absence of $8.5 million in acquisition costs incurred in the prior year for the purchase of Bal Seal. GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations improved to $1.57 compared to a loss per share from continuing operations in the prior year, primarily due to the absence of the impairment charges incurred in 2020.
Other financial highlights
•Earnings from continuing operations, net of tax was $43.7 million, a 162.0% increase compared to the prior year. This increase reflects the absence of the goodwill impairment charge and loss on the anticipated sale of our UK Composites business realized in 2020.
•Cash flows provided by operating activities of continuing operations were $48.7 million for 2021, an increase of $32.2 million, compared to the prior year. This change was largely driven by the collection of payments on outstanding receivables related to the Joint Programmable Fuze ("JPF") direct commercial sales ("DCS") program.
•Total unfulfilled performance obligations ("backlog") increased 11.0% to $700.9 million, mostly driven by the award of a follow-on multi-year contract for the BLACK HAWK program and strong order intake at our Engineered Products segment.
Acquisitions and divestitures
•In February 2021, we completed the sale of our UK Composites business.
Awards and recognition
•In October 2021, our Jacksonville division was named Manufacturer of the Year by First Coast Manufacturing Association. Key considerations of the award include environmental, health and safety, continuous improvement, workforce and community engagement and talent management process.
•In April 2021, Kineco Kaman Composites India Private Limited, our joint venture, was named a Gold Supplier of BAE Systems and received the BAE Systems Partner 2 Win Supplier of the Year Award for Command, Control, Communications, Computers, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Systems ("C4ISR") for exceptional performance and contributions to supply chain success in the Electronic Systems sector in 2020.
Management changes
•In December 2021, Russell J. Bartlett was named segment lead of the Engineered Products segment and Structures segment and Darlene R. Smith was named segment lead of the Precision Products segment.
•In July 2021, James G. Coogan was appointed Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, effective July 8, 2021. Mr. Coogan succeeded Robert D. Starr.
•In April 2021, Ian K. Walsh, President and CEO, was appointed Chairman of the Board of Directors and Jennifer Pollino assumed the role of the Lead Independent Director.
Other key events
•In February 2022, our FAA Part 145 Repair Station in Wichita, Kansas earned FAA approval for two new composite repair capabilities.
•In January 2022, we announced the expansion of our medical imaging program through a partnership with Mirion Technologies ("Mirion"). We will supply surgical C-Arm tabletops to Mirion with deliveries expected to begin in the second quarter of 2022.
•In January 2022, we announced that our Kamatics business will support the new James Webb Telescope with its KAron® high technology, self-lubricating bearings.
•In December 2021, we entered into a follow-on multi-year contract with Sikorsky to manufacture UH-60 BLACK HAWK cockpits for both the “M” and the “Med” models.
•In 2021, we received signed purchase agreements for three K-MAX® medium-to-heavy lift helicopters. One aircraft was delivered in the first quarter of 2021 and two aircraft were delivered in the fourth quarter of 2021.
•In October 2021, we integrated our TITAN UAV aerial system onto our K-MAX® aircraft and successfully completed two demonstrations of its capabilities, including Near Earth autonomy and obstacle avoidance technology.
•In October 2021, we successfully completed the demonstration of two flight tests of FireBurstTM enhanced fuzing capability, a Kaman patented Height of Burst solution that adds additional capabilities to existing and future safe and arm devices.
•In September 2021, we unveiled the KARGO UAV unmanned aerial system, a purpose-built, autonomous system designed to be the new standard for expeditionary logistics.
•In August 2021, Kaman Composites - Wichita celebrated the delivery of the 1,500th inlet unit for the CH-47 Boeing Program.
•In August 2021, the Company was selected by Transcend Air Corporation to participate in the manufacturing of its the Vy 400 High Speed Vertical Takeoff and Landing ("HSVTOL") aircraft.
•In August 2021, we announced that that we received an order under Option 16 of our JPF contract with the USG. This order has an expected value of approximately $43 million for the procurement of JPFs for foreign militaries.
•In April 2021, we successfully completed the first test flight with the K-MAX TITAN unmanned aerial system.
•In March 2021, we opened our first production cell for highly engineered products utilizing our proprietary Titanium Diffusion Hardening process.
•In March 2021, we were awarded a contract by Boeing to manufacture the refueling boom assembly for the MH-47 program. The program is expected to start in the first half of 2022.
•In January 2021, the Agencia Nacional de Aviação Civil ("ANAC") in Brazil issued the Type Certificate for the Kaman K-1200 K-MAX® helicopter. We have been marketing the K-MAX® helicopter to various Brazilian operators, power line, oil and gas firms, and engineering companies over the past two years, and this certification clears the path for K-MAX® operations in Brazil.
COVID-19 Discussion
We continue to monitor the impact of the coronavirus ("COVID-19") pandemic on all aspects of our business and across the geographies in which we operate and serve customers, as well as the extent to which it has impacted and will continue to impact our customers, suppliers and other business partners. Despite efforts to mitigate the risks associated with COVID-19, the markets we serve and demand for our products were adversely impacted during 2021 and we have seen some disruptions to our supply chain, such as delays in materials and components used in our manufacturing process; however, we continue to meet the demands of our customers. While we did not incur significant disruptions related to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2021, we continue to operate below pre-pandemic levels for our commercial aerospace products. We anticipate recoveries for these
products in 2022; however, the developments related to COVID-19 variants make it difficult to predict the timing and magnitude of the recovery. We saw recoveries in our medical and industrial end markets during 2021. Our defense and safe and arm device end markets have not been impacted by COVID-19 and we do not expect future declines due to COVID-19 on the results of these end markets. In addition to the pressures discussed above, we anticipate inflationary and wage pressures in 2022. The extent to which COVID-19 may adversely impact the Company depends on future developments, which are highly uncertain and unpredictable at this time.
The health and safety of our employees, their families and communities, and our customers are our highest priorities. To maintain employee productivity and minimize the risk of exposure while working, we continue to follow guidance issued by the Centers for Disease Control and state and local governments to allow our employees to work with confidence knowing that their health and safety is a key priority. We have begun to allow visitors and business associates to our facilities, provided they adhere to the Company's guidelines. On September 9, 2021, the Biden Administration issued an executive order requiring all employers with USG contracts to ensure that their U.S.-based employees, contractors, and subcontractors who perform work on or in support of USG contracts, are fully vaccinated by December 8, 2021, which was later delayed to January 4, 2022. President Biden also announced that he directed the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ("OSHA") to create an Emergency Temporary Standard ("ETS"), stating that all employers with 100 or more employees require that all workers be vaccinated or undergo weekly COVID-19 testing. OSHA issued this ETS on November 5, 2021 which echoed the requirements of the executive order discussed above. In January 2022, the Supreme Court blocked the Biden administration from enforcing the executive order discussed above and a U.S. judge blocked the Biden Administration from enforcing the executive order on federal employees. In the event a vaccine mandate is required, it is currently not possible to predict the effect that the executive order or OSHA ETS will have on our workforce. Ensuring compliance with a vaccine mandate or weekly testing requirement may be difficult and costly and it is possible that some employees may choose to leave employment over a vaccine or testing requirement, which would result in attrition, including the attrition of skilled labor, and difficulty finding future workers. Our ability to perform on our contracts is also dependent upon our subcontractors and suppliers. Our subcontractors and suppliers who are subject to the vaccine mandate may be impacted by an inability to comply or loss of personnel, which could disrupt subcontractor or supplier performance or deliveries. There can be no assurance that the compliance with these requirements will not have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Refer to the Liquidity and Capital Resources section of Management's Discussion and Analysis for information on the impact of COVID-19 on the liquidity of the Company.
RESULTS FROM CONTINUING OPERATIONS
During the third quarter of 2019, we completed the sale of our Distribution business for total cash consideration of $700.0 million, excluding certain working capital adjustments. As a result of the sale, the Distribution business results met the criteria for the presentation of discontinued operations. The results presented below represent the results of continuing operations. See Note 2, Disposals, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further details.
Refer to Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of the change in results of continuing operations from the earliest year presented.
Net Sales from Continuing Operations
Net sales for 2021 decreased when compared to 2020, primarily due to a 7.3% decrease in organic sales and $19.8 million in lower sales due to the sale of our UK Composites business in early 2021. The decrease in organic sales was attributable to $46.2 million in lower sales in our Precision Products segment and $12.1 million in lower organic sales at our Structures segment.
These decreases were partially offset by an increase in sales at our Engineered Products segment. Foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar had a favorable impact of $3.7 million on net sales. See Segment Results of Operations and Financial Condition below for further discussion of segment net sales.
The table below summarizes the changes in organic net sales by product line for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the corresponding period in 2020.
Gross Profit from Continuing Operations
Gross profit for 2021 decreased when compared to 2020. This was primarily attributable to lower direct commercial sales of our JPF to foreign militaries and lower sales and associated gross profit on our bearings products and missile fuzing contracts. These decreases, totaling $35.5 million, were partially offset by the absence of losses associated with our former UK Composites business and higher sales and associated gross profit under our JPF program with the USG, our medical implantable and analytical devices and the SH-2G spares program for New Zealand.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales for 2021 increased when compared to 2020, primarily due to the absence of losses from our former UK Composites business, improved performance on our K-MAX® spares and support and on our seals, springs and contacts. These increases were partially offset by cost growth on our missile fuzing and memory products and on our Boeing Wing-to-Body Fairing program.
Selling, General & Administrative Expenses (S,G&A) from Continuing Operations
The decrease in S,G&A expenses for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily attributable to a decrease in employee-related costs, including lower salary and wage expenses as a result of the workforce reductions implemented to support our cost savings initiative, the absence of $8.5 million of Bal Seal acquisition costs and $2.3 million in third party costs associated with our efforts to reduce general and administrative expenses in the prior year and lower S,G&A of $4.6 million due to the sale of our UK Composites business in early 2021. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in group health costs.
Costs from Transition Services Agreement
Upon closing the sale of the Distribution business, the Company entered into a transition services agreement ("TSA") with the buyer, pursuant to which the Company agreed to support the information technology, human resources and benefits, tax and treasury functions of the Distribution business for six to twelve months. The buyer had the option to extend the support period for up to an additional year for certain services. The buyer exercised the option to extend the support period for up to a maximum of an additional year for certain information technology services. The buyer had the right to terminate individual services at any point over the renewal term and began to terminate certain services during the third quarter of 2020. During the third quarter of 2021, the TSA expired and all services were completed as of the end of the period. The Company incurred $1.7 million, $12.5 million and $4.7 million in costs associated with the TSA in the years ending December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. These costs were partially offset by $0.9 million, $8.4 million, and $3.7 million in income earned from the TSA included in income from transition services agreement, which is below operating income on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Cost of Acquired Retention Plans
Bal Seal's previous owner implemented employee retention plans prior to our 2020 acquisition of the business. Upon closing, we funded $24.7 million of the purchase price into escrow accounts associated with these employee retention plans. Eligible participants received an allocation of the escrow balances one year following the acquisition date. Upon acquisition, Bal Seal had $1.9 million in costs accrued for these employee retention plans; therefore, we incurred $22.8 million in compensation expense associated with these retention plans in the year ended December 31, 2020. Eligible participants received an allocation of the escrow balance one year following the acquisition date, which is reflected in the Company's cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Goodwill and Other Intangibles Impairment
During the third quarter of 2020, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment of our Aerosystems reporting unit based on a decline in earnings compared to forecasts used in prior periods and updated forecasts, which indicated the forecasted cash flows for this reporting unit were lower than amounts previously forecasted. The evaluation resulted in a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million for the Aerosystems reporting unit in the year ended December 31, 2020, which represented the entire goodwill balance for this reporting unit.
See Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, for further information on the goodwill impairment charge taken in the prior year period.
Impairment of Assets Held for Sale
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we committed to a plan and received approval from our Board of Directors to sell our UK Composites division. At December 31, 2020, the assets of the UK Composites business were considered impaired as the estimated fair value of the disposal group was lower than the estimated carrying value of the UK Composites business. As a result, $24.3 million in assets were written off and the remaining loss related to the anticipated sale of the disposal group of $12.0 million was accrued for in liabilities held for sale, current portion on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets, resulting in a total loss of $36.3 million recorded to impairment on assets held for sale on the Company's Consolidated
Statements of Operations in the year ended December 31, 2020. Of this amount, $22.9 million related to the cumulative translation adjustment balance for the UK Composites division. In the first quarter of 2021, we closed on a transaction to sell the UK Composites business, which did not qualify for reporting of discontinued operations. We recorded an additional loss of $0.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 associated with the sale which was recorded to loss (gain) on sale of business.
Restructuring and Severance Costs from Continuing Operations
The following table disaggregates the components of restructuring and severance costs:
Cost Reduction Initiative
Since the sale of our former distribution business in 2019, we continued to evaluate our cost structure with the objective of a lean organizational structure that improves operational efficiency and provides a scalable infrastructure which facilitates future growth opportunities. We have identified information technology functions to be outsourced, workforce reductions and other reductions in certain general and administrative expenses to support the cost savings initiative. The actions taken in 2021 are expected to begin generating savings in the first half of 2022, with total annualized cost savings of approximately $10.3 million being realized by 2024.
Integration of Bal Seal Acquisition
We incurred severance costs as we integrated the acquisition of Bal Seal in year ended December 31, 2020. We are realizing annual cost savings of approximately $1.2 million as a result of these activities.
Workforce Reductions in Response to COVID-19
During 2020, the Company implemented temporary workforce reductions, including furloughs, and elected to eliminate certain open positions as a response to the unprecedented hardships brought on by COVID-19.
The restructure and severance costs above were included in restructuring and severance costs on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations and other unallocated expenses, net within Note 4, Segment and Geographic Information.
Loss (Gain) on Sale of Business
As discussed above, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we committed to a plan and received approval from our Board of Directors to sell our UK Composites division. At December 31, 2020, the assets of the UK Composites business were considered impaired as the estimated fair value of the disposal group was lower than the estimated carrying value of the UK Composites business resulting in a $36.3 million impairment charge recorded to impairment on assets held for sale on the Company's Consolidated Statements of Operations in the year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an additional loss of $0.2 million recorded to loss (gain) on sales of business when the sale was finalized.
During 2018, we sold our UK Tooling business. This sale did not qualify for the reporting of discontinued operations within the consolidated financial statements. In the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company incurred a loss of $3.7 million associated with the write-off of note receivables recorded for the amounts to be collected on the sale of the UK Tooling business as this balance was deemed not likely to be collected. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we collected $0.5 million of the note receivables written off in 2019.
Operating Income (Loss) from Continuing Operations
We had operating income of $49.5 million in 2021, compared to an operating loss of $84.3 million in 2020. This change was primarily attributable to the absence of the impairment charges discussed above and the cost of the acquired retention plan recorded in the prior year. Additionally contributing to the increase in operating income were lower costs incurred related to the TSA, a decrease in severance costs, the absence of costs associated with the purchase accounting for the Bal Seal acquisition and higher operating income at the Engineered Products and Structures segments. These changes were partially offset by lower operating income at the Precision Products segment. See Segment Results of Operations and Financial Condition below for further discussion of segment operating income.
Interest Expense, Net from Continuing Operations
Interest expense, net generally consists of interest charged on our Credit Agreement, which includes a revolving credit facility and a term loan under our previously existing credit facility, and our convertible notes and the amortization of debt issuance costs, offset by interest income. The decrease in interest expense, net for 2021 as compared to 2020 was primarily due to lower interest expense on our revolving credit facility due to lower average borrowings, partially offset by lower interest income earned on marketable securities.
Effective Income Tax Rate from Continuing Operations
The effective tax rate represents the combined federal, state and foreign tax effects attributable to pretax earnings for the year. See Note 16, Income Taxes, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further details.
Backlog
Backlog increased from 2020 to 2021, primarily driven by the follow-on multi-year contract for the BLACK HAWK program, the award of Option 16 under our JPF program with the USG and strong order intake in our Engineered Products segment. These increases were partially offset by revenue recognized for deliveries of direct commercial JPF orders.
Other Matters
Information regarding our various environmental remediation activities and associated accruals can be found in Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, and Note 13, Environmental Costs, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Long-Term Contracts
For long-term contracts, we generally recognize sales and cost of sales over time because of continuous transfer of control to the customer, which allows for recognition of revenue as work on a contract progresses. For those programs for which there is a continuous transfer of control to the customer, we recognize sales and profit on a cost-to-cost basis, in which case sales and profit are recorded based upon the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs to complete the contract. Conversely, revenue on certain programs, such as the K-MAX® program and on direct commercial sales under our JPF program, is recognized at a point in time, with revenue being recognized upon transfer to the end customer. See Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for additional information regarding the effects of adjustments in profit estimates on long-term contracts for which revenue is recognized over time.
SEGMENT RESULTS OF OPERATIONS AND FINANCIAL CONDITION
In the fourth quarter of 2021, the Chief Operating Decision Maker ("CODM") established a new structure for the Company to better align our businesses to support capital allocation plans, portfolio management and growth. This new structure resulted in the introduction of three reportable segments: Engineered Products, Precision Products and Structures. Refer to the Overview of Business section of Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis included in this Form 10-K for descriptions of each segment.
Engineered Products Segment
Our Strategy
Our Engineered Products strategy is to differentiate ourselves with innovative solutions that drive organic growth and solve our customers problems while focusing on a best in class operations excellence model. Our strong and diversified portfolio of businesses and products allow us to leverage our broad capabilities across multiple industries, including aerospace and defense, medical and industrial. We will leverage our experience and expertise in material science and application engineering to design and develop bearings, seals, springs and contacts in partnership with our customers to push the boundaries on what is possible.
Results of Operations
The following table presents selected financial data for our Engineered Products segment:
Net sales
2021 versus 2020
Net sales for 2021 increased compared to 2020, driven by recoveries in our medical and industrial bearings products and springs, seals and contacts, including products used in medical implantables and analytical devices. These improvements, totaling $26.1 million, were partially offset by lower sales volume of our commercial bearings products, which continue to be impacted by COVID-19, and to a lesser extent defense bearings products.
2020 versus 2019
Net sales for 2020 increased when compared to 2019, primarily due to the contribution of $77.0 million of sales from our Bal Seal acquisition and higher sales volume of our defense bearings products. These increases, totaling $89.1 million, were partially offset by lower sales volume of our commercial bearings products, driven by lower sales to Boeing and Airbus due to the impacts of COVID-19, and a less significant decrease in sales volume of our medical bearings products.
Operating Income
2021 versus 2020
Operating income for 2021 increased when compared to 2020, primarily due to higher sales and associated gross profit on our seals, springs and contacts and $5.3 million in lower intangible asset amortization expense. These changes were partially offset by lower sales volume of our commercial bearings products, driven by lower sales to Boeing and Airbus due to the impacts of COVID-19.
2020 versus 2019
Operating income for 2020 decreased when compared to 2019, primarily due to lower sales volume of our commercial bearings products, driven by lower sales to Boeing and Airbus due to the impacts of COVID-19. Additionally contributing to the decrease in operating income was $11.1 million in intangible asset amortization expense associated with the purchase accounting for the Bal Seal acquisition. These changes were partially offset by the contribution of $29.1 million in gross profit from our Bal Seal acquisition and higher sales and gross profit on our defense bearings.
Major Programs/Product Lines
Defense Bearings
Our bearings products are included on numerous military platforms manufactured in North America, South America, Asia and Europe. These products are used as original equipment and/or specified as replacement parts by the manufacturers. The most significant portion of our military bearings sales is derived from U.S. military platforms, such as the AH-64 helicopter, Virginia Class submarine and Joint Strike Fighter aircraft, and sales in Europe for the Typhoon program. These products are primarily proprietary self-lubricating, ball and roller bearings for aircraft flight controls, turbine engines and landing gear, and helicopter driveline couplings.
Commercial Bearings
Our bearings products are included on commercial airliners and regional/business jets manufactured in North and South America, Europe and Asia and are used as original equipment and/or specified as replacement parts by airlines and aircraft manufacturers. These products are primarily proprietary self-lubricating, ball and roller bearings for aircraft flight controls, turbine engines, landing gear and helicopter driveline couplings. The most significant portion of our commercial sales is derived from Boeing, Airbus and Bombardier platforms, such as the Boeing 737, 747, 777 and 787, the Airbus A320, A330, A350 and A380, and the Bombardier Global 7500. Our commercial bearings products were particularly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect recovery in sales related to single-aisle aircraft to occur over the next three years, while the recovery for sales related to twin-aisle aircraft to be more gradual over the next decade.
In the first quarter of 2019, the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA") issued an order to suspend all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S. aircraft operators following two fatal 737 MAX accidents. Boeing suspended deliveries until the FAA and other civil aviation authorities worldwide granted the clearance to return the aircraft to service. In November 2020, the FAA lifted the orders to suspend operations of the Boeing 737 MAX and in early 2021, airlines around the globe began to clear the Boeing 737 MAX for flying. Although production rates increased in 2021 and higher output rates are expected in 2022, there can be no assurance that the production rate will return to the production rate prior to the grounding of the 737 MAX fleet. In the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recognized $4.0 million, $5.6 million and $19.9 million, respectively, in revenue associated with the sale of our products that are utilized on the 737 MAX aircraft fleet.
Aerospace and Defense Springs, Seals and Contacts
Our precision springs, seals and contacts are used in the aerospace and defense end market to protect critical equipment from potential failure and maintain pressure while excluding debris and moisture. These products provide mechanical latching and electrical conductivity and are also used to shield sensitive electronics used in defense aircraft.
Medical Products
Our super precision miniature ball bearings and precision springs, seals and contacts are utilized in the medical technology end market. These products improve the performance and reliability of components in high cost of failure environments, such as powered surgical tools, orthopedic implants, dental products, pumps, monitors, analytic devices, active implantables and other critical medical equipment.
Industrial Products
Our bearings and precision seals, springs and contacts are used in the industrial end market. Our technology differentiation provides a high power draw and is utilized in applications requiring high performance including radar systems, fuel pumps, hydraulics, navigation systems, motors and robotics.
Other
In 2021, we opened a new production cell for products manufactured using our proprietary Titanium Diffusion Hardening ("TDH") process, which provides the lightweight and high strength benefits of titanium alloys while improving surface hardness, durability and wear characteristics. In July 2021, the TDH process was utilized in a successful human space travel mission and, during the year, we received an initial order from a leading electric vertical takeoff and landing ("eVTOL") manufacturer for components manufactured using our TDH process. We see significant opportunities to expand our product offering utilizing our TDH process across a broad range of end markets, including eVTOL, space, aerospace and defense, medical and industrial.
Precision Products Segment
Our Strategy
The Precision Products strategy is to focus on solving tomorrow’s problems through innovation and technology by empowering the strengths of our employees, partners and suppliers. We serve both commercial and defense customers by customizing solutions and technologies for their specific needs. Our strategy is focused on growing an ecosystem of products, including safe and arming solutions for missile and bomb systems, helicopters and aerial systems, which enhances the customer’s ability to execute missions flawlessly, with simplistic ease. We have an endless pursuit of operational excellence through the continual training of our employees and successful integration of new talent. We will grow our product offerings by investing in new technologies and identifying new market opportunities.
Results of Operations
The following table presents selected financial data for our Precision Products segment:
Net sales
2021 versus 2020
Net sales for 2021 decreased when compared to 2020, primarily due to lower direct commercial sales of our JPF to foreign militaries and a decrease in sales on our MK54 fuzing program. These decreases, totaling $69.6 million, were partially offset by higher sales under our JPF program with the USG, revenue related to the development of our TITAN UAV unmanned aerial system and higher sales volume of spares on the K-MAX® program and the SH-2G program with New Zealand.
2020 versus 2019
Net sales for 2020 decreased when compared to 2019, primarily due to lower sales under our JPF program with the USG, the K-MAX® program and our measuring programs, the absence of sales under our SH-2G program for Peru, lower sales volume of spares for the SH-2G program with New Zealand and the absence of $6.1 million of sales associated with composite blade programs which were moved to the Structures segment in 2020. These decreases, totaling $71.4 million, were partially offset by higher direct commercial sales of our JPF to foreign militaries and an increase in sales on our MK54 fuzing program.
Operating Income
2021 versus 2020
Operating income for 2021 decreased when compared to 2020, primarily attributable to lower direct commercial sales and associated gross profit on our JPF to foreign militaries and a decrease in gross profit on our legacy fuzing programs. These decreases in gross profit, totaling $26.6 million, were partially offset by higher sales and associated gross profit on our JPF program with the USG and the SH-2G program with New Zealand.
2020 versus 2019
Operating income for 2020 increased when compared to 2019. This increase was primarily attributable to higher direct commercial sales of and associated gross profit on our JPF to foreign militaries and an increase in gross profit on our legacy fuzing programs. These increases in gross profit, totaling $27.5 million, were partially offset by lower sales and associated gross profit on our JPF program with the USG and lower volume of spares for the SH-2G program with New Zealand.
Major Programs/Product Lines
FMU-152 A/B - JPF
We manufacture the JPF, an electro-mechanical bomb safe and arming device, which allows the settings of a weapon to be programmed in flight. Sales of these fuzes can be direct to the USG, Foreign Military Sales ("FMS") through the USG and Direct Commercial Sales (“DCS”) to foreign militaries that, although not funded by or sold through the USG, require regulatory approvals from the USG.
A total of 8,790 fuzes were delivered to our customers during the fourth quarter of 2021, bringing the year-to-date total to 29,080 fuzes. We expect to deliver 25,000 to 30,000 fuzes in 2022. Total JPF backlog at December 31, 2021 was $103.4 million, down from $214.7 million at December 31, 2020, reflecting the delivery of fuzes during 2021, partially offset by the award of Option 16 discussed below.
Our JPF program continues to move through its product lifecycle, reflecting the previously announced decision of the United States Air Force ("USAF") to move to the FMU-139 D/B (which we do not produce) as its primary fuze system. During 2021, we completed our delivery requirements under Option 14 of our USG contract and we began to satisfy the requirements under Option 15, which relates solely to the procurement of fuzes by 25 foreign militaries and has an expected value of approximately $57.3 million. In the third quarter of 2021, we received an award under Option 16 with an expected total value of approximately $43.0 million. Similar to Option 15, this order relates solely to the procurement of fuzes by or in support of foreign militaries and does not include any sales to the USAF. Option 16 extends FMU-152 A/B production into 2023. We have been advised by our customer that Option 16 will be the last order under our JPF contract with the USG. While we do not expect the close-out of our JPF contract with the USG to adversely impact our ability to continue to market the FMU-152 A/B directly to foreign militaries in direct commercial sales transactions, in the event the foreign militaries move to the FMU-139 D/B, our financial condition and results of operations would be materially adversely impacted. We are currently in discussions with two Middle Eastern customers for one or more follow-on orders aggregating a minimum of $45.0 million. The final value of these orders
will be dependent on volume and pricing agreed upon in the completed contracts. If received, these orders would continue to extend the life of the program. DCS orders are subject to export approvals, licenses, or authorizations. The timing and receipt of any such export approvals, licenses, or authorizations are subject to political and geopolitical conditions that are beyond our control.
K-MAX®
We manufacture the commercial K-MAX® aircraft at our Jacksonville, Florida and Bloomfield, Connecticut facilities. In 2021, three helicopters from the commercial production line were accepted by our customers. During 2019, we announced that we are developing the next generation TITAN UAV unmanned aerial system that will allow operators to have the capability to fly either manned or unmanned missions. In October 2021, we integrated our TITAN UAV aerial system onto our K-MAX® aircraft and successfully completed two demonstrations of its capabilities, including Near Earth autonomy and obstacle avoidance technology. We expect to offer unmanned system kits for new production and existing aircraft in 2022. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our backlog for the K-MAX® program was $13.8 million and $20.9 million, respectively.
KARGO
In 2021, we unveiled the KARGO UAV unmanned aerial system, a compact purpose-built, autonomous aircraft designed to provide cost-effective cargo hauling up to 800 pounds. The KARGO UAV provides multiple payload options with a conformal supply pod and external slingload. The aircraft is expected to serve the defense and commercial markets. In the second half of 2021, we completed a successful demonstration of our half scale model and we are currently in development of the full scale model.
Missile Fuzing
We manufacture missile fuzing systems utilized in safe and arm devices. Our fuzes are qualified for use in missile systems used by the U.S. Armed Forces, and can be found on numerous platforms, including AMRAAM®, ATacMS®, Harpoon, JASSM®, MK-54, SLAM-ER and Tomahawk.
Structures Segment
Our Strategy
The Structures strategy is focused on delivering complex metallic and composites structural components and systems to a broad range of customers in the commercial aerospace, defense and medical end markets. We seek to partner with customers and become an extension of their manufacturing process, providing our ability to strategically source, manufacture, assemble and deliver products to the strict tolerance required by our industries and to the high quality expected by our customers. Looking ahead, we are focused on adding new programs from customers that value our experience and expertise in structural manufacturing, while broadening our end market exposure to emerging growth areas, such as space and eVTOL.
Results of Operations
The following table presents selected financial data for our Structures segment:
Net sales
2021 versus 2020
Net sales decreased for 2021 when compared to 2020, primarily due to $19.8 million in lower sales from our former UK Composites business, which was sold in early 2021, and lower sales on the Boeing Wing-to-Body Fairing program, our AH-1Z program, certain composites programs and a metallic structures program with Boeing. These decreases, totaling $39.0 million, were partially offset by higher sales on our A-10 program.
2020 versus 2019
Net sales decreased for 2020 when compared to 2019, primarily due to $10.6 million in lower sales volume of composite products from our former UK Composites business and lower sales on our Rolls Royce program, AH-1Z program and a metallic structures program with Boeing. These decreases, totaling $36.0 million, were partially offset by higher sales on our Boeing Wing-to-Body Fairing program and the Sikorsky Combat Rescue Helicopter program and an increase in sales on composite blade programs which were moved from the Precision Products segment in 2020.
Operating (Loss)/Income
2021 versus 2020
Operating loss decreased for 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to the absence of losses from our UK Composites business sold in early 2021, higher sales and associated gross profit on the A-10 program and higher gross profit on the AH-1Z program. These changes were partially offset by lower gross profit on our Boeing Wing-to-Body Fairing program and a composites structures program.
2020 versus 2019
We had an operating loss of $8.9 million compared to operating income of $1.2 million in 2019. This change was primarily due to lower sales and associated gross margin on our AH-1Z program and a metallic structures program with Boeing. These decreases were partially offset by higher sales and associated gross profit on the Sikorsky Combat Rescue Helicopter program.
Major Programs/Product Lines
A-10
In 2019, the USAF awarded Boeing a contract to provide up to 112 new wing assemblies and up to 15 wing kits through 2030 and we announced that we had been awarded a contract by Boeing to manufacture wing control surfaces and structural assemblies in support of the USAF's A-10 Thunderbolt Advanced Wing Continuation Kitting ("ATTACK") program. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, our program backlog was $23.3 million and $35.7 million, respectively.
BLACK HAWK
The Sikorsky BLACK HAWK helicopter cockpit program involves the manufacture of cockpits, including the installation of all wiring harnesses, hydraulic assemblies, control pedals and sticks, seat tracks, pneumatic lines and the composite structure that holds the windscreen for most models of the BLACK HAWK helicopter. We delivered 65 cockpits in 2021 as compared to the 53 cockpits delivered in 2020. In December 2021, we entered into a follow-on multi-year contract with Sikorsky to manufacture UH-60 BLACK HAWK cockpits for both the “M” and the “Med” models. The term of the agreement is five years, beginning in 2023 and ending in 2027. Included in backlog at December 31, 2021 and 2020, was $202.0 million and $47.0 million, respectively, for orders on this program. We anticipate cockpit deliveries to total 65 in 2022.
AH-1Z
We manufacture sheet metal details and subassemblies for the increased capability AH-1Z attack helicopter, which is produced by Bell Helicopter for the U.S. Marine Corps. We are currently on contract through Lot 17. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our backlog for this program was $2.0 million and $11.2 million, respectively.
777 / 767
In 2019, we signed a multi-year follow-on contract with Boeing for the production of fixed trailing edge ("FTE") assemblies for the Boeing 777 and 767 commercial aircraft. Annual quantities will vary, as they are dependent upon the orders Boeing receives from its customers. To date, Kaman has provided approximately 1,490 FTE kits and assemblies for each of the 777 and 767 programs since 1995 and 1986, respectively. During 2021, on average, we delivered one and one-half shipsets per month on the Boeing 777 platform and three shipsets per month on the Boeing 767 platform, which includes one shipset per month associated with a military tanker derivative of the 767. For 2022, we estimate deliveries on the 777 program to be two shipsets per month and on the 767 program to be three shipsets per month which includes one shipset per month associated with a military tanker derivative of the 767. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our backlog for these programs was $34.1 million and $28.7 million, respectively.
On February 21, 2021, Boeing recommended grounding active Boeing 777 aircraft equipped with a particular engine model following an engine failure. In December 2021, the FAA proposed a change to the engines. Following the modifications to the engine, the aircraft is expected to return to flight in 2022. In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, revenue associated with the Boeing 777 aircraft was approximately 1% of total sales in both periods.
Composite Platforms
We manufacture composite structures products, which are utilized in the commercial, defense and medical imaging platforms. Our composite offerings are included on programs with major manufacturers including Bell, Boeing, Cessna, Sikorsky and Rolls Royce, among others.
For a discussion of other matters, see Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Discussion and Analysis of Cash Flows
We assess liquidity in terms of our ability to generate cash to fund working capital requirements and investing and financing activities. Significant factors affecting liquidity include: cash flows generated from or used by operating activities, capital expenditures, investments in our business and its programs, acquisitions, divestitures, dividends, availability of future credit, adequacy of available bank lines of credit and factors that might otherwise affect the Company's business and operations generally, as described under the heading “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” in Item 1A of Part I of this Form 10-K.
COVID-19
We anticipate that the disruptions and delays resulting from the spread of COVID-19 and the measures instituted by governments and businesses to mitigate its spread could impact our liquidity in the next twelve months. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $140.8 million of cash on our Consolidated Balance Sheet. We are closely managing our daily cash flows to optimize our liquidity position. We also continue to closely monitor the collectability of our receivables from commercial aerospace customers as we recognize there may be delays in payments due to the impacts of COVID-19 on our customers. As of the date of this filing, we do not believe there has been any material impact on the collectability of these receivables. In addition to our reviews of collections and payables, management meets with our business units on a regular basis to review liquidity.
As of the date of this filing, we believe we have adequate liquidity due to the cash we have on hand, the bank financing we have available to us and the other actions we have taken to enhance financial flexibility and reduce the potential impact of the pandemic on our operations.
A summary of our consolidated cash flows from continuing operations is as follows:
(1) Free Cash Flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, is defined as net cash provided by operating activities less expenditures for property plant and equipment, both of which are presented in our Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. See Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures, in this Form 10-K.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $48.7 million in 2021, a $32.2 million improvement over cash provided in 2020, largely driven by the collection of payments on outstanding receivables, more specifically significant receipts on JPF DCS receivables, and higher net earnings. These changes were partially offset by $25.1 million in nonrecurring payments to eligible participants of Bal Seal's employee retention plans implemented prior to our acquisition in 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $21.1 million in 2021, $297.6 million less than cash used in 2020. This change was primarily attributable to cash used to acquire Bal Seal in the prior period.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased by $11.3 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to lower purchases of treasury shares in the current period.
Refer to Item 7, Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, of the Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 for a discussion of the change in cash flows from the earliest year presented.
Material Cash Commitments
The Company considers its material contractual obligations when assessing its liquidity.
Debt and Related Interest Payments
We rely on debt financing as a source of liquidity for our business activities, including both convertible notes and our revolving credit facility. Under the convertible notes, $199.5 million of principal liability is due in 2024. No amounts were outstanding under the revolving credit agreement at December 31, 2021. The Company is contractually obligated to make interest payments on our debt and is required to pay a quarterly commitment fee on the unused revolving loan commitment amount. The total estimated interest payments over the life of our debt instruments is $41.4 million as of December 31, 2021. Of this amount, $13.7 million is estimated be paid within one year. Interest payments on debt are calculated based on the applicable rate and payment dates for each instrument. For variable-rate instruments, interest rates and payment dates are based on management’s estimate of the most likely scenarios for each relevant debt instrument. In the event that we borrow under our revolving credit agreement in 2022, we may be impacted by expected increases in interest rates. For further information on debt and the related interest payments, refer to Financing Arrangement discussed below and Note 14, Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Leasing
Future rental payments for operating and financing leases total $12.2 million and $4.5 million, respectively, as of December 31, 2021. For further information on leasing obligations, including the timing of these payments, refer to Note 20, Leases, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Purchase Obligations
The Company has entered into purchase commitments with suppliers for materials and supplies as part of the ordinary course of business, consulting arrangements and support services. Obligations of at least $50,000 total $177.4 million as of December 31, 2021, of which $135.2 million will be paid within one year.
Other
Our other long-term obligations, which include obligations under the Company's long-term incentive plan, deferred compensation plan, environmental liabilities, acquisition holdbacks and unrecognized tax benefits, total $38.1 million at December 31, 2021, of which $6.6 million will be paid within one year. For further information on these obligations refer to Note 13, Environmental Costs; Note 16, Income Taxes; Note 18, Other Long-Term Liabilities; and Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
During 2020, the Company and the USG entered into a Guaranty Agreement, pursuant to which the Company agreed to guarantee the full, complete and satisfactory performance of its subsidiary, Kaman Precision Products, Inc. ("KPPI") under all current and future contracts with the USG. As of the date of this filing, the only contract in place between KPPI and the USG relates to the production and sale of the JPF. KPPI is currently fulfilling the requirements of Option 15 and has been awarded Option 16. The guarantee was provided in lieu of a periodic financial capability review by the Financial Capacity Team ("FCT") of the Defense Contract Management Agency ("DCMA"). The Company is unable to estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments under the guarantee as it is dependent on costs incurred by the USG in the event of default. Although the Company believes the risk of default is low given the maturity and operational performance of the JPF program, there can be no assurance that the guarantee will not have a material adverse effect on the Company's results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
As of December 31, 2021, we had no significant off-balance sheet arrangements other than purchase obligations, the guarantee discussed above and $92.6 million of outstanding standby letters of credit, all of which were under the revolving credit facility. Of this amount, $86.3 million letters of credit relate to a JPF DCS contract.
In addition to the impacts of COVID-19, our working capital requirements and the material cash commitments discussed above, one or more of the following items could have an impact on our liquidity during the next 12 months:
•the matters described in Note 19, Commitments and Contingencies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, including the cost of existing environmental remediation matters discussed in Note 13, Environmental Costs;
•contributions to our qualified pension plan and Supplemental Employees’ Retirement Plan (“SERP”);
•deferred compensation payments to officers;
•income tax payments;
•costs associated with acquisitions and corporate development activities;
•capital expenditures;
•research and development expenditures;
•repurchase of common stock under share repurchase programs;
•payment of dividends;
•costs associated with the start-up of new programs; and
•the timing of payments and extension of payment terms by our customers.
Financing Arrangements
We continue to rely upon bank financing as an important source of liquidity for our business activities including acquisitions. We believe this, when combined with cash generated from operating activities, will be sufficient to support our anticipated cash requirements for the foreseeable future. However, we may decide to raise additional debt or equity capital to support other business activities including potential future acquisitions. We regularly monitor credit market conditions to identify potential issues that may adversely affect, or provide opportunities for, the securing and/or pricing of additional financing, if any, that may be necessary to continue with our growth strategy and finance working capital requirements. Refer to Note 14, Debt, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K for further information on our Financing Arrangements.
Convertible Notes
2024 Notes
During May 2017, we issued $200.0 million aggregate principal amount of convertible senior unsecured notes due May 2024 (the "2024 Notes") pursuant to an indenture (the "Indenture"), dated May 12, 2017, between the Company and U.S. Bank National Association, as trustee. In connection therewith, we entered into certain capped call transactions that cover, collectively, the number of shares of the Company's common stock underlying the 2024 Notes. The 2024 Notes bear 3.25% interest per annum on the principal amount, payable semiannually in arrears on May 1 and November 1 of each year, beginning on November 1, 2017. The 2024 Notes will mature on May 1, 2024, unless earlier repurchased by the Company or converted. We will settle any conversions of the 2024 Notes in cash, shares of the Company's common stock or a combination of cash and shares of common stock, at the Company's election.
The sale of the Distribution business in the third quarter of 2019 was deemed to be a "Fundamental Change" and a "Make-Whole Fundamental Change" pursuant to the terms and conditions of the indenture governing the 2024 Notes. As a result, the sale triggered the right of the holders of our 2024 Notes to require us to repurchase all of the 2024 Notes, or any portion thereof that is a multiple of $1,000 principal amount on September 27, 2019. The aggregate principal amount of the 2024 Notes validly tendered and not validly withdrawn was $0.5 million, representing 0.25% of all outstanding notes. Holders of such notes receive the purchase price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the 2024 Notes being purchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
The following table illustrates the dilutive effect of securities issued under the 2024 Notes at various theoretical average share prices for our stock as of December 31, 2021:
Credit Agreement
On December 13, 2019, the Company closed an amended and restated $800.0 million Credit Agreement (the "Credit Agreement") with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as Administrative Agent and as Collateral Agent. The Credit Agreement amends and restates the Company's previously existing credit facility in its entirety to, among other things: (i) extend the maturity date to December 13, 2024; (ii) increase the aggregate amount of revolving commitments from $600.0 million to $800.0 million; (iii) remove the existing term loan credit facility; (iv) modify the affirmative and negative covenants set forth in the facility; and (v) effectuate a number of additional modifications to the terms and provision of the facility, including its pricing. Capitalized terms used but not defined within this discussion of the Credit Agreement have the meanings ascribed thereto in the Credit Agreement. This agreement was further amended on December 8, 2021 to move its LIBOR benchmark for non-U.S. dollar ("USD") borrowings to other non-USD benchmark rates.
The LIBOR benchmark has been the subject of national, international, and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. These reforms may cause LIBOR to perform differently than in the past, and LIBOR may ultimately cease to exist. Alternative benchmark rate(s) may replace LIBOR and could affect the Company's debt securities, derivative instruments, receivables, debt payments and receipts. An alternative rate may create additional basis risk for market participants as an alternative index is utilized alongside LIBOR. Key regulatory authorities have requested that banks cease entering into new contracts that use USD LIBOR as a reference rate, and do not permit new or existing non-USD LIBOR borrowings, by no later than December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee has recommended replacing USD LIBOR with the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (“SOFR”), which is calculated by short-term repurchase agreements. There can be no guarantee that SOFR will become widely used, or that any alternatives may or may not be developed.
Interest rates on amounts outstanding under the Credit Agreement are variable based on LIBOR. As discussed above, the Company amended its Credit Agreement to move its LIBOR benchmark for non-USD borrowings to other non-USD benchmark rates. Future USD borrowings under our current Credit Agreement will continue be based on LIBOR. At this time, it is not possible to predict the effect of any changes to LIBOR, the phase out of LIBOR or any establishment of alternative benchmark rates. Any new benchmark rate will likely not replicate LIBOR exactly, which could impact our contracts that terminate after 2023. There is uncertainty about how applicable law, the courts or the Company will address the replacement of
LIBOR with alternative rates on variable rate retail loan contracts and other contracts that do not include alternative rate fallback provisions.
At December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding amounts on the Credit Agreement. We are required to pay a quarterly commitment fee on the unused revolving loan commitment amount at a rate ranging from 0.150% to 0.250% per annum, based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio. Fees for outstanding letters of credit range from 1.125% to 1.625%, based on the Senior Secured Net Leverage Ratio. There were no bank borrowings under our revolving credit facility during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to total average bank borrowings of $111.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table shows the amounts available for borrowing under the Company's revolving credit facility:
(1) The Company has entered into standby letters of credit issued on the Company's behalf by financial institutions, and directly issued guarantees to third parties primarily related to advances received from customers and the guarantee of future performance on certain contracts. Letters of credit generally are available for draw down in the event the Company does not perform its obligations.
(2) Of these amounts,$86.3 million and $146.2 million letters of credit relate to a certain JPF DCS contract in both periods.
(3) Amounts available for borrowing subject to EBITDA reflect the minimum borrowing capacity under EBITDA, subject to adjustments.
Other Sources/Uses of Capital
Letters of Credit
We have $86.3 million in letters of credit outstanding for a JPF DCS contract, including the offset agreement. In the event that we default on the contract and we are unable to fulfill our contractual commitments, our customer has the ability to draw on the letters of credit.
Pension
Management regularly monitors its pension plan asset performance and the assumptions used in the determination of our benefit obligation, comparing them to actual experience. We continue to believe the assumptions selected are valid due to the long-term nature of our benefit obligation.
We contributed $10.0 million to the qualified pension plan during both 2021 and 2020. In 2022, we do not expect to make a pension contribution to the qualified pension plan. We paid $2.7 million and $0.5 million in SERP benefits in 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to pay $0.5 million in SERP benefits in 2022.
Effective December 31, 2015, the qualified pension plan was frozen with respect to future benefit accruals. Under U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standard ("CAS") 413 we must calculate the USG’s share of any pension curtailment adjustment resulting from the freeze. Such adjustments can result in an amount due to the USG for pension plans that are in a surplus position or an amount due to the contractor for plans that are in a deficit position. During the fourth quarter of 2016, we accrued a $0.3 million liability representing our estimate of the amount due to the USG based on our pension curtailment adjustment calculation that was submitted to the USG for review in December 2016. We have maintained our accrual at $0.3 million as of December 31, 2021. There can be no assurance that the ultimate resolution of this matter will not have a material adverse effect on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows.
For more information refer to Note 17, Pension Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Acquisitions
On January 3, 2020, the Company completed the acquisition of Bal Seal, at a purchase price of approximately $317.5 million. We continue to identify and evaluate potential acquisition candidates, the purchase of which may require the use of additional capital. No acquisitions were completed in 2021 or 2019. For a discussion of the Bal Seal acquisition, see Note 3, Business Combinations, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K.
Share-based Arrangements
In 2021, the Company modified its long-term incentive program to increase the emphasis on equity. The long-term incentive awards granted to our Named Executive Officers (“NEOs”) in February 2021 consist of a combination of service-based restricted shares ("RSAs") and performance share units settled in shares ("PSUs"), as opposed to the cash-based awards that had been utilized before. These awards are expected to increase the alignment of interests between our NEOs and shareholders, and help build stock ownership by new executives, supporting both executive retention and the Company’s long-term financial performance. RSAs will vest over a three-year period on each of the first three anniversaries of the date of grant. The number of PSUs that will vest will be determined based on total shareholder return ("TSR") and return on total invested capital ("ROIC") over a three-year performance period, each of which will remain equally weighted in determining payouts. The achievement level for both factors may range from zero to 200%. As of December 31, 2021, future compensation costs related to non-vested stock options, performance shares and restricted stock grants was $7.7 million. The Company anticipates that this cost will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.1 years.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
Management believes that the non-GAAP measures used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K provide investors with important perspectives into our ongoing business performance. We do not intend for the information to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related GAAP measures. Other companies may define the measures differently. We define the non-GAAP measures used in this report and other disclosures as follows:
Organic Sales
Organic Sales is defined as "Net Sales" less sales derived from acquisitions completed or businesses disposed of that did not qualify for accounting as a discontinued operation during the previous twelve months. We believe that this measure provides management and investors with a more complete understanding of underlying operating results and trends of established, ongoing operations by excluding the effect of acquisitions, which can obscure underlying trends. We also believe that presenting Organic Sales separately provides management and investors with useful information about the trends impacting our operations and enables a more direct comparison to other businesses and companies in similar industries. Management recognizes that the term "Organic Sales" may be interpreted differently by other companies and under different circumstances.
Free Cash Flow
Free cash flow is defined as GAAP “Net cash provided by (used in) operating activities” in a period less “Expenditures for property, plant & equipment” in the same period. Management believes Free Cash Flow provides an important perspective on our ability to generate cash from our business operations and, as such, that it is an important financial measure for use in evaluating the Company's financial performance. Free Cash Flow should not be viewed as representing the residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures such as dividends to shareholders or acquisitions, as it may exclude certain mandatory expenditures such as repayment of maturing debt and other contractual obligations. Management uses Free Cash Flow internally to assess overall liquidity. Refer to the Discussion and Analysis of Cash Flows in Liquidity and Capital Resources included in this Form 10-K for the calculation of Free Cash Flow.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
Our significant accounting policies are outlined in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosures based upon historical experience, current trends and other factors that management believes to be relevant. We are also responsible for evaluating the propriety of our estimates, judgments and accounting methods as new events occur. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Management periodically reviews the Company’s critical accounting policies, estimates and judgments with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors. The most significant areas currently involving management judgments and estimates are described below.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Methodology
We recognize sales and profit based upon either (1) the over time method, in which sales and profit are recorded based upon the ratio of costs incurred to date to estimated total costs to complete the performance obligation, or (2) the point-in-time method, in which sales are recognized at the time control is transferred to the customer. For long-term contracts, we generally recognize sales and income over time because of continuous transfer of control to the customer. Revenue is generally recognized using the cost-to-cost method based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation, which allows for recognition of revenue as work on a contract progresses.
Management performs detailed quarterly reviews of all of our significant long-term contracts. Based upon these reviews, we record the effects of adjustments in profit estimates each period. If at any time management determines that in the case of a particular contract total costs will exceed total contract revenue, we record a provision for the entire anticipated contract loss at that time.
Judgment and Uncertainties
The over time revenue recognition model requires that we estimate future revenues and costs over the life of a contract. Revenues are estimated based upon the original contract price, with consideration being given to exercised contract options, change orders and, in some cases, projected customer requirements. Contract costs may be incurred over a period of several years, and the estimation of these costs requires significant judgment based upon the acquired knowledge and experience of program managers, engineers and financial professionals. Estimated costs are based primarily on anticipated purchase contract terms, historical performance trends, business base and other economic projections. The complexity of certain programs as well as technical risks and uncertainty as to the future availability of materials and labor resources could affect the Company’s ability to accurately estimate future contract costs. The amount of revenue recognized at a point-in time is approximately 60% compared to approximately 40% of consolidated revenue recognized over time.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
While we do not believe there is a reasonable likelihood there will be a material change in estimates or assumptions used to calculate our long-term revenues and costs, estimating the percentage of work complete on certain programs is a complex task. As a result, changes to these estimates could have a significant impact on our results of operations. These programs include the Sikorsky BLACK HAWK program, the JPF program with the USG, the Boeing A-10 program, the AH-1Z program, our other Bell Helicopter programs and several other programs. Estimating the ultimate total cost of these programs is challenging due to the complexity of the programs, unanticipated increases in production requirements, the nature of the materials needed to complete these programs, change orders related to the programs and the need to manage our customers’ expectations. These programs are an important element in our continuing strategy to increase operating efficiencies and profitability as well as
broaden our business base. Management continues to monitor and update program cost estimates quarterly for these contracts. A significant change in an estimate on one or more of these programs could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations. The company recognized a reduction in revenue of $2.6 million, $7.0 million, and $4.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020,and 2019, respectively, due to changes in profit estimates.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Methodology
The allowance for doubtful accounts represents management’s best estimate of probable losses inherent in the receivable balance. These estimates are based on known past due amounts and historical write-off experience, as well as trends and factors impacting the credit risk associated with specific customers. In an effort to identify adverse trends for trade receivables, we perform ongoing reviews of account balances and the aging of receivables. Amounts are considered past due when payment has not been received within a predetermined time frame based upon the credit terms extended. For our government and commercial contracts, we evaluate, on an ongoing basis, the amount of recoverable costs. The recoverability of costs is evaluated on a contract-by-contract basis based upon historical trends of payments, program viability and the customer’s credit-worthiness.
Judgment and Uncertainties
Write-offs are charged against the allowance for doubtful accounts only after we have exhausted all collection efforts. Actual write-offs and adjustments could differ from the allowance estimates due to unanticipated changes in the business environment as well as factors and risks associated with specific customers.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our allowance for doubtful accounts was $1.5 million and $2.0 million, respectively. Receivables written off, net of recoveries, in 2021 and 2020 were $0.6 million and $1.4 million, respectively.
Currently we do not believe that we have a significant amount of risk relative to the allowance for doubtful accounts. A 10% change in the allowance would have a $0.2 million effect on pre-tax earnings.
Inventory Valuation
Methodology
We have four types of inventory (a) raw materials, (b) contracts in process, (c) other work in process and (d) finished goods. Raw material includes certain general stock materials but primarily relates to purchases that were made in anticipation of specific programs that have not been started as of the balance sheet date. Raw materials are stated at the lower of the cost of the inventory or its fair market value. Contracts in process, other work in process and finished goods are valued at production cost comprised of material, labor and overhead. Contracts in process, other work in process and finished goods are reported at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Judgment and Uncertainties
The process for evaluating inventory obsolescence or market value often requires the Company to make subjective judgments and estimates concerning future sales levels, quantities and prices at which such inventory will be sold in the normal course of business. We adjust our inventory by the difference between the estimated market value and the actual cost of our inventory to arrive at net realizable value. Changes in estimates of future sales volume may necessitate future write-downs of inventory value. At December 31, 2021, $69.2 million of K-MAX® inventory was included in contracts and other work in process and finished goods, of which management believes that approximately $36.2 million will be sold after December 31, 2022, based upon the anticipation of additional aircraft manufacturing and supporting the fleet for the foreseeable future. We believe the inventory is stated at net realizable value, although lack of demand for aircraft or spare parts in the future could result in additional write-downs of the inventory value. Overall, management believes that our inventory is appropriately valued and not subject to further obsolescence in the near term.
At December 31, 2021, $6.0 million of SH-2G(I) inventory was included in contracts and other work in process inventory on the Company's Consolidated Balance Sheets. Management believes $4.7 million of the SH-2G(I) inventory will be sold after December 31, 2022. This balance represents spares requirements and inventory to be used in SH-2G programs.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
Management reviews the K-MAX® inventory balance on an annual basis to determine whether any additional write-downs are necessary. We believe this inventory is stated at net realizable value, although lack of demand for aircraft or spare parts in the future could result in additional write-downs of the inventory value. Overall, management believes that our inventory is appropriately valued and not subject to further obsolescence in the near term. If such a write-down were to occur, this could have a significant impact on our operating results. A 10% write-down of the December 31, 2021 K-MAX® inventory balance would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $6.9 million in 2021.
The balance of SH-2G(I) inventory projected to be sold after December 31, 2021, represents spares requirements and inventory to be used to support the SH-2G programs in future periods and as such is appropriately valued as of December 31, 2021.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Methodology
Goodwill and certain intangible assets that have indefinite lives are evaluated at least annually for impairment. The annual evaluation is generally performed during the fourth quarter, using forecast information. All intangible assets are also reviewed for possible impairment whenever changes in conditions indicate that their carrying value may not be recoverable. For reporting units that qualify for a qualitative assessment, management will perform the quantitative impairment test after a period of three years has elapsed since the test was last performed.
In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, we test goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level and other long-lived intangible assets (excluding goodwill) for impairment at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are available. The identification and measurement of goodwill impairment involves the estimation of fair value of the reporting unit as compared to its carrying value. The identification and measurement of other long-lived intangible asset impairment involves the estimation of future cash flows of the business unit as compared to its carrying value. Goodwill is tested one level below the segment level, and components are not aggregated for purposes of goodwill testing.
At December 31, 2021, the carrying value of goodwill was $199.3 million and $41.4 million for the Engineered Products and Precision Products segments, respectively. There is no goodwill related to the Structures segment. The specific Engineered Products reporting units contributing to the total goodwill balance were Specialty Bearings and Engineered Products, $104.2 million and Bal Seal, $95.1 million. The Precision Products segment has one reporting unit contributing to the total balance, Precision Products Orlando ("KPP-Orlando"), $41.4 million. During 2020, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment of our Aerosystems reporting unit based on a decline in earnings compared to forecasts used in prior periods and updated forecasts which indicated the forecasted cash flows for this reporting unit were lower than amounts previously forecasted. We performed a quantitative analysis on the Aerosystems reporting unit using an income methodology based on management's estimates of forecasted cash flows, with those cash flows discounted to present value using rates commensurate with the risks associated with those cash flows. In addition, management used a market-based valuation involving analysis of market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization ("EBITDA") for (i) a group of comparable companies and (ii) recent transactions, if any, involving comparable companies. The quantitative analysis resulted in a conclusion that the fair value of the Aerosystems reporting unit was $56.1 million below its carrying value; therefore, goodwill was impaired. In 2020, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million for the Aerosystems reporting unit, which represented the entire goodwill balance associated with this reporting unit. No such triggering events were identified in 2021 or 2019. See Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these assets.
The carrying value of other intangible assets as of December 31, 2021, was $138.1 million. No triggering events were identified in 2021, 2020 or 2019. See Note 12, Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets, Net, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding these assets.
Judgment and Uncertainties
In years that management performs a qualitative assessment we consider the following qualitative factors: general economic conditions in the markets served by the reporting units carrying goodwill, relevant industry-specific performance statistics, changes in the carrying value of the individual reporting units and assumptions used in the most recent fair value calculation, including forecasted results of operations, the weighted average cost of capital and recent transaction multiples.
We performed a qualitative assessment for the Specialty Bearings and KPP-Orlando reporting units. The results of these analyses indicated that it is more likely than not that goodwill is not impaired and these reporting units did not need to proceed to a quantitative assessment.
For the quantitative impairment tests, management estimated the fair value of the reporting units using an income methodology based on management's estimates of forecasted cash flows, with those cash flows discounted to present value using rates commensurate with the risks associated with those cash flows. In addition, management used a market-based valuation method involving analysis of market multiples of revenues and earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) for (i) a group of comparable public companies and (ii) recent transactions, if any, involving comparable companies. In estimating the fair value of the reporting units, a weighting of 80% to the income approach and 20% to the market-based valuation method was selected, consistent with the prior year. A higher weighting was applied to the estimate derived from the income approach as it is based on management's assumptions specific for the reporting units, which are the outcome of an internal planning process. While the selected companies in the market based valuation method have comparability to the reporting units, they may not fully reflect the market share, product portfolio and operations of the reporting units. The estimated fair value of the reporting units is adjusted for an excess net working capital assumption, which represents management's identification of specific contract-related assets that will generate cash flows in the future.
In performing our quantitative test for the Bal Seal reporting unit, we assumed a terminal growth rate of 3.0%. The discount rate utilized to reflect the risk and uncertainty in the financial markets and specifically in our internally developed earnings projections was 10.0% for this reporting unit. Changes in these estimates and assumptions could materially affect the results of our tests for goodwill impairment.
An impairment loss is recognized for any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill over the implied fair value of that goodwill. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined by allocating the fair value of the reporting unit in a manner similar to a purchase price allocation. The residual fair value after this allocation is the implied fair value of the reporting unit goodwill. The results of the quantitative tests indicated that the fair values of the reporting units exceeded the respective carrying values; therefore, no impairment charge was recorded for the Bal Seal reporting unit.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We performed the quantitative impairment test for the Bal Seal reporting unit. Bal Seal's fair value exceeded its carrying value by approximately 11%. A one percentage point decrease in our terminal growth rate or an increase of one percentage point in our discount rate would not result in a fair value calculation less than the carrying value for these reporting units. In 2020, we identified a triggering event for possible impairment at the Aerosystems reporting unit. The fair value of the Aerosystems reporting unit was $56.1 million below its carrying value. We recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $50.3 million for the Aerosystems reporting unit in 2020, which represented the entire goodwill balance associated with this reporting unit.
As with all assumptions, there is an inherent level of uncertainty and actual results, to the extent they differ from those assumptions, could have a material impact on fair value. For example, multiples for similar type reporting units could deteriorate due to changes in technology or a downturn in economic conditions. A reduction in customer demand would impact our assumed growth rate resulting in a reduced fair value. Potential events or circumstances could have a negative effect on the estimated fair value. The loss of a major customer or program could have a significant impact on the future cash flows of the reporting unit(s). Advances in technology by our competitors could result in our products becoming obsolete.
We do not currently believe there to be a reasonable likelihood that actual results will vary materially from estimates and assumptions used to test goodwill and other intangible assets for impairment losses. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to an impairment charge that could be material.
Long-Term Incentive Programs
Methodology
The Company maintains a Management Incentive Plan, which provides for cash and share-based payment awards. In 2021, the Company modified its long-term incentive program to increase the emphasis on equity. Beginning in the first quarter of 2021, the long-term incentive awards granted to the Company's Named Executive Officers ("NEOs") consist of a combination of service-based RSAs and PSUs which are intended to be settled in shares, as opposed to cash-based awards that had been utilized in the past. These awards are expected to increase the alignment of interests between the Company's NEOs and shareholders and help build stock ownership for new executives, supporting both executive retention and the Company's long-term financial performance.
The Company's share-based payment awards include non-statutory stock options, restricted stock and performance share units. We determine the fair value of our non-qualified stock option awards at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes model. We determine the fair value of our restricted share awards at the date of grant using the closing price the day prior to the grant. We determine the fair value of our performance share units at the date of grant using both the closing price the day prior to the grant
and a Monte-Carlo simulation model as the number of PSUs that will vest will be determined based on total shareholder return ("TSR") and return on total invested capital ("ROIC") over a three-year performance period, each of which will remain equally weighted in determining payouts. The achievement level for both factors may range from zero to 200%.
The long-term incentive program ("LTIP") cash-based awards provide certain senior executives an opportunity to receive long-term incentive award payments, generally in cash, for achieving targets established by the Personnel Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors. Performance metrics for LTIP cash-based awards are based on the following: (a) average return on total capital and (b) total return to shareholders, both compared to the Russell 2000 indices for the same performance period. No awards will be payable if the Company’s performance is below the 25th percentile of the designated indices. The maximum award is payable if performance reaches the 75th percentile of the designated indices. Awards will be paid out at 100% at the 50th percentile. Awards for performance between the 25th and 75th percentiles are determined by straight-line interpolation between 0% and 200%.
In order to estimate the liability associated with the cash-based LTIP awards, management must make assumptions as to how our current performance compares to current Russell 2000 data based upon the Russell 2000’s historical results. This analysis is performed on a quarterly basis. When sufficient Russell 2000 data for a year is available, which typically will not be until May or June of the following year, management will adjust the liability to reflect its best estimate of the total award. Actual results could differ significantly from management’s estimates. The total estimated liability as of December 31, 2021, was $3.1 million.
Judgment and Uncertainties
Option-pricing models and generally accepted valuation techniques require management to make assumptions and to apply judgment to determine the fair value of our awards. These assumptions and judgments include estimating the future volatility of our stock price, expected dividend yield, future employee turnover rates and future employee stock option exercise behaviors. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the fair value estimate.
Our cash-based LTIP requires management to make assumptions regarding the likelihood of achieving long-term Company goals as well as estimate future Russell 2000 results.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We do not currently believe there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the estimates or assumptions we use to determine cash and share-based compensation expense. However, if actual results are not consistent with our estimates or assumptions, we may be exposed to changes in cash and share-based compensation expense that could be material.
If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions used, the share-based compensation expense reported in our financial statements may not be representative of the actual economic cost of the share-based compensation. A 10% change in our share-based compensation expense from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, would have affected pre-tax earnings by approximately $0.7 million in 2021.
Due to the timing of availability of the Russell 2000 data, there is a risk that the amount we have recorded as LTIP expense could be different from the actual payout. A 10% increase in the total estimated liability for our cash-based LTIP would result in a reduction of 2021 pretax earnings of $0.3 million.
Pension Plans
Methodology
We maintain a qualified defined benefit pension, as well as a non-qualified Supplemental Employees Retirement Plan ("SERP") for certain key executives. See Note 17, Pension Plans, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Form 10-K for further discussion of these plans.
Expenses and liabilities associated with each of these plans are determined based upon actuarial valuations. Integral to these actuarial valuations are a variety of assumptions including expected return on plan assets and discount rates. We regularly review these assumptions, which are updated at the measurement date, December 31st. In accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the impact of differences between actual results and the assumptions are accumulated and generally amortized over future periods, which will affect expense recognized in future periods.
We utilize a "spot rate approach" in the calculation of pension interest and service cost. The spot rate approach applies separate discount rates for each projected benefit payment in the calculation of pension interest and service cost.
Judgment and Uncertainties
The discount rate represents the interest rate used to determine the present value of future cash flows currently expected to be required to settle the pension obligation. Management uses the Financial Times Stock Exchange ("FTSE") Pension Discount Curve for discount rate assumptions. This index was designed to provide a market average discount rate to assist plan sponsors in valuing the liabilities associated with postretirement obligations. Additionally, we reviewed the changes in the general level of interest rates since the last measurement date noting that overall rates had increased when compared to 2020.
Based upon this information, we used a 2.71% discount rate as of December 31, 2021, for the qualified defined benefit pension plan. This rate takes into consideration the participants in our pension plan and the anticipated payment stream as compared to the Above Median Double-A Curve. For the SERP, we used the same methodology as the pension plan and derived a discount rate of 2.33% in 2021 for the benefit obligation. The difference in the discount rates is primarily due to the expected duration of SERP payments, which is shorter than the anticipated duration of benefit payments to be made to the average participant in the pension plan. The qualified defined benefit pension plan and SERP used discount rates of 2.34% and 1.78% at December 31, 2020, respectively, for purposes of calculating the benefit obligation.
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets represents the average rate of earnings expected on the funds invested to provide for anticipated benefit payments. The expected return on assets assumption is developed based upon several factors. Such factors include current and expected target asset allocation, our expected returns by asset class type and our expected investment performance. The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is 6.0%.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
During 2021, the pension plan generated net periodic benefit income and as a result, the sensitivity analysis calculates the change on pension income rather than on pension expense. A lower discount rate increases the present value of benefit obligations which increases pension expense; however, this is more than offset by a reduction in interest costs resulting in net pension income. A one percentage point decrease in the assumed discount rate would have increased pension income in 2021 by $2.0 million. A one percentage point increase in the assumed discount rate would have decreased pension income in 2021 by $1.3 million.
A lower expected rate of return on pension plan assets would increase pension expense. For 2021 and 2020, the expected rate of return on plan assets was 6.0% and 6.5%, respectively. A one-percentage point increase/decrease in the assumed return on pension plan assets would have changed pension income in 2021 by approximately $7.5 million. During 2021, the actual return on pension plan assets of 3.2% was lower than our expected long-term rate of return on pension plan assets of 6.0%.
Income Taxes
Methodology
Deferred tax assets and liabilities generally represent temporary differences between the recognition of tax benefits/expenses in our financial statements and the recognition of these tax benefits/expenses for tax purposes.
We establish reserves for deferred taxes when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are valid and defensible, we believe that certain positions may not prevail if challenged. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit or changes in tax legislation. Our effective tax rate includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that we consider appropriate. This rate is then applied to our quarterly operating results. In the event that there is a significant unusual or one-time item recognized in our operating results, the tax attributable to that item would be separately calculated and recorded at the same time as the unusual or one-time item.
As of December 31, 2021, we had recorded $9.2 million of deferred tax assets, net of valuation allowances. The realization of these benefits is dependent in part on future taxable income and, if need be, tax planning strategies designed to realize the benefits associated with tax losses and credit carryforwards. For those jurisdictions where the expiration of tax loss or credit carryforwards or the projection of operating results indicates that realization is not likely, a valuation allowance is provided.
Judgment and Uncertainties
Management believes that sufficient income will be earned in the future to realize deferred income tax assets, net of valuation allowances recorded. The realization of these deferred tax assets can be impacted by changes to tax laws or statutory tax rates and future taxable income levels.
Our effective tax rate on earnings was 27.8% for 2021. This rate includes a charge to record additional valuation allowances relating to the Company’s foreign and state tax loss carryforwards in the amount of $1.5 million and $1.2 million, respectively. The Company also incurred a charge in the amount $1.4 million, primarily attributable to nondeductible compensation relating to post termination payments and benefits of former executive officers. Additionally, the Company recognized benefits relating to research and development credits in the amount of $2.0 million. Our effective tax rate is based on expected or reported income or loss, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our effective tax rate and in evaluating our tax positions.
Effect if Actual Results Differ From Assumptions
We do not anticipate a significant change in our unrecognized tax benefits within the next twelve months. We file tax returns in numerous U.S. and foreign jurisdictions, with returns subject to examination for varying periods, but generally back to and including 2016. It is our policy to record interest and penalties on unrecognized tax benefits as income taxes. A one percentage point increase/decrease in our tax rate would have affected our 2021 earnings by $0.6 million.
RECENT ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
A summary of recent accounting standards is included in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Item 8, Financial Statements and Supplementary Data, of this Form 10-K.