Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Business Overview
Kimball International (the “Company,” “Kimball International,” “we,” “us,” or “our”) is a leading omnichannel commercial furnishings company with deep expertise in the Workplace, Health and Hospitality markets. We combine our bold entrepreneurial spirit, a history of craftsmanship and today’s design-driven thinking alongside a commitment to our culture of caring and lasting connections with our customers, shareholders, employees and communities. For over 70 years, our brands have seized opportunities to customize solutions into personalized experiences, turning ordinary spaces into meaningful places. Our family of brands includes Kimball, National, Etc., Interwoven, Poppin, Kimball Hospitality, and D’style.
Management currently considers the following events, trends, and uncertainties to be most important to understanding our financial condition and operating performance:
•Operating Environment - During the second half of fiscal year 2022, the benefit of increased prices and higher volumes coupled with our cost savings initiatives had a positive financial impact, while inflationary pressures and supply chain disruptions continued to increase production costs. See the Recent Business Changes section within Item 1 - Business for additional details regarding changes in our operating environment.
•Transformation Restructuring Plan - Included in the current phase of our transformation restructuring plan are activities such as the streamlining of manufacturing facilities, voluntary retirement incentive programs, and the consolidation of showrooms. This phase of the transformation restructuring plan began in the first quarter of our fiscal year 2021, and we expect a substantial majority of the restructuring actions to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2023. In addition to the savings already generated from the first phase of the transformation restructuring plan, the efforts of this second phase of the transformation restructuring plan are expected to generate annualized pre-tax savings of approximately $19.0 million when it is fully implemented. See Note 3 - Restructuring of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for additional information.
•During the second quarter of fiscal year 2021, we acquired Poppin, Inc. (“Poppin”), a tech-enabled, market-leading B2B commercial furniture design company headquartered in New York City, New York. Poppin designs commercial-grade furniture that is made to mix, match, and scale in today’s modern office and work-from-home environments. In addition to the cash consideration paid at the acquisition date, the acquisition purchase price included contingent payments based on revenue and profitability milestones achieved through June 30, 2024. As of the acquisition date the fair value of the contingent earn-out was $31.8 million. As of the end of fiscal year 2022 the fair value of the contingent earn-out liability was $3.2 million. During fiscal year 2022 we recorded a pre-tax non-cash charge to reduce the carrying value of goodwill by $34.1 million.
•In connection with the $68.0 million of borrowings on our revolving credit facility, during fiscal year 2022 we entered into an interest rate swap agreement with a bank with a notional value of $40.0 million. The interest rate swap agreement exchanges the variable interest rate on the revolving line of credit with a fixed interest rate and is used to hedge our exposure to interest rate risk.
•Due to the contract and project nature of furniture markets, fluctuation in the demand for our products and variation in the gross margin on those projects is inherent to our business, which in turn impacts our operating results. Effective management of our manufacturing capacity is and will continue to be critical to our success. See below for further details regarding current sales and order backlog trends.
•We expect to continue to invest in capital expenditures prudently, particularly for projects that will enhance our capabilities and diversification while providing an opportunity for growth and improved profitability.
•We continue to maintain a strong balance sheet. Our short-term liquidity available, represented as cash and cash equivalents plus the unused amount of our revolving credit facility, was $66.2 million at June 30, 2022.
Results of Operations - Fiscal Year 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year 2021
* Items indicated represent Non-GAAP (Generally Accepted Accounting Principles) measurements.
** Items indicated represent Key Performance Indicators.
See the “Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Other Key Performance Indicators” section below.
Our Workplace end market includes sales to the commercial, financial, government and education vertical markets and eBusiness. The revenue of the Poppin acquisition is included in eBusiness.
Fiscal year 2022 consolidated net sales were $665.9 million compared to fiscal year 2021 consolidated net sales of $569.0 million, a 17% increase. Organic net sales increased $70.9 million, or 13%, year-over-year due to increased pricing and higher volume in our workplace and health end markets which were partially offset by lower volume in our hospitality end market
which has not yet rebounded from the negative impact of the pandemic. Each of our end market sales levels can fluctuate depending on the mix of projects in a given period.
Order backlog at June 30, 2022 increased 24%, when compared to the open order level as of June 30, 2021, as increases in our workplace and health backlog were partially offset by a decline in hospitality backlog. Open orders at a point in time may not be indicative of future sales trends.
Gross profit as a percent of net sales decreased 40 basis points to 31.7% for fiscal year 2022 compared to 32.1% for fiscal year 2021. The primary drivers for the decrease were inflationary pressure on materials, increased freight costs, manufacturing labor increases, and the cost associated with the one-time COVID vaccine incentive which were partially offset by price increases and savings realized from our operational excellence initiatives.
Fiscal year 2022 selling and administrative (S&A) expenses compared to fiscal year 2021 increased 11%, and decreased 150 basis points as a percent of net sales, due to the leverage of our increased sales. S&A expenses increased due to the incremental S&A expenses of our acquired Poppin business which were offset by reductions in our S&A expense of our organic business. The consulting costs related to the Poppin acquisition in the prior year-to-date period did not repeat in the current year. Related to our organic business, we also recorded decreased salary expenses, decreased commission costs, increased incentive compensation expenses, increased travel and entertainment expenses, and increased expense for our COVID vaccine incentive compared to the prior fiscal year. During fiscal year 2022 we recorded lower selling and administrative expenses related to the normal revaluation to fair value of our Supplemental Employee Retirement Plan (“SERP”) liability. The impact from the change in the SERP liability that was recognized in selling and administrative expenses was offset with the change in fair value of the SERP investments which was recorded in Other Income (Expense), and thus there was no effect on net income.
We recognized pre-tax restructuring expense of $10.5 million in fiscal year 2022 and $10.7 million in fiscal year 2021 related to our transformation restructuring plan. See Note 3 - Restructuring of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on our restructuring plan.
In connection with our annual goodwill impairment test, we assessed goodwill at the reporting unit level for impairment during our second quarter of fiscal year 2022 ended December 31, 2021 and based on our analysis our Poppin reporting unit had carrying value in excess of the calculated fair value. The decline in the fair value of the reporting unit was driven by revised sales forecasts primarily attributable to changes in demand due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and supply chain constraints. As a result, we recorded a pre-tax, non-cash charge to reduce the carrying value of goodwill by $34.1 million during fiscal year 2022. We also recorded a non-cash pre-tax contingent earn-out benefit during fiscal year 2022 of $17.0 million which partially offset the goodwill impairment, as there was a lower likelihood of Poppin achieving targeted milestones during the earn-out period.
Other General (Income) Expense consisted of a $4.5 million gain on the sale of a warehouse during the third quarter of fiscal year 2022.
Other income (expense), net consisted of the following:
Our fiscal year 2022 effective tax rate of 9.8% was driven by the book versus tax treatment of nondeductible goodwill impairment and earn-out valuation adjustments. Our fiscal year 2021 effective tax rate of (60.9%) was driven by the book versus tax treatment of the $11.6 million Poppin earn-out gain and a $0.6 million research and development tax credit.
Comparing our balance sheets as of June 30, 2022 to June 30, 2021, our accounts receivable balance increased as a result of the increased sales volumes. Our inventory and accounts payable balances increased as we ramped up our material purchases and production to fulfill our order backlog and to cushion against supply chain disruptions. Due to COVID-19 and supply chain disruptions which have temporarily delayed Poppin’s sales growth expectations, we recognized a goodwill impairment charge which reduced our goodwill balance, and we also reduced our earn-out liability due to the lower likelihood of Poppin achieving targeted milestones during the earn-out period.
Results of Operations - Fiscal Year 2021 Compared to Fiscal Year 2020
For the comparison of fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and June 30, 2020, see the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K filed August 31, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our total cash and cash equivalents was $10.9 million at June 30, 2022 and $24.3 million at June 30, 2021. Our total debt was $68.1 million at June 30, 2022 and $40.1 million at June 30, 2021. During fiscal year 2022, cash flows used for operations were $4.6 million, capital expenditures including capitalized software were $25.1 million, the return of capital to shareholders in the form of dividends totaled $13.2 million and stock repurchases totaled $3.0 million which were partially offset by proceeds from the sale of assets of $5.4 million.
Working capital at June 30, 2022 was $67.7 million compared to working capital of $44.1 million at June 30, 2021. The current ratio was 1.4 at both June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
Our short-term liquidity available, represented as cash and cash equivalents plus the unused amount of our revolving credit facility, totaled $66.2 million at June 30, 2022. At June 30, 2022, we had $1.7 million in letters of credit outstanding, which reduced our borrowing capacity on the revolving credit facility. We had $68.0 million and $40.0 million of revolving credit facility borrowings outstanding as of June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, respectively. Total availability to borrow under the credit facility totaled $55.3 million at June 30, 2022.
Cash Flows
The following table reflects the major categories of cash flows for fiscal years 2022 and 2021.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Fiscal year 2022 net cash used for operating activities was $4.6 million inclusive of a net loss of $15.7 million which included $34.1 million of noncash goodwill impairment and $17.0 million of noncash contingent earn-out liability gains. Fiscal year 2021 net cash provided by operating activities was $27.3 million inclusive of net income of $7.4 million. Changes in working capital balances used $37.3 million of cash in fiscal year 2022 and provided $6.1 million of cash in fiscal year 2021.
The $37.3 million of cash used by changes in working capital balances in fiscal year 2022 was primarily driven by $43.7 million increase in inventory and a $20.7 million increase in receivables which were partially offset by a $27.9 million increase in our accounts payable. The inventory, receivables, and accounts payable increases were due to the increased net sales and associated increase in material purchases and production to fulfill our order backlog and to cushion against supply chain disruptions.
The $6.1 million of cash provided by changes in working capital balances in fiscal year 2021 was primarily driven by a $12.7 million decrease in our accounts receivable balance due to decreased sales in the latter portion of fiscal year 2021 and an $11.2 million decrease in our inventories balance as we scaled to the new order levels. These changes were partially offset by a $10.4 million decrease to our accrued expenses balance and a $6.6 million decrease in our accounts payable balance in conjunction with the lower inventory purchases.
Our measure of accounts receivable performance, also referred to as Days Sales Outstanding (“DSO”), for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021 were 33 days and 34 days, respectively. We define DSO as the average of monthly accounts and notes receivable divided by an average day’s net sales. Our Production Days Supply on Hand (“PDSOH”) of inventory measure for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021 were 77 and 65 days, respectively. The increase in PDSOH was driven by increases in average inventory levels outpacing the sales ramp up. We define PDSOH as the average of the monthly net inventory divided by an average day’s cost of sales.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During fiscal years 2022 and 2021, we reinvested $25.1 million and $19.5 million, respectively, into capital investments for the future. The current year capital investments includes current construction of a warehouse, and both the current and prior year
capital investments include various manufacturing equipment upgrades to increase automation in production facilities, configuration design software, and facility improvements. During fiscal year 2021, we expended $101.5 million for the Poppin acquisition, invested $10.0 million in available-for-sale securities, and had investment maturities of $15.3 million. While we held no short-term investments as of June 30, 2022 or June 30, 2021, throughout fiscal year 2021, our short-term investments included certificates of deposit purchased in the secondary market, U.S. Treasury and federal agency securities, and municipal bonds.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During fiscal year 2022 we had proceeds from borrowings on our revolving credit facility of $113.0 million and during the same period we also repaid $85.0 million on our revolving credit facility. During fiscal year 2021, we had proceeds from borrowings on our revolving credit facility of $40.0 million. We paid $13.2 million of dividends in fiscal year 2022 compared to paying $13.3 million of dividends in fiscal year 2021. Consistent with our historical dividend policy, our Board of Directors evaluates the appropriate dividend payment on a quarterly basis. We repurchased shares pursuant to a previously announced stock repurchase program, which drove cash outflow of $3.0 million in fiscal year 2022 and $3.6 million in fiscal year 2021. Future debt payments may be paid out of cash flows from operations or from future refinancing of our debt.
Revolving Credit Facility
As of June 30, 2022 we had a $125 million revolving credit facility with a maturity date of October 2024 that allowed for both issuances of letters of credit and cash borrowings. We also have an option to request an increase of the amount available for borrowing to $200 million, subject to participating banks’ consent. The loans under the Credit Agreement could consist of, at our election, advances in U.S. dollars or advances in any other currency that was agreed to by the lenders. The proceeds are to be used for general corporate purposes including acquisitions. A portion of the revolving credit facility, not to exceed $10 million of the principal amount, was available for the issuance of letters of credit. At June 30, 2022, we had $1.7 million in letters of credit outstanding, which reduced our borrowing capacity on the revolving credit facility. At June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, we had $68.0 million and $40.0 million in borrowings outstanding, respectively.
The revolving credit facility requires us to comply with certain debt covenants, the most significant of which are the adjusted leverage ratio and the interest coverage ratio. The adjusted leverage ratio is defined as (a) consolidated total indebtedness minus unencumbered U.S. cash equivalents in excess of $15,000,000 provided that the maximum subtraction did not exceed $35,000,000 to (b) adjusted consolidated EBITDA, determined as of the end of each of our fiscal quarters for the then most recently ended four fiscal quarters, to not be greater than 3.00 to 1.00. The interest coverage ratio, for any period, of (a) Consolidated EBITDA for such period to (b) cash interest expense for such period, calculated on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP for the trailing four quarter period then ending, to not be less than 3.0 to 1.00. We were in compliance with all debt covenants of the revolving credit facility during the twelve-month period ended June 30, 2022.
The table below compares the adjusted leverage ratio and interest coverage ratio with the limits specified in the credit agreement.
Future Liquidity
We believe our principal sources of liquidity from available funds on hand, cash generated from operations, and the availability of borrowing under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and other operating needs for at least the next twelve months. Our Board of Directors declared quarterly dividends of $0.09 per share which was paid during our first quarter of fiscal year 2023. Future cash dividends are subject to approval by our Board of Directors and may be adjusted as business needs or market conditions change.
During fiscal year 2023, we expect to invest approximately $25 million in capital expenditures, particularly for machinery and equipment automation and technology upgrades. Additionally, we have short-term purchase obligations as of June 30, 2022 of approximately $53 million. Our purchase obligations are defined as agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable and legally binding and that specify all significant terms. Purchase obligations include contractual commitments for items such as raw materials, supplies, ocean freight, capital expenditures, services, and software acquisitions/license commitments. As of June 30, 2022, our short-term contractual obligations also included lease liability and a liability for SERP
and severance future payments. Refer to Note 5 - Leases and Note 12 - Employee Benefit Plans, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for details.
Our long-term purchase obligations as of June 30, 2022 are approximately $17 million and are of a similar nature to the aforementioned purchase obligations. In addition to the purchase obligations, as of June 30, 2022, our long-term contractual obligations also included lease liability, long-term debt, and a liability for SERP and severance future payments. Refer to Note 5 - Leases, Note 11 - Long-Term Debt and Revolving Credit Facility, and Note 12 - Employee Benefit Plans, respectively, of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for details. We continuously monitor for potential acquisitions that would enhance our capabilities and diversification while providing an opportunity for growth and improved profitability.
Our ability to generate cash from operations to meet our liquidity obligations could be adversely affected in the future by factors such as general economic and market conditions, lack of availability of raw material components in the supply chain, lack of availability or cost of manufacturing labor, loss of key contract customers, and other unforeseen circumstances. In particular, should demand for our products decrease significantly over the next 12 months, the available cash provided by operations could be adversely impacted.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures and Other Key Performance Indicators
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) contains non-GAAP financial measures. A non-GAAP financial measure is a numerical measure of a company’s financial performance that excludes or includes amounts so as to be different than the most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP in the statements of operations, statements of comprehensive income, balance sheets, statements of cash flows, or statements of shareholders’ equity of the company. The non-GAAP financial measures used within this MD&A include:
•organic net sales, defined as net sales excluding acquisition-related net sales;
•adjusted gross profit, defined as gross profit excluding acquisition-related inventory adjustments and COVID vaccine incentive costs;
•adjusted gross profit percentage, defined as adjusted gross profit as a percentage of net sales;
•adjusted operating income, defined as operating income (loss) excluding restructuring expenses, goodwill impairment, other general income (expense) which consists of a gain on a sale of a warehouse, market valuation adjustments related to our SERP liability, CEO transition costs, acquisition-related amortization and inventory valuation adjustments, costs of acquisition, contingent earn-out gain or loss, and COVID vaccine incentive costs;
•adjusted operating income percentage, defined as adjusted operating income as a percentage of net sales;
•adjusted net income, defined as net income (loss) excluding restructuring expenses, goodwill impairment, other general income (expense) which consists of a gain on a sale of a warehouse, CEO transition costs, acquisition-related amortization and inventory valuation adjustments, costs of acquisition, contingent earn-out gain or loss, and COVID vaccine incentive costs;
•adjusted diluted earnings per share, defined as diluted earnings (loss) per share excluding restructuring expenses, goodwill impairment, other general income (expense) which consists of a gain on a sale of a warehouse, CEO transition costs, acquisition-related amortization and inventory valuation adjustments, costs of acquisition, contingent earn-out gain or loss, and COVID vaccine incentive costs;
•adjusted EBITDA, defined as earnings before interest, statutory income tax impacts for taxable after-tax measures, depreciation, and amortization and excluding restructuring expenses, goodwill impairment, other general income (expense) which consists of a gain on a sale of a warehouse, CEO transition costs, acquisition-related inventory valuation adjustments, costs of acquisition, contingent earn-out gain or loss, and COVID vaccine incentive costs; and
•adjusted EBITDA percentage, defined as adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales.
Reconciliations of the reported GAAP numbers to these non-GAAP financial measures are included in the tables below. Management believes it is useful for investors to understand and to be able to meaningfully trend, analyze and benchmark how our core operations performed without market value adjustments related to our SERP liability, without expenses incurred in executing our transformation restructuring plan, without CEO transition costs, without acquisition-related costs, without costs of the COVID vaccine incentive, and without the gain on sale of a warehouse. Many of our internal performance measures that management uses to make certain operating decisions exclude these expenses to enable meaningful trending of core operating metrics. These non-GAAP financial measures should not be viewed as an alternative to the GAAP measures and are presented as supplemental information.
(1) Poppin was acquired on December 9, 2020 and for fiscal years 2022 and 2021, organic net sales exclude Poppin acquisition net sales for the fiscal year-to-date periods ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
(2) Fiscal year 2022 Other General (Income) Expense consists of a gain realized on the sale of a warehouse totaling $4.5 million on a pre-tax basis and $3.4 million on an after-tax basis.
The order backlog metric is a key performance indicator representing firm orders placed by our customers which have not yet been fulfilled and are expected to be recognized as revenue during future quarters. The timing of shipments can vary, but generally the backlog of orders is expected to ship within a six-month period.
Return on Invested Capital is a key performance indicator calculated as: [(Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Amortization, Restructuring Expense, CEO Transition Costs, Acquisition-related Inventory Valuation Adjustments, Goodwill Impairment, Costs of the Acquisition, Contingent Earn-out Gain/ Loss, COVID Vaccine Incentive, and Other General Income) multiplied by (1 minus Effective Tax Rate)] divided by (Total Shareholders’ Equity plus Net Debt). Net Debt is defined as current maturities of long-term debt plus long-term debt less cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments.
Fair Value
During fiscal year 2022, no financial instruments were affected by a lack of market liquidity. Financial assets classified as level 1 assets were valued using readily available market pricing. For available-for-sale securities classified as level 2 assets, the fair values are determined based on market data which use evaluated pricing models and incorporate available trade, bid, and other market information. We evaluated the inputs used to value the instruments and validated the accuracy of the instrument fair values based on historical evidence. The investment in stock warrants and equity securities without readily determinable fair value of a privately-held company are classified as level 3 financial assets. The stock warrants are accounted for as a derivative instrument valued on a recurring basis considering the pricing of recent purchases or sales of the investment as well as positive and negative qualitative evidence, while the equity securities without readily determinable fair value are accounted for as a cost-method investment which carries the securities at cost, except in the event of impairment. The contingent earn-out liability is classified as a Level 3 financial liability and is valued based on a valuation model that measures the present value of the probable cash payments based upon the forecasted operating performance of the acquisition and a discount rate that captures the risk associated with the liability.
See Note 14 - Fair Value of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. These principles require the use of estimates and assumptions that affect amounts reported and disclosed in the consolidated financial statements and related notes. Actual results could differ from these estimates and assumptions. Management uses its best judgment in the assumptions used to value these estimates, which are based on current facts and circumstances, prior experience, and other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable. Management believes the following critical accounting policies reflect the more significant judgments and estimates used in preparation of our consolidated financial statements and are the policies that are most critical in the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations. Management has discussed these critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and with our independent registered public accounting firm.
Revenue recognition - Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring distinct goods or providing services to customers. Our revenue consists substantially of product sales, and is reported net of sales discounts, rebates, incentives, returns, and other allowances offered to customers. We recognize revenue when performance obligations under the terms of contracts with our customers are satisfied, which occurs when control passes to a customer to enable them to direct the use of and obtain benefit from the product. This typically occurs when a customer obtains legal title, obtains the risks and rewards of ownership, has received the goods according to the contractual shipping terms either at the shipping point or destination, and is obligated to pay for the product. Shipping and handling activities are recognized as fulfillment activities and are expensed at the time revenue is recognized. We recognize sales net of applicable sales taxes and similar revenue-based taxes.
We use judgment in estimating the reduction in net sales driven by customer rebate and incentive programs. Judgments primarily include expected sales levels to be achieved and the corresponding rebate and incentive amounts expected to be earned by dealers and salespersons.
We also use judgment in estimating a reserve for returns and allowances which is recorded at the time of the sale, based on estimated product returns and price concessions. The reserve for returns and allowances is recorded in accrued expenses on the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and the expense is recorded as a reduction of net sales in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers and impair receivable balances by recording specific allowances for bad debts based on judgment using factors such as current trends, the length of time the receivables are past due, and historical collection experience. The allowance for accounts receivable balances that are determined likely to be uncollectible are a reduction in the receivables line of the Consolidated Balance Sheets, and the expense is recorded in selling and administrative expenses in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Inventory - Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost includes material, labor, and applicable manufacturing overhead. Costs associated with underutilization of capacity are expensed as incurred. Inventories were valued using the last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) method for approximately 51% and 67% of consolidated inventories at June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, respectively, and the remaining inventories were valued using the first-in, first-out (“FIFO”) method and average cost method. The percentage of inventory subject to LIFO as of June 30, 2022 decreased as a result of higher Poppin inventory which is accounted for using the average cost method.
Inventory valued using the LIFO method requires judgement in the determination of appropriate indices used for evaluating price level changes and the application of indices to the various types of inventory within LIFO inventory pools. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information regarding the LIFO calculation. As of June 30, 2022 and 2021, the LIFO reserve was $23.8 million and $18.2 million, respectively. Inventories recorded on our balance sheets are adjusted for excess and obsolete inventory. For inventory using the LIFO method, excess and obsolete inventory is determined based upon FIFO inventory values, but the LIFO reserve is adjusted to prevent recognizing excessive inventory reserves in total.
Self-insurance reserves - We are self-insured up to certain limits for automobile and general liability, workers’ compensation, and certain employee health benefits such as medical, short-term disability, and dental, with the related liabilities included in the accompanying financial statements. Our policy is to estimate reserves based upon a number of factors, including known claims, estimated incurred but not reported claims, and other analyses, which are based on historical information, along with certain assumptions about future events. Changes in assumptions for such matters as a result of increased medical costs and changes in actual experience could cause these estimates to change and reserve levels to be adjusted accordingly. At June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, our accrued liabilities for self-insurance exposure were $2.3 million and $3.0 million, respectively.
Business Combinations, including Contingent Earn-Out Liability - We completed the acquisition of Poppin during the second quarter of fiscal year 2021. The accounting for a business combination requires tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed to be recorded at estimated fair value. We valued intangible assets at their estimated fair values at the acquisition date based upon assumptions related to the future cash flows and discount rates utilizing currently available information, and in some cases, valuation results from independent valuation specialists. The use of a discounted cash flow analysis requires significant judgment to estimate the future cash flows derived from the asset and the expected period of time over which those cash flows will occur and to determine an appropriate discount rate.
The acquisition purchase price includes contingent payments if revenue and EBITDA milestones are achieved through June 30, 2024. The fair value at initial measurement was $31.8 million, and as of June 30, 2022, the fair value of the contingent earn-out liability was $3.2 million. We utilized management estimates and consultation with an independent third-party valuation firm to assist in the valuation process. The fair value of the contingent earn-out liability was estimated using the Monte Carlo Simulation methodology, which is a discounted cash flow method. The fair value determination of the contingent earn-out liability required significant estimates and assumptions related to the forecasts of revenue and EBITDA, and the selection of the discount and volatility rates.
Goodwill - Goodwill represents the difference between the purchase price and the related underlying tangible and intangible net asset fair values resulting from business combinations. Goodwill is assigned to and the fair value is tested at the reporting unit level. Annually, or if conditions indicate an earlier review is necessary, we may assess qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that the fair value is less than its carrying amount. We also have the option to bypass the qualitative assessment and proceed directly to performing the quantitative goodwill impairment test which compares the carrying value of the reporting unit to the reporting unit’s fair value to identify impairment. Using the quantitative test, we determine the fair value of our reporting unit generally using market data, appraised values and discounted cash flow analyses. The use of a discounted cash flow analysis requires significant judgment to estimate the future cash flows derived from the business and the period of time over which those cash flows will occur, as well as to determine an appropriate discount rate. Under the quantitative assessment, if the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, goodwill is written down to its fair value. The fair value is established primarily using a discounted cash flow analysis and secondarily a market approach utilizing current industry information. The calculation of the fair value of the reporting unit considers current market conditions existing at the assessment date. During fiscal year 2022, we recognized goodwill impairment of $34.1 million. During fiscal year 2021 no goodwill impairment was recognized. At June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, goodwill totaled $47.8 million and $82.0 million, respectively.
New Accounting Standards
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding New Accounting Standards.