Item 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Our discussion and analysis below is focused on our 2021 and 2020 financial results, including comparisons of our year-over-year performance between these years. Discussion and analysis of our 2019 fiscal year specifically, as well as the year-over-year comparison of our 2020 financial performance to 2019, are located under Part II, Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended November 30, 2020, filed with the SEC on January 22, 2021, which is available on our investor relations website at investor.kbhome.com and the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview. Revenues are generated from our homebuilding and financial services operations. The following table presents a summary of our consolidated results of operations (dollars in thousands, except per share amounts):
In 2021, housing market conditions were positive, with healthy demand, particularly from millennial and Generation Z demographic groups, a limited supply of new and resale inventory and relatively low mortgage loan interest rates driving strong results for our business. Considerable demand for our homes enabled us to lift selling prices in the vast majority of our communities and, in combination with our focus on balancing pace, price and construction starts at each community, helped us to enhance the performance of our inventory assets and improve returns, despite supply chain challenges and rising construction services and building materials costs. Reflecting these actions, the value of our net orders for 2021 grew 45% year over year to $7.68 billion due to a 21% increase in net orders and a 20% rise in their overall average selling price. The year-over-year increase in our net order volume was due to higher net orders per community, partly offset by a lower average community count for the year. Our lower average community count reflected the accelerated sell-out of communities that resulted from our exceptionally strong monthly net order pace, which rose 37% to 6.3 in 2021 from 4.6 in 2020, even as we paced lot releases to
align with our production capacity, as well as delays in new community openings during 2021, as further described below. Compared to 2020, our average community count for 2021 decreased 12%, and our ending community count declined 8%.
Since 2020, we have experienced intensifying building material cost pressures, particularly for lumber, and production capacity issues with some of our main product suppliers, reflecting sustained high levels of homebuilding and renovation activity combined with supply chain disruptions stemming from international and domestic COVID-19 control responses and economy-wide labor shortages in the U.S. Our housing gross profit margin on homes delivered in the latter part of 2021 were especially impacted by high lumber costs during the period in which these homes were started. In 2021, the continuing supply chain disruptions, combined with construction services availability constraints and delays with respect to state and municipal construction permitting, inspections and utilities, extended our construction cycle times by several weeks and delayed many expected deliveries and new community openings during our fiscal year. We believe these challenging conditions will generally persist into 2022 and potentially throughout the year. We have incorporated these trends into our performance expectations, as presented below under “Outlook.”
Homebuilding revenues for 2021 grew 37% from the previous year due to an increase in housing revenues that reflected 26% growth in the number of homes delivered to 13,472 and a 9% increase in the overall average selling price of those homes to $422,700. In 2021, homebuilding operating income rose 109% year over year to $661.3 million and, as a percentage of homebuilding revenues, improved 400 basis points to 11.6%. The increase in our homebuilding operating income margin was driven by significant improvements in both housing gross profit margin and selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues. Our pretax income margin improved 340 basis points to 12.1%, and net income and diluted earnings per share increased 91% and 92%, respectively, each as compared to 2020. Our 2021 results included a $5.1 million loss on early extinguishment of debt associated with our purchase, pursuant to a tender offer that expired on June 8, 2021, of $269.8 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.00% senior notes due 2021 (“7.00% Senior Notes due 2021”) prior to their maturity date. . Our 2020 results included severance charges of $6.7 million, as described below under “COVID-19 Pandemic Impact.”
Our return on equity (“ROE”) for 2021 improved 810 basis points to 19.9%, compared to 11.8% for 2020. ROE is calculated as net income for the year divided by average stockholders’ equity, where average stockholders’ equity is based on the ending stockholders’ equity balances of the trailing five quarters.
COVID-19 Pandemic Impact. The COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses considerably disrupted global and national economies, the U.S. housing market, and our business in the 2020 second quarter. During that period, we experienced a sizable reduction in net orders and backlog as well as supply chain disruptions and construction cycle time extensions in most of our served markets that resulted in home delivery delays. With the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, and in prioritizing cash preservation and liquidity, we limited our land investments and curtailed our overhead expenditures, partly through workforce realignment and reductions. Due to these workforce-related actions, our selling, general and administrative expenses for the 2020 second quarter included severance charges of $6.7 million.
With the easing to varying degrees of restrictive public health orders in our served markets beginning in May 2020, our net orders began to rebound significantly following a low point in April 2020, as steadily increasing demand drove our 2020 third- and fourth-quarter net orders to then-15-year highs. The sharp rise in net orders over these periods substantially expanded the number of homes in our backlog as well as our backlog value. In 2021, demand for our homes remained strong, with the value of our net orders for the year up 45% year over year to $7.68 billion. Our ending backlog value at November 30, 2021 increased 67% to approximately $4.95 billion, our highest fourth-quarter level since 2005, supporting our expectation for significant year-over-year growth in our scale, profitability and returns in 2022, as described below under “Outlook.” With the ongoing strong demand, we continued to increase our land acquisition and development investments in 2021, as we did in the latter part of 2020, to measurably expand our lot pipeline and support future community count growth.
While we continue to experience construction services availability constraints, supply chain disruptions and rising and volatile raw material prices and availability, particularly with respect to lumber, other building materials and appliances, as well as delays related to state and municipal construction permitting, inspections and utilities, that could negatively impact our growth, margins and financial results in future periods, and there remains a risk that significant COVID-19 pandemic-related disruptions could emerge or re-emerge, we believe we are well-positioned to operate effectively through the present environment.
HOMEBUILDING
Financial Results. The following table presents a summary of certain financial and operational data for our homebuilding operations (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
Revenues. Year-over-year growth in homebuilding revenues to $5.71 billion in 2021 reflected an increase in housing revenues, partly offset by a decrease in land sale revenues. Housing revenues in 2020 were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses.
Housing revenues in 2021 advanced 37% from the previous year, due to a 26% increase in the number of homes delivered and a 9% increase in the overall average selling price of those homes. The higher volume of homes delivered was largely due to our backlog of homes at the beginning of the year (“beginning backlog”) increasing 54% from 2020, as well as strong net order growth in 2021. In addition, the number of homes delivered in 2020 was tempered primarily by the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses. The year-over-year increase in the overall average selling price of our homes delivered in 2021 reflected strong housing market conditions, which enabled us to raise prices in the vast majority of our communities, as well as product and geographic mix shifts of homes delivered.
Land sale revenues for 2021 decreased 39% from 2020. Generally, land sale revenues fluctuate with our decisions to maintain or decrease our land ownership position in certain markets based upon the volume of our holdings, our business strategy, the strength and number of developers and other land buyers in particular markets at given points in time, the availability of opportunities to sell land at acceptable prices and prevailing market conditions.
Operating Income. Our homebuilding operating income grew 109% in 2021, as compared to the previous year, due to an increase in housing gross profits, partly offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses. In 2021 and 2020, homebuilding operating income included total inventory-related charges of $12.0 million and $28.7 million, respectively, as discussed in Note 7 - Inventory Impairments and Land Option Contract Abandonments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report. In 2020, our homebuilding operating income also included severance charges of $6.7 million associated with workforce reductions made during the 2020 second quarter, as discussed above under “COVID-19 Pandemic Impact.” As a percentage of homebuilding revenues, our homebuilding operating income for 2021 improved 400 basis points year over year to 11.6%. Excluding inventory-related charges for both periods and the above-mentioned severance charges in 2020, our homebuilding operating income margin improved 340 basis points to 11.8% in 2021 from 8.4% in 2020.
•Housing Gross Profits - In 2021, housing gross profits increased by $443.3 million, or 56%, to $1.23 billion from $785.3 million in 2020. The year-over-year increase in 2021 reflected the higher volume of homes delivered and an increase in the housing gross profit margin. Housing gross profits for 2021 and 2020 included the respective inventory-related charges described above.
Our housing gross profit margin for 2021 increased 270 basis points from the previous year, mainly as a result of a favorable pricing environment that more than offset higher construction services and building materials costs (approximately 110 basis points); lower amortization of previously capitalized interest as a percentage of housing revenues (approximately 50 basis points); a decrease in inventory-related charges (approximately 50 basis points); an increase in operating leverage due to higher housing revenues (approximately 40 basis points); and other miscellaneous factors (approximately 20 basis points). As a percentage of housing revenues, the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations was 2.6% for 2021 and 3.1% for 2020. Excluding the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations and the above-mentioned inventory-related charges for the applicable periods, our adjusted housing gross profit margin increased 170 basis points to 24.4% in 2021 from 22.7% in 2020. The calculation of adjusted housing gross profit margin, which we believe provides a clearer measure of the performance of our business, is described below under “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
•Selling, General and Administrative Expenses - The following table presents the components of our selling, general and administrative expenses (dollars in thousands):
(a)Commission expenses include sales commissions on homes delivered paid to internal sales counselors and/or external real estate brokers.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for 2021 increased 22% from the prior year, mainly due to an increase in commission expenses associated with our higher housing revenues, and an increase in general and administrative expenses. The year-over-year increase in general and administrative expenses primarily reflected higher costs associated with performance-based employee compensation plans, as well as expenses incurred to support current operations and expected growth, partly offset by a $4.3 million benefit from an Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”), which is discussed in Note 14 - Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, recognized in early 2021 and the severance charges of $6.7 million recorded in 2020. As a percentage of housing revenues, our selling, general and administrative expenses improved 120 basis points in 2021 as compared to 2020, largely reflecting increased operating leverage due to our higher housing revenues, partly offset by the above-mentioned higher expenses.
Interest Income/Expense. Interest income, which is generated from short-term investments, totaled $1.0 million in 2021 and $2.6 million in 2020. Generally, increases and decreases in interest income are attributable to changes in the interest-bearing average balances of short-term investments and fluctuations in interest rates.
We incur interest principally from our borrowings to finance land acquisitions, land development, home construction and other operating and capital needs. The amount of interest incurred generally fluctuates based on the average amount of debt outstanding for the period and/or the interest rate on that debt. In 2021, interest incurred totaled $120.5 million, down 3% from $124.1 million in 2020, mainly due to both our lower average interest rate and lower average debt level. All interest incurred during 2021 and 2020 was capitalized as the average amount of our inventory qualifying for interest capitalization was higher than our average debt level for each period. As a result, we had no interest expense for 2021 or 2020. Further information regarding our interest incurred and capitalized is provided in Note 6 - Inventories in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Equity in Income (Loss) of Unconsolidated Joint Ventures. Our equity in loss of unconsolidated joint ventures totaled $.4 million in 2021, compared to equity in income of unconsolidated joint ventures of $12.5 million in 2020. This year-over-year change mainly resulted from a decrease in the number of homes delivered from an unconsolidated joint venture in California. This unconsolidated joint venture, which delivered its last home in the 2021 second quarter, delivered 10 homes in 2021, compared to 99 homes delivered in 2020. Further information regarding our investments in unconsolidated joint ventures is provided in Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Loss on Early Extinguishment of Debt. Our $5.1 million loss on early extinguishment of debt in 2021 was associated with our purchase, pursuant to a tender offer that expired on June 8, 2021, of $269.8 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.00% Senior Notes due 2021 prior to their maturity date. Further information regarding this transaction is provided in Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Net Orders, Backlog and Community Count. The following table presents information about our net orders, cancellation rate, ending backlog, and community count for the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(a)Net order value represents potential future housing revenues associated with net orders generated during the period, as well as homebuyer selections of lot and product premiums and design studio options and upgrades for homes in backlog during the same period.
(b)Cancellation rate represents the total number of contracts for new homes cancelled during a period divided by the total (gross) orders for new homes generated during the same period.
Net Orders. In 2021, net orders from our homebuilding operations grew 21% from 2020, reflecting a 37% increase in monthly net orders per community to 6.3, partly offset by a 12% decrease in our overall average community count, which is discussed below under “Community Count.” This higher monthly net order pace occurred even as we raised our home selling prices and paced lot releases, as described above under “Overview.” We believe our Built-to-Order homebuying process, which, as described above under Item 1 - Business in this report, provides personalization and choice, was a key contributor to our strong 2021 net order pace.
The value of our 2021 net orders rose 45% from 2020 as a result of the growth in net orders and a 20% increase in the overall average selling price of those orders. These factors drove net order value expansion in all four of our homebuilding reporting segments, ranging from 37% in our West Coast segment to 93% in our Southeast segment. The higher overall average selling price of net orders in 2021 largely reflected strong demand in most of our served markets as well as product and geographic mix shifts of net orders.
Backlog. The number of homes in our backlog at November 30, 2021 increased 35% from the previous year, mainly due to our substantially higher backlog at the beginning of the fiscal year as well as year-over-year growth in our 2021 net orders. The potential future housing revenues in our backlog at November 30, 2021 grew 67% year over year as a result of both the higher number of homes in our backlog and a 24% increase in the average selling price of those homes. The increases in the number of homes in backlog and backlog value reflected strong growth in each of our four homebuilding reporting segments, with increases in backlog value ranging from 53% in our West Coast segment to 106% in our Southeast segment. Substantially all of the homes in our backlog at November 30, 2021 are expected to be delivered during the year ending November 30, 2022.
Community Count. Our average community count for 2021 decreased 12% from the previous year, and our ending community count declined 8%. The year-over-year decreases in our average and ending community counts primarily reflected communities that sold out earlier than planned due to an increase in our demand-driven net order pace and delays in new community openings. We substantially increased our investments in land acquisition and land development in 2021 to support future community count growth.
HOMEBUILDING REPORTING SEGMENTS
Operational Data. The following tables present information about our homes delivered, net orders, cancellation rates as a percentage of gross orders, net order value, average community count, and ending backlog (number of homes and value) by homebuilding reporting segment (dollars in thousands):
As discussed above under Item 1 - Business in this report, the composition of our homes delivered, net orders and backlog shifts with the mix of our active communities and the corresponding average selling prices of the homes ordered and/or delivered at these communities in any particular period, and it changes as new communities open and existing communities wind down or sell out. In addition, with our Built-to-Order model, the selling prices of individual homes within a community may vary due to differing lot sizes and locations, home square footage, and option and upgrade selections. These intrinsic
variations in our business limit the comparability of our homes delivered, net orders and backlog, as well as their corresponding values, between sequential and year-over-year periods, in addition to the effect of prevailing economic or housing market conditions in or across any particular periods.
Financial Results. Below is a discussion of the financial results of each of our homebuilding reporting segments. Further information regarding these segments, including their pretax income (loss), is included in Note 2 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report. The difference between each homebuilding reporting segment’s operating income (loss) and pretax income (loss) is generally due to the equity in income (loss) of unconsolidated joint ventures, which is also presented in Note 2 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, and/or interest income and expense.
In addition to the results of our homebuilding reporting segments presented below, our consolidated homebuilding operating income includes the results of Corporate and other, a non-operating segment described in Note 2 - Segment Information in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report. Corporate and other had operating losses of $148.9 million in 2021, $107.2 million in 2020 and $104.1 million in 2019. The increase in 2021 as compared to 2020 reflected higher selling, general and administrative expenses, mainly due to higher costs associated with performance-based employee compensation plans, as well as expenses to support current operations and expected growth.
With strong housing market conditions from the 2020 third quarter through the 2021 fourth quarter in most of our served markets, we delivered more homes at a higher overall average selling price and significantly expanded our homebuilding operating income as a percentage of revenues in each of our homebuilding segments for 2021, as compared to the previous year. The financial results for each of our homebuilding reporting segments for the year ended November 30, 2020 were negatively affected by the impacts from the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, as discussed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report
West Coast. The following table presents financial information related to our West Coast homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
This segment’s revenues in 2021 were generated solely from housing operations. In 2020, revenues for this segment were generated from housing operations and nominal land sales. Housing revenues for 2021 grew 46% from the previous year due to increases in the number of homes delivered in California and Washington, and the higher average selling price of those homes. The higher average selling price reflected strong housing market conditions and product and geographic mix shifts of homes delivered.
Operating income grew significantly from 2020, reflecting higher housing gross profits, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses. As a percentage of revenues, this segment’s 2021 operating income increased from the previous year, reflecting a 460 basis-point expansion in the housing gross profit margin to 19.9%, and a 100 basis-point improvement in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to 6.4%. The housing gross profit margin expansion was primarily driven by a favorable pricing environment that more than offset higher construction services and building materials costs, lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest, a reduction in inventory-related charges and an increase in operating leverage due to higher housing revenues. Inventory-related charges impacting the housing gross profit margin totaled $11.0 million in 2021, compared to $21.9 million in 2020. The improvement in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues mainly reflected increased operating leverage from higher housing revenues, partly offset by higher expenses incurred to support current operations and expected growth.
Southwest. The following table presents financial information related to our Southwest homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
In 2021 and 2020, this segment’s revenues were generated from both housing operations and land sales. Housing revenues for 2021 grew 22% year over year to $955.7 million, mainly due to an increase in the number of homes delivered from our Nevada operations and a rise in the average selling price of homes delivered in both our Arizona and Nevada operations. The higher average selling price reflected strong housing market conditions and product and geographic mix shifts of homes delivered. Land sale revenues totaled $9.4 million in 2021 and $16.1 million in 2020.
This segment’s operating income for 2021 increased from the previous year, mainly due to higher housing gross profits and increased land sale profits, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses. As a percentage of revenues, operating income improved from 2020 due to a 130 basis-point increase in the housing gross profit margin to 26.7%, a 60 basis-point improvement in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to 7.9% and higher profits from land sales. The housing gross profit margin expansion was largely driven by a favorable pricing environment that more than offset higher construction services and building materials costs, and lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest. Land sales generated profits of $7.1 million in 2021 and $2.0 million in 2020. The improvement in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues was mainly due to increased operating leverage from higher housing revenues.
Central. The following table presents financial information related to our Central homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
In 2021 and 2020, revenues for this segment were generated solely from housing operations. Housing revenues for 2021 grew 26% from the prior year, reflecting increases in the number of homes delivered in both states that comprise this segment, and the higher average selling price of those homes. The increase in the average selling price reflected strong housing market conditions and product and geographic mix shifts of homes delivered.
Operating income for 2021 increased from 2020, reflecting growth in housing gross profits, partially offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses. In 2021, the improvement in operating income as a percentage of revenues
reflected a 90 basis-point expansion in the housing gross profit margin to 22.0% and a 160 basis-point improvement in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to 8.7%. The housing gross profit margin rose from the previous year primarily due to lower inventory-related charges, improved operating leverage due to higher housing revenues, and lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest. Inventory-related charges for 2021 were nominal, compared to $5.5 million in 2020. The year-over-year improvement in selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues mainly reflected increased operating leverage from higher housing revenues, and the continued impact of targeted actions we took in 2020 to reduce overhead costs in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Southeast. The following table presents financial information related to our Southeast homebuilding reporting segment for the years indicated (dollars in thousands, except average selling price):
In 2021 and 2020, this segment’s revenues were generated from both housing operations and nominal land sales. Housing revenues for 2021 rose 59% year over year to $682.7 million due to increases in both the number of homes delivered and the average selling price of those homes. The higher average selling price in 2021 as compared to 2020 mainly reflected strong housing market conditions and product and geographic mix shifts of homes delivered.
Operating income increased from 2020, reflecting higher housing gross profits, partly offset by higher selling, general and administrative expenses. As a percentage of revenues, operating income rose from 2020 due to a 350 basis-point increase in the housing gross profit margin to 20.8% that mainly reflected a shift in geographic mix, improved operating leverage due to higher housing revenues, and lower relative amortization of previously capitalized interest. In addition, selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues improved 260 basis points from 2020 to 9.4%, primarily due to increased operating leverage as a result of higher housing revenues, and the continued impact of targeted actions we took in 2020 to reduce overhead costs in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.
FINANCIAL SERVICES REPORTING SEGMENT
The following table presents a summary of selected financial and operational data for our financial services reporting segment (dollars in thousands):
(a)Loan originations and sales occurred within KBHS.
Revenues. Our financial services reporting segment, which includes the operations of KB HOME Mortgage Company, generates revenues primarily from insurance commissions and title services. The year-over-year growth in our financial services revenues for 2021 reflected increases in both title services revenues and insurance commissions.
Pretax income. Our financial services pretax income for 2021 grew 18% from the previous year due to improved results from our insurance and title services businesses, and an increase in the equity in income of unconsolidated joint ventures. In 2021, our equity in income of our unconsolidated joint venture, KBHS, increased 12% year over year as a result of a substantial increase in the principal amount of loan originations and improved margins. The higher principal amount of loan originations in 2021 was primarily due to a 26% increase in the number of homes we delivered and a 9% increase in the average selling price of those homes.
On March 1, 2021, Guaranteed Rate acquired the parent company of Stearns, our KBHS partner prior to that date. In October 2021, Stearns was renamed as GR Alliance. As of the date of this report, we are not aware of any significant changes with respect to GR Alliance or its operations as a result of the transaction being completed.
INCOME TAXES
Income Tax Expense. Our income tax expense and effective income tax rate were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Our effective tax rate for 2021 increased slightly from the previous year, as the impacts of higher taxable income, a $5.6 million increase in non-deductible compensation expense and a $4.9 million decrease in excess tax benefits related to stock-based compensation were mostly offset by the favorable effect of a $30.8 million increase in federal tax credits we earned primarily from building energy-efficient homes.
The federal energy tax credits for the year ended November 30, 2021 resulted from legislation enacted in December 2020 and earlier periods. The legislation enacted in December 2020, among other things, extended the availability of a business tax
credit for building new energy-efficient homes through December 31, 2021. Prior to this legislation, the tax credit was set to expire on December 31, 2020.
In June 2020, California enacted tax legislation that approved the suspension of California net operating loss (“NOL”) deductions for tax years 2020, 2021 and 2022. Although the suspension of California NOL deductions did not have an impact on our income tax expense for the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, it contributed to the year-over-year increase in the amount of income taxes we paid in 2021.
Under current accounting standards, we expect volatility in our income tax expense in future periods, the magnitude of which will depend on, among other factors, the price of our common stock and the timing and volume of stock-based compensation award activity, such as employee exercises of stock options and the vesting of restricted stock awards and performance-based restricted stock units (each, a “PSU”).
For each of the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020, the amount of income taxes we paid was substantially less than our income tax expense primarily due to the utilization of our deferred tax assets to reduce taxable income. We anticipate the amount of income taxes we pay will be less than our income tax expense for at least the next year.
Further information regarding our income taxes is provided in Note 14 - Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
This report contains information about our adjusted housing gross profit margin, which is not calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). We believe this non-GAAP financial measure is relevant and useful to investors in understanding our operations, and may be helpful in comparing us with other companies in the homebuilding industry to the extent they provide similar information. However, because it is not calculated in accordance with GAAP, this non-GAAP financial measure may not be completely comparable to other companies in the homebuilding industry and, thus, should not be considered in isolation or as an alternative to operating performance and/or financial measures prescribed by GAAP. Rather, this non-GAAP financial measure should be used to supplement the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure in order to provide a greater understanding of the factors and trends affecting our operations.
Adjusted Housing Gross Profit Margin. The following table reconciles our housing gross profit margin calculated in accordance with GAAP to the non-GAAP financial measure of our adjusted housing gross profit margin (dollars in thousands):
(a)Represents inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges associated with housing operations.
(b)Represents the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations.
Adjusted housing gross profit margin is a non-GAAP financial measure, which we calculate by dividing housing revenues less housing construction and land costs excluding (1) housing inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges (as applicable) recorded during a given period and (2) amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with
housing operations, by housing revenues. The most directly comparable GAAP financial measure is housing gross profit margin. We believe adjusted housing gross profit margin is a relevant and useful financial measure to investors in evaluating our performance as it measures the gross profits we generated specifically on the homes delivered during a given period. This non-GAAP financial measure isolates the impact that the housing inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges, and the amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations, have on housing gross profit margins, and allows investors to make comparisons with our competitors that adjust housing gross profit margins in a similar manner. We also believe investors will find adjusted housing gross profit margin relevant and useful because it represents a profitability measure that may be compared to a prior period without regard to variability of housing inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges, and amortization of previously capitalized interest associated with housing operations. This financial measure assists us in making strategic decisions regarding community location and product mix, product pricing and construction pace.
SUPPLEMENTAL GUARANTOR FINANCIAL INFORMATION
As of November 30, 2021, we had $1.69 billion in aggregate principal amount of outstanding senior notes and no borrowings outstanding under the Credit Facility. Our obligations to pay principal, premium, if any, and interest on the senior notes and borrowings, if any, under the Credit Facility are guaranteed on a joint and several basis by certain of our subsidiaries (“Guarantor Subsidiaries”), which are listed on Exhibit 22. Our other subsidiaries, including all of our subsidiaries associated with our financial services operations, do not guarantee any such indebtedness (collectively, “Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries”), although we may cause a Non-Guarantor Subsidiary to become a Guarantor Subsidiary if we believe it to be in our or the relevant subsidiary’s best interest. See Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report for additional information regarding the terms of our senior notes and the Credit Facility.
The guarantees are full and unconditional and the Guarantor Subsidiaries are 100% owned by us. The guarantees are senior unsecured obligations of each of the Guarantor Subsidiaries and rank equally in right of payment with all unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness and guarantees of such Guarantor Subsidiaries. The guarantees are effectively subordinated to any secured indebtedness of such Guarantor Subsidiaries to the extent of the value of the assets securing such indebtedness, and structurally subordinated to indebtedness and other liabilities of Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries.
Pursuant to the terms of the indenture governing the senior notes and the terms of the Credit Facility, if any of the Guarantor Subsidiaries ceases to be a “significant subsidiary” as defined by Rule 1-02 of Regulation S-X using a 5% rather than a 10% threshold (provided that the assets of our non-guarantor subsidiaries do not in the aggregate exceed 10% of an adjusted measure of our consolidated total assets), it will be automatically and unconditionally released and discharged from its guaranty of the senior notes and the Credit Facility so long as all guarantees by such Guarantor Subsidiary of any other of our or our subsidiaries’ indebtedness are terminated at or prior to the time of such release.
The following tables present summarized financial information for KB Home and the Guarantor Subsidiaries on a combined basis, excluding unconsolidated joint ventures and after the elimination of (a) intercompany transactions and balances between KB Home and the Guarantor Subsidiaries and (b) equity in earnings from and investments in the Non-Guarantor Subsidiaries. See Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report for additional information regarding our unconsolidated joint ventures.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview. We have funded our homebuilding and financial services activities over the last several years with:
• internally generated cash flows;
• public issuances of debt securities;
• borrowings under the Credit Facility;
• land option contracts and other similar contracts and seller notes;
• public issuances of our common stock; and
• letters of credit and performance bonds.
We manage our use of cash in the operation of our business to support the execution of our primary strategic goals. Over the past several years, we have primarily used cash for:
•land acquisitions and land development;
•home construction;
•operating expenses;
•principal and interest payments on notes payable; and
•repayments of borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Cash flows for each of our communities depend on their stage of development and can differ significantly from reported earnings. Early stages of development or expansion require significant cash outflows for land acquisition, zoning plat and other approvals, land development, and construction of model homes, roads, utilities, landscape and other items. Because these costs are a component of our inventory and are not recognized in our income statement until a home is delivered, we incur significant cash outflows prior to the recognition of earnings. In the later stages of a community as homes are delivered, cash inflows may significantly exceed earnings reported for financial statement purposes, as the cash outflows associated with the land and home construction were previously incurred.
We ended 2021 with total liquidity of $1.08 billion, including cash and cash equivalents and $791.4 million of available capacity under the Credit Facility. Based on our financial position as of November 30, 2021, and our positive business forecast for 2022 as discussed below under “Outlook,” we have no material concerns related to our liquidity. While the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic creates potential liquidity risks, as discussed further below, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents, our anticipated cash flows from operations and amounts available under our Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our anticipated operating and land-related investment needs for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Requirements. Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations:
Notes Payable. We have outstanding fixed-rate notes payable with varying maturities. As of November 30, 2021, our notes payable had an aggregate principal amount of $1.70 billion, with $353.6 million payable within 12 months. Future interest payments associated with our notes payable totaled $443.6 million as of November 30, 2021, with $104.1 million payable within 12 months. Further information regarding our notes payable is provided in Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Leases. We have operating leases for certain property and equipment with an expected term at the commencement date of more than 12 months. As of November 30, 2021, the future minimum payments required under these leases totaled $32.6 million, with $10.6 million payable within 12 months. Further information regarding our leases is provided in Note 13 - Leases in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Inventory-Related Obligations. As of November 30, 2021, we had inventory-related obligations totaling $36.1 million, comprised of liabilities for inventory not owned associated with financing arrangements as discussed in Note 8 - Variable Interest Entities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, as well as liabilities for fixed or determinable amounts associated with tax increment financing entity (“TIFE”) assessments. Approximately $27.0 million of these inventory-related obligations are payable within 12 months. However, TIFE assessment obligations are paid by us only to the extent we do not deliver homes on applicable lots before the related TIFE obligations mature.
Investments in Land and Land Development. Our investments in land and land development increased to $2.53 billion in 2021, compared to $1.69 billion in 2020. Approximately 50% of our total investments in both 2021 and 2020 related to land acquisitions. While we made strategic investments in land and land development in each of our homebuilding reporting segments during 2021 and 2020, approximately 53% and 55%, respectively, of these investments for each year were made in our West Coast homebuilding reporting segment. Our investments in land and land development in the future will depend significantly on market conditions and available opportunities that meet our investment return standards to support home delivery and revenue growth in 2022 and beyond.
The following table presents the number of lots we owned or controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts and the carrying value of inventory by homebuilding reporting segment (dollars in thousands):
The number and carrying value of lots we owned or controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts at November 30, 2021 increased from November 30, 2020, primarily due to our investments in land and land development in 2021 and an increase in the number of homes under construction. The number of lots in inventory as of November 30, 2021 included 12,434 lots under contract where the associated deposits were refundable at our discretion, compared to 10,254 of such lots at November 30, 2020, reflecting ordinary course fluctuations in the number of such contracts. Our lots controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts as a percentage of total lots was 44% at November 30, 2021 and 40% at November 30, 2020. Generally, this percentage fluctuates with our decisions to control (or abandon) lots under land option contracts and other similar contracts or to purchase (or sell owned) lots based on available opportunities and our investment return standards.
Land Option Contracts and Other Similar Contracts. As discussed in Note 8 - Variable Interest Entities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, our land option contracts and other similar contracts generally do not contain provisions requiring our specific performance. Our decision to exercise a particular land option contract or other similar contract depends on the results of our due diligence reviews and ongoing market and project feasibility analysis that we conduct after entering into such a contract. In some cases, our decision to exercise a land option contract or other similar contract may be conditioned on the land seller obtaining necessary entitlements, such as zoning rights and environmental and development approvals, and/or physically developing the underlying land by a pre-determined date. We typically have the ability not to exercise our rights to the underlying land for any reason and forfeit our deposits without further penalty or obligation to the sellers. If we were to acquire all of the land we had under land option contracts and other similar contracts at November 30, 2021, we estimate the remaining purchase price to be paid would be as follows: 2022 - $1.34 billion; 2023 - $318.7 million; 2024 - $51.6 million; 2025 - $78.2 million; 2026 - $1.7 million; and thereafter - $0.
Liquidity. The table below summarizes our total cash and cash equivalents, and total liquidity (in thousands):
The majority of our cash equivalents at November 30, 2021 and 2020 were invested in interest-bearing bank deposit accounts.
Capital Resources. Our notes payable consisted of the following (in thousands):
Our financial leverage, as measured by the ratio of debt to capital, was 35.8% at November 30, 2021, compared to 39.6% at November 30, 2020. The ratio of debt to capital is calculated by dividing notes payable by capital (notes payable plus stockholders’ equity).
On June 9, 2021, we completed the underwritten public offering of $390.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.00% senior notes due 2031 (“4.00% Senior Notes due 2031”) at 100% of their aggregate principal amount. Net proceeds from this offering totaled $385.2 million, after deducting the underwriting discount and our expenses relating to the offering. The 4.00% Senior Notes due 2031 will mature on June 15, 2031. On June 9, 2021, we used a portion of the net proceeds to purchase, pursuant to a tender offer that expired the previous day, $269.8 million in aggregate principal amount of our outstanding $450.0 million of 7.00% Senior Notes due 2021. We paid $274.9 million to purchase the notes and recorded a charge of $5.1 million for the early extinguishment of debt in the 2021 third quarter due to a premium paid under the tender offer and the unamortized original issue discount associated with these senior notes. On September 15, 2021, we redeemed the remaining $180.2 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.00% Senior Notes due 2021 at par value pursuant to the terms of the notes. Together, these 2021 transactions effectively extended the maturity of our senior notes by more than two years and reduced our weighted average borrowing rate by approximately 70 basis points.
LOC Facility. On August 12, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our unsecured letter of credit agreement with a financial institution (“LOC Facility”) that increased the limit of letters of credit we may issue from $50.0 million to $75.0 million and extended the expiration date from February 13, 2022 to February 13, 2025. We had $34.6 million and $29.7 million of letters of credit outstanding under the LOC Facility at November 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Performance Bonds. As discussed in Note 17 - Commitments and Contingencies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, we had $1.11 billion and $897.6 million of performance bonds outstanding at November 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Unsecured Revolving Credit Facility. We have an $800.0 million Credit Facility that will mature on October 7, 2023. The amount of the Credit Facility available for cash borrowings and the issuance of letters of credit depends on the total cash borrowings and letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Facility and the maximum available amount under the terms of the Credit Facility. As of November 30, 2021, we had no cash borrowings and $8.6 million of letters of credit outstanding under the Credit Facility. The Credit Facility is further described in Note 15 - Notes Payable in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
Under the terms of the Credit Facility, we are required, among other things, to maintain compliance with various covenants, including financial covenants regarding our consolidated tangible net worth, consolidated leverage ratio (“Leverage Ratio”), and either a consolidated interest coverage ratio (“Interest Coverage Ratio”) or minimum liquidity level, each as defined therein. Our compliance with these financial covenants is measured by calculations and metrics that are specifically defined or described by the terms of the Credit Facility and can differ in certain respects from comparable GAAP or other commonly used terms. The financial covenant requirements under the Credit Facility are set forth below:
•Consolidated Tangible Net Worth - We must maintain a consolidated tangible net worth at the end of any fiscal quarter greater than or equal to the sum of (a) $1.54 billion, plus (b) an amount equal to 50% of the aggregate of the cumulative consolidated net income for each fiscal quarter commencing after May 31, 2019 and ending as of the last day of such fiscal quarter (though there is no reduction if there is a consolidated net loss in any fiscal quarter), plus (c) an amount equal to 50% of the cumulative net proceeds we receive from the issuance of our capital stock after May 31, 2019.
•Leverage Ratio - We must also maintain a Leverage Ratio of less than or equal to .65 at the end of each fiscal quarter. The Leverage Ratio is calculated as the ratio of our consolidated total indebtedness to the sum of consolidated total indebtedness and consolidated tangible net worth, all as defined under the Credit Facility.
•Interest Coverage Ratio or Liquidity - We are also required to maintain either (a) an Interest Coverage Ratio of greater than or equal to 1.50 at the end of each fiscal quarter; or (b) a minimum level of liquidity, but not both. The Interest Coverage Ratio is the ratio of our consolidated adjusted EBITDA to consolidated interest incurred, each as defined under the Credit Facility, in each case for the previous 12 months. Our minimum liquidity is required to be greater than or equal to consolidated interest incurred, as defined under the Credit Facility, for the four most recently ended fiscal quarters in the aggregate.
In addition, under the Credit Facility, our investments in joint ventures and non-guarantor subsidiaries (which are shown, respectively, in Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report and under “Supplemental Guarantor Financial Information” above) as of the end of each fiscal quarter cannot exceed the sum of (a) $104.8 million and (b) 20% of consolidated tangible net worth. Further, the Credit Facility does not permit our borrowing base indebtedness, which is the aggregate principal amount of our outstanding indebtedness for borrowed money and non-collateralized financial letters of credit, to be greater than our borrowing base (a measure relating to our inventory and unrestricted cash assets).
The covenants and other requirements under the Credit Facility represent the most restrictive provisions that we are subject to with respect to our notes payable. The following table summarizes the financial covenants and other requirements under the Credit Facility, and our actual levels or ratios (as applicable) with respect to those covenants and other requirements, in each case as of November 30, 2021:
(a)Under the terms of the Credit Facility, we are required to maintain either a minimum Interest Coverage Ratio or a minimum level of liquidity, but not both. As of November 30, 2021, we met both the Interest Coverage Ratio and the minimum liquidity requirements.
The indenture governing our senior notes does not contain any financial covenants. Subject to specified exceptions, the indenture contains certain restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit our ability to incur secured indebtedness, or engage in sale-leaseback transactions involving property above a certain specified value. In addition, our senior notes contain certain limitations related to mergers, consolidations, and sales of assets.
As of the date of this report, we were in compliance with the applicable terms of all our covenants and other requirements under the Credit Facility, the senior notes, the indenture, and the mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans. Our ability to access the Credit Facility for cash borrowings and letters of credit and our ability to secure future debt financing depend, in part, on our ability to remain in such compliance. There are no agreements that restrict our payment of
dividends other than the Credit Facility, which would restrict our payment of certain dividends, such as cash dividends on our common stock, if a default under the Credit Facility exists at the time of any such payment, or if any such payment would result in such a default (other than dividends paid within 60 days after declaration, if there was no default at the time of declaration).
Depending on available terms, we finance certain land acquisitions with purchase-money financing from land sellers or with other forms of financing from third parties. At November 30, 2021, we had outstanding mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans payable in connection with such financing of $5.3 million, secured primarily by the underlying property, which had an aggregate carrying value of $20.8 million.
Unconsolidated Joint Ventures. As discussed in Note 9 - Investments in Unconsolidated Joint Ventures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, we have investments in unconsolidated joint ventures in various markets where our homebuilding operations are located. None of our unconsolidated joint ventures had outstanding debt at November 30, 2021.
Credit Ratings. Our credit ratings are periodically reviewed by rating agencies. In February 2021, Moody’s Investors Service affirmed our corporate Ba3 credit rating, and upgraded the rating outlook to positive from stable. In May 2021, Moody’s Investors Service upgraded our corporate rating to Ba2 from Ba3, and changed the rating outlook to stable from positive.
Consolidated Cash Flows. The following table presents a summary of net cash provided by (used in) our operating, investing and financing activities (in thousands):
Operating Activities. Operating activities used net cash of $37.3 million in 2021 and provided net cash of $310.7 million in 2020. Generally, our net operating cash flows fluctuate primarily based on changes in our inventories and our profitability. Net cash used in operating activities in 2021 mainly reflected a net increase in inventories of $897.8 million and a net increase in receivables of $32.0 million, partly offset by net income of $564.7 million and a net increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $181.6 million. Net cash provided by operating activities in 2020 primarily reflected net income of $296.2 million, a net decrease in receivables of $59.3 million, largely due to an income tax refund received, and a net increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $4.1 million, partly offset by a net increase in inventories of $183.2 million.
Investing Activities. Investing activities used net cash of $38.1 million in 2021 and $26.6 million in 2020. Our uses of cash in 2021 included $39.4 million for net purchases of property and equipment and $11.5 million for contributions to unconsolidated joint ventures. These uses of cash were partially offset by a $12.8 million return of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures. In 2020, the net cash used in investing activities included $28.8 million for net purchases of property and equipment and $10.4 million for contributions to unconsolidated joint ventures. These uses of cash were partly offset by a $12.7 million return of investments in unconsolidated joint ventures.
Financing Activities. In 2021, the year-over-year change in net cash used in financing activities was mainly due to financing transactions we completed during the year. In 2021, cash was used for the repayment of $450.0 million in aggregate principal amount of our 7.00% Senior Notes due 2021, stock repurchases totaling $188.2 million, dividend payments on our common stock of $54.1 million, tax payments associated with stock-based compensation awards of $12.3 million, payments of debt issuance costs of $4.8 million and payments on mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans of $2.3 million. The cash used was partially offset by cash provided from our public offering of $390.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 4.00% Senior Notes due 2031 and $11.7 million of issuances of common stock under employee stock plans. In 2020, net cash was used for dividend payments on our common stock of $38.1 million, payments on mortgages and land contracts due to land sellers and other loans of $24.9 million, and tax payments associated with stock-based compensation awards of $9.5 million. Partially offsetting these uses of cash was $16.1 million of cash provided by issuances of common stock under employee stock plans.
Dividends. Our board of directors declared four quarterly cash dividends of $.15 per share of common stock in 2021. In 2020, our board of directors declared quarterly cash dividends of $.09 per share of common stock in the first, second and third quarters. In the 2020 fourth quarter, our board of directors approved an increase in the quarterly cash dividend on our common stock to $.15 per share and declared a quarterly cash dividend at the new higher rate. Cash dividends declared and paid during the years ended November 30, 2021 and 2020 totaled $.60 and $.42 per share of common stock, respectively. The declaration and payment of future cash dividends on our common stock, whether at current levels or at all, are at the discretion of our board of directors, and depend upon, among other things, our expected future earnings, cash flows, capital requirements, access to external financing, debt structure and any adjustments thereto, operational and financial investment strategy and general financial condition, as well as general business conditions.
Shelf Registration Statement. On July 9, 2020, we filed an automatically effective universal shelf registration statement (“2020 Shelf Registration”) with the SEC. The 2020 Shelf Registration registers the offering of securities that we may issue from time to time in amounts to be determined. Our ability to issue securities is subject to market conditions. The 2020 Shelf Registration replaced our previously effective universal shelf registration statement filed with the SEC on July 14, 2017.
Share Repurchase Program. On July 8, 2021, our board of directors authorized us to repurchase up to 5,000,000 shares of our outstanding common stock. This authorization reaffirmed and incorporated the then-current balance of 2,193,947 shares that remained under a prior board-approved share repurchase program. In 2021, we repurchased 4,668,600 shares of our common stock on the open market pursuant to this authorization at a total cost of $188.2 million. Repurchases under the remaining authorization of 331,400 shares may occur periodically through open market purchases, privately negotiated transactions or otherwise, with the timing and amount at management’s discretion and dependent on market and business conditions and other factors. This share repurchase authorization will continue in effect until fully used or earlier terminated or suspended by our board of directors and does not obligate us to purchase any additional shares.
Unrelated to the common stock repurchase program, our board of directors authorized in 2014 the repurchase of no more than 680,000 shares of our outstanding common stock solely as necessary for director compensation elections with respect to settling outstanding stock appreciation rights awards (“Director Plan SARs”) granted under our Non-Employee Directors Compensation Plan (“Director Plan”). As of November 30, 2021, we have not repurchased any shares pursuant to the board of directors authorization.
While the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has created uncertainty as to general economic conditions for 2022 and beyond, as of the date of this report, we believe we have adequate capital resources and sufficient access to external financing sources to satisfy our current and reasonably anticipated requirements for funds to conduct our operations and meet other needs in the ordinary course of our business. In 2022, we expect to use or redeploy our cash resources or cash borrowings under the Credit Facility to support our business within the context of prevailing market conditions. During this time, we may also engage in capital markets, bank loan, project debt or other financial transactions, including the repurchase of debt or equity securities or potential new issuances of debt or equity securities to support our business needs. The amounts involved in these transactions, if any, may be material. In addition, as necessary or desirable, we may adjust or amend the terms of and/or expand the capacity of the Credit Facility or the LOC Facility, or enter into additional letter of credit facilities, or other similar facility arrangements, in each case with the same or other financial institutions, or allow any such facilities to mature or expire. However, with the uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, which could materially and negatively affect our business and the housing market, our ability to engage in such transactions may be constrained by volatile or tight economic, capital, credit and/or financial market conditions, as well as moderated investor and/or lender interest or capacity and/or our liquidity, leverage and net worth, and we can provide no assurance as to successfully completing, the costs of, or the operational limitations arising from any one or series of such transactions. Further discussion of the potential impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic on our capital resources and liquidity is provided above under Item 1A - Risk Factors in this report.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The accompanying consolidated financial statements were prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires the use of estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the periods presented. Actual results could differ from those estimates and assumptions. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report for a discussion of our significant accounting policies. The following are accounting policies that we believe are critical because of the significance of the activity to which they relate or because they require the use of significant estimates, judgments and/or other assumptions in their application.
Homebuilding Revenue Recognition. We recognize homebuilding revenue by applying the following steps in determining the timing and amount of revenue to recognize: (1) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (2) identify the performance
obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, if applicable; and (5) recognize revenue when (or as) we satisfy a performance obligation.
Our home sale transactions are made pursuant to contracts under which we typically have a single performance obligation to deliver a completed home to the homebuyer when closing conditions are met. Revenues from home sales are recognized when we have satisfied the performance obligation within the sales contract, which is generally when title to and possession of the home and the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the homebuyer on the closing date. Little to no estimation is involved in recognizing such revenues.
Land sale transactions are made pursuant to contracts under which we typically have a performance obligation(s) to deliver specified land parcels to the buyer when closing conditions are met. We evaluate each land sale contract to determine our performance obligation(s) under the contract, including whether we have a distinct promise to perform post-closing land development work that is material within the context of the contract, and use objective criteria to determine our completion of the applicable performance obligation(s), whether at a point in time or over time. Revenues from land sales are recognized when we have satisfied the performance obligation(s) within the sales contract, which is generally when title to and possession of the land and the risks and rewards of ownership are transferred to the land buyer on the closing date. In instances where we have a distinct and material performance obligation(s) within the context of a land sale contract to perform land development work after the closing date, a portion of the transaction price under the contract is allocated to such performance obligation(s) and is recognized as revenue over time based upon our estimated progress toward the satisfaction of the performance obligation(s). We generally measure our progress based on our costs incurred relative to the total costs expected to satisfy the performance obligation(s). Certain land sale contracts may require management judgment in determining the appropriate revenue recognition, but the impact of such transactions is generally immaterial.
Inventories and Cost of Sales. Housing and land inventories are stated at cost, unless the carrying value is determined not to be recoverable, in which case the affected inventories are written down to fair value or fair value less associated costs to sell. Fair value is determined based on estimated future net cash flows discounted for inherent risks associated with the real estate assets, or other valuation techniques. Due to uncertainties in the estimation process and other factors beyond our control, it is possible that actual results could differ from those estimated. Other than model homes, our inventories typically do not consist of completed unsold homes. However, as discussed above under Item 1 - Business in this report, we may have unsold completed or partially completed homes in our inventory.
We rely on certain estimates to determine our construction and land costs and resulting housing gross profit margins associated with revenues recognized. Construction and land costs are comprised of direct and allocated costs, including estimated future costs for the limited warranty we provide on our homes, and certain amenities within a community. Land acquisition, land development and other common costs are generally allocated on a relative fair value basis to the homes or lots within the applicable community or land parcel. Land acquisition and land development costs include related interest and real estate taxes.
In determining a portion of the construction and land costs recognized for each period, we rely on project budgets that are based on a variety of assumptions, including future construction schedules and costs to be incurred. It is possible that actual results could differ from budgeted amounts for various reasons, including construction delays, construction resource shortages, increases in costs that have not yet been committed, changes in governmental requirements, unforeseen environmental hazards or other unanticipated issues encountered during construction and other factors beyond our control. While the actual results for a particular construction project are accurately reported over time, variances between the budgeted and actual costs of a project could result in the understatement or overstatement of construction and land costs and homebuilding gross profits in a particular reporting period. To reduce the potential for such distortion, we have set forth procedures that collectively comprise a critical accounting policy. These procedures, which we have applied on a consistent basis, include assessing, updating and revising project budgets on a monthly basis, obtaining commitments to the extent possible from independent contractors and vendors for future costs to be incurred, reviewing the adequacy of warranty accruals and historical warranty claims experience, and utilizing the most current information available to estimate construction and land costs to be charged to expense. Variances to the budgeted costs after an estimate has been charged to expense that are related to project costs are generally allocated on a relative fair value basis to the remaining homes to be delivered within the community or land parcel, while such variances related to direct construction costs are generally expensed as incurred. The variances between budgeted and actual costs have historically not been material to our consolidated financial statements. We believe that our policies provide for reasonably dependable estimates to be used in the calculation and reporting of construction and land costs.
Inventory Impairments and Land Option Contract Abandonments. Each community or land parcel in our owned inventory is assessed to determine if indicators of potential impairment exist. Impairment indicators are assessed separately for each community or land parcel on a quarterly basis and include, but are not limited to, the following: significant decreases in net orders, average selling prices, volume of homes delivered, gross profit margins on homes delivered or projected gross profit
margins on homes in backlog or future deliveries; significant increases in budgeted land development and home construction costs or cancellation rates; or projected losses on expected future land sales. If indicators of potential impairment exist for a community or land parcel, the identified asset is evaluated for recoverability.
We evaluated one, 11 and 21 communities or land parcels for recoverability as of November 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The carrying values of those communities or land parcels evaluated as of November 30, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were $29.9 million, $123.4 million and $207.7 million, respectively. The higher number and corresponding carrying value of communities or land parcels evaluated as of November 30, 2020 and 2019 reflected the then-current conditions and trends in the markets where the communities are located, as well as certain communities or land parcels previously held for future development that were reactivated as part of our efforts to improve our asset efficiency.
When an indicator of potential impairment is identified for a community or land parcel, we test the asset for recoverability by comparing the carrying value of the asset to the undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. The undiscounted future net cash flows are impacted by then-current conditions and trends in the market in which the asset is located as well as factors known to us at the time the cash flows are calculated. These factors may include recent trends in our orders, backlog, cancellation rates and volume of homes delivered, as well as our expectations related to the following: product offerings; market supply and demand, including estimated average selling prices and related price appreciation; and land development, home construction and overhead costs to be incurred and related cost inflation.
The following table presents information regarding inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment charges included in construction and land costs in our consolidated statements of operations (dollars in thousands):
The inventory impairment charges in 2021, 2020 and 2019 reflected our decisions to make changes in our operational strategies aimed at more quickly monetizing our investment in certain communities by accelerating the overall pace for selling, building and delivering homes therein, including communities on land previously held for future development.
As further described in Note 7 - Inventory Impairments and Land Option Contract Abandonments in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, given the inherent challenges and uncertainties in forecasting future results, our inventory assessments at the time they are made take into consideration whether a community or land parcel is active, meaning whether it is open for sales and/or undergoing development, or whether it is being held for future development or held for sale.
We record an inventory impairment charge on a community or land parcel that is active or held for future development when indicators of potential impairment exist and the carrying value of the real estate asset is greater than the undiscounted future net cash flows the asset is expected to generate. These real estate assets are written down to fair value, which is primarily determined based on the estimated future net cash flows discounted for inherent risk associated with each such asset, or other valuation techniques. Inputs used in our calculation of estimated discounted future net cash flows are specific to each affected real estate asset and are based on our expectations for each such asset as of the applicable measurement date, including, among others, expectations related to average selling prices and volume of homes delivered. The discount rates used in our estimated discounted cash flows ranged from 18% - 19% in 2021, 17% - 18% in 2020, and 17% during 2019. The discount rates we used were impacted by one or more of the following at the time the calculation was made: the risk-free rate of return; expected risk premium based on estimated land development, home construction and delivery timelines; market risk from potential future price erosion; cost uncertainty due to land development or home construction cost increases; and other risks specific to the asset or conditions in the market in which the asset is located.
We record an inventory impairment charge on land held for sale when the carrying value of the real estate asset is greater than its fair value. These real estate assets are written down to fair value, less associated costs to sell. The fair value of such
real estate assets is generally based on bona fide letters of intent from outside parties, executed sales contracts, broker quotes or similar information.
As of November 30, 2021, the aggregate carrying value of our inventory that had been impacted by inventory impairment charges was $87.7 million, representing 11 communities and various other land parcels. As of November 30, 2020, the aggregate carrying value of our inventory that had been impacted by inventory impairment charges was $113.1 million, representing 16 communities and various other land parcels.
Our inventory controlled under land option contracts and other similar contracts is assessed to determine whether it continues to meet our investment return standards. Assessments are made separately for each optioned land parcel on a quarterly basis and are affected by the following factors relative to the market in which the asset is located, among others: current and/or anticipated net orders, average selling prices and volume of homes delivered; estimated land development and home construction costs; and projected profitability on expected future housing or land sales. When a decision is made not to exercise certain land option contracts and other similar contracts due to market conditions and/or changes in our marketing strategy, we write off the related inventory costs, including non-refundable deposits and unrecoverable pre-acquisition costs.
The estimated remaining life of each community or land parcel in our inventory depends on various factors, such as the total number of lots remaining; the expected timeline to acquire and entitle land and develop lots to build homes; the anticipated future net order and cancellation rates; and the expected timeline to build and deliver homes sold. While it is difficult to determine a precise timeframe for any particular inventory asset, based on current market conditions and expected delivery timelines, we estimate our inventory assets’ remaining operating lives to range generally from one year to in excess of 10 years and expect to realize, on an overall basis, the majority of our inventory balance as of November 30, 2021 within five years. The following table presents as of November 30, 2021 and 2020, respectively, the estimated timeframe of delivery for the last home in an applicable community or land parcel and the corresponding percentage of total inventories such categories represent within our inventory balance (dollars in millions):
The inventory balances in the 0-2 years and 3-5 years categories were located throughout all of our homebuilding reporting segments, though mostly in our West Coast, Southwest and Central segments. These categories collectively represented 96% of our total inventories as of November 30, 2021 and November 30, 2020. The inventory balances in the 6-10 years and greater than 10 years categories were primarily located in our Central and Southeast segments, and together totaled $195.2 million at November 30, 2021, compared to $159.8 million at November 30, 2020. The year-over-year increase mainly reflected larger land positions in the Central and Southeast homebuilding reporting segments acquired during 2021, partly offset by our decisions to accelerate the overall timing for selling, building and delivering homes through community reactivations and generally favorable market conditions. The inventories in the 6-10 years and greater than 10 years categories as of November 30, 2021 were mostly comprised of active, multi-phase communities with large remaining land positions. As of November 30, 2020, such inventories also included certain land held for future development.
Due to the judgment and assumptions applied in our inventory impairment and land option contract abandonment assessment processes, and in our estimations of the remaining operating lives of our inventory assets and the realization of our inventory balances, particularly as to land held for future development, it is possible that actual results could differ substantially from those estimated.
Deterioration in the supply and demand factors in the overall housing market or in an individual market or submarket, or changes to our operational or selling strategy at certain communities may lead to additional inventory impairment charges, future charges associated with land sales or the abandonment of land option contracts or other similar contracts related to certain assets. Due to the nature or location of the projects, land held for future development that we activate as part of our strategic growth initiatives or to accelerate sales and/or our return on investment, or that we otherwise monetize to help improve our asset efficiency, may have a somewhat greater likelihood of being impaired than other of our active inventory.
We believe the carrying value of our inventory balance as of November 30, 2021 is recoverable. Our considerations in making this determination include the factors and trends incorporated into our impairment analyses, and as applicable, the prevailing regulatory environment, competition from other homebuilders, inventory levels and sales activity of resale homes, and the local economic conditions where an asset is located. In addition, we consider the financial and operational status and
expectations of our inventories as well as unique attributes of each community or land parcel that could be viewed as indicators for potential future impairments. However, if conditions in the overall housing market or in a specific market or submarket worsen in the future beyond our current expectations, including, among other things, from ongoing negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses, if future changes in our business strategy significantly affect any key assumptions used in our projections of future cash flows, or if there are material changes in any of the other items we consider in assessing recoverability, we may recognize charges in future periods for inventory impairments or land option contract abandonments, or both, related to our current inventory assets. Any such charges could be material to our consolidated financial statements.
Warranty Costs. We provide a limited warranty on all of our homes. The specific terms and conditions of our limited warranty program vary depending upon the markets in which we do business. We estimate the costs that may be incurred under each limited warranty and record a liability in the amount of such costs at the time the revenue associated with the sale of each home is recognized. In assessing our overall warranty liability at a reporting date, we evaluate the costs for warranty-related items on a combined basis for all of our previously delivered homes that are under our limited warranty program.
Our primary assumption in estimating the amounts we accrue for warranty costs is that historical claims experience is a strong indicator of future claims experience. Factors that affect our warranty liability include the number of homes delivered, historical and anticipated rates of warranty claims, and cost per claim. We periodically assess the adequacy of our accrued warranty liability, which is included in accrued expenses and other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets, and adjust the amount as necessary based on our assessment. Our assessment includes the review of our actual warranty costs incurred to identify trends and changes in our warranty claims experience, and considers our home construction quality and customer service initiatives and outside events. Based on this assessment, we may from time to time adjust our warranty accrual rates, which would be applied on a prospective basis to homes delivered. Although adjustments to the accrual rates are generally infrequent, they may be necessary when actual warranty expenditures have increased or decreased on a sustained basis, as was the case in recent years when we reduced our warranty accrual rates to reflect favorable trends in our warranty expenditures. Based on our assessment, we may also make adjustments to our previously recorded accrued warranty liability. Such adjustments are recorded in the period in which the change in estimate occurs. During 2021, 2020 and 2019, we made adjustments to reduce our accrued warranty liability by $4.0 million, $3.6 million and $5.6 million, respectively. While we believe we may face increased future home warranty and construction defect claims associated with replacing or servicing substitute products or materials used in some instances to address supply shortages in certain served markets or communities, as discussed above under Item 1A - Risk Factors in this report, as of the date of this report, we have not made any adjustments to our accrued liabilities associated with this potential risk. We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to establish our accrued warranty liability during 2021, 2020 and 2019. Our accrued warranty liability is presented on a gross basis for all years without consideration of recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of and expect to recover from other parties, if any. Estimates of recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of and expect to recover from other parties, if any, are recorded as receivables when such recoveries are considered probable.
While we believe the warranty liability currently reflected in our consolidated balance sheets to be adequate, unanticipated changes or developments in the legal environment, local weather, land or environmental conditions, quality of materials or methods used in the construction of homes or customer service practices and/or our warranty claims experience could have a significant impact on our actual warranty costs in future periods and such amounts could differ significantly from our current estimates. A 10% change in the historical warranty rates used to estimate our accrued warranty liability would not result in a material change in our accrual.
Self-Insurance. We maintain, and require the majority of our independent contractors to maintain, general liability insurance (including construction defect and bodily injury coverage) and workers’ compensation insurance. These insurance policies protect us against a portion of our risk of loss from claims related to our homebuilding activities, subject to certain self-insured retentions, deductibles and other coverage limits. We self-insure a portion of our overall risk through the use of a captive insurance subsidiary. In Arizona, California, Colorado and Nevada, our contractors’ general liability insurance primarily takes the form of a wrap-up policy under a program where eligible independent contractors are enrolled as insureds on each community. Enrolled contractors contribute toward the cost of the insurance and agree to pay a contractual amount in the future if there is a claim related to their work.
We record liabilities based on the estimated costs required to cover reported claims, claims incurred but not yet reported, and claim adjustment expenses. These estimated costs are based on an actuarial analysis of our historical claims and expense data, as well as industry data. Our self-insurance liabilities are presented on a gross basis without consideration of insurance recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of and expect to recover from other parties, if any.
The amount of our self-insurance liability is based on an analysis performed by a third-party actuary that uses our historical claim and expense data, as well as industry data to estimate these overall costs. These estimates are subject to uncertainty due
to a variety of factors, the most significant being the long period of time between the delivery of a home to a homebuyer and when a structural warranty or construction defect claim may be made, and the ultimate resolution of any such construction defect claim. Though state regulations vary, construction defect claims are reported and resolved over a long period of time, which can extend for 10 years or more. As a result, the majority of the estimated self-insurance liability based on the actuarial analysis relates to claims incurred but not yet reported. Therefore, adjustments related to individual existing claims generally do not significantly impact the overall estimated liability. Adjustments to our liabilities related to homes delivered in prior years are recorded in the period in which a change in our estimate occurs. During 2021, we recorded adjustments to increase our previously recorded liabilities by $6.8 million. In 2020 and 2019, we recorded adjustments to reduce our previously recorded liabilities by $4.0 million and $2.5 million, respectively. The adjustments in 2021, 2020 and 2019 resulted from changes in estimates due to actual claims experience differing from previous actuarial projections and, in turn, impacting actuarial estimates for existing and potential future claims. We have not made any material changes in our methodology used to establish our self-insurance liabilities during 2021, 2020 or 2019.
The projection of losses related to these liabilities requires the use of actuarial assumptions. Key assumptions used in developing these estimates include claim frequencies, severities and resolution patterns, which can occur over an extended period of time. These estimates are subject to variability due to the length of time between the delivery of a home to a homebuyer and when a construction defect claim is made, and the ultimate resolution of such claim; uncertainties regarding such claims relative to our markets and the types of product we build; and legal or regulatory actions and/or interpretations, among other factors. Due to the degree of judgment involved and the potential for variability in these underlying assumptions, our actual future costs could differ from those estimated. In addition, changes in the frequency and severity of reported claims and the estimates to resolve claims can impact the trends and assumptions used in the actuarial analysis, which could be material to our consolidated financial statements. A 10% increase in the claim frequency and the average cost per claim used to estimate the self-insurance liability would result in increases of approximately $26.7 million in our liability and approximately $10.2 million in our receivable as of November 30, 2021, and additional expense of approximately $16.5 million for 2021. A 10% decrease in the claim frequency and the average cost per claim used to estimate the self-insurance liability would result in decreases of approximately $24.8 million in our liability and approximately $7.6 million in our receivable as of November 30, 2021, and a reduction to expense of approximately $17.2 million for 2021.
Estimates of insurance recoveries and amounts we have paid on behalf of other parties, if any, are recorded as receivables when such recoveries are considered probable. These estimated recoveries are principally based on actuarially determined amounts and depend on various factors, including, among other things, the above-described claim cost estimates, our insurance policy coverage limits for the applicable policy year(s), historical third-party recovery rates, insurance industry practices, the regulatory environment, and legal precedent, and are subject to a high degree of variability from year to year. Because of the inherent uncertainty and variability in these assumptions, our actual insurance recoveries could differ significantly from amounts currently estimated.
Legal Matters Accruals. We record contingent liabilities resulting from claims against us when a loss is assessed to be probable and the amount of the loss is reasonably estimable. Assessing the probability of losses and estimating probable losses requires analysis of multiple factors, including in some cases judgments about the potential actions of third-party claimants, regulatory agencies, mediators, arbitrators, responsible third parties and/or courts, as the case may be. Recorded contingent liabilities are based on the most recent information available and actual losses in any future period are inherently uncertain. If future adjustments to estimated probable future losses or actual losses exceed our recorded liability for such claims, we would record additional charges during the period in which the actual loss or change in estimate occurred. In addition to contingent liabilities recorded for probable losses, we disclose contingent liabilities when there is a reasonable possibility the ultimate loss will materially exceed the recorded liability. While we cannot predict the outcome of pending legal matters with certainty, we do not believe any currently identified claim or proceeding, either individually or in aggregate, will have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position or cash flows.
Stock-Based Compensation. We measure and recognize compensation expense associated with our grants of equity-based awards at an amount equal to the fair value of such share-based payments over their applicable vesting period. We have provided compensation benefits to certain of our employees in the form of stock options, restricted stock and PSUs, and to our non-employee directors in the form of unrestricted shares of common stock, deferred common stock awards and Director Plan SARs. Determining the fair value of share-based awards requires judgment to identify the appropriate valuation model and develop the assumptions to be used in the calculation, including the expected term of the stock options or Director Plan SARs, expected stock-price volatility and dividend yield. We estimate the fair value of stock options and Director Plan SARs granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with assumptions based primarily on historical data. The expected volatility factor is based on a combination of the historical volatility of our common stock and the implied volatility of publicly traded options on our common stock. We believe this blended approach balances the forward-looking nature of implied volatility with the relative stability over time of historical volatility to arrive at a reasonable estimate of expected volatility. Additionally, judgment is required in estimating the percentage of share-based awards that are expected to vest, and in the case of PSUs, the
level of performance that will be achieved and the number of shares that will be earned. If actual results differ significantly from these estimates, stock-based compensation expense could be higher and have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes. As discussed in Note 14 - Income Taxes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this report, we evaluate our deferred tax assets quarterly to determine if adjustments to our valuation allowance are required based on the consideration of all available positive and negative evidence using a “more likely than not” standard with respect to whether deferred tax assets will be realized. This evaluation considers, among other factors, our historical operating results, our expectation of future profitability, the duration of the applicable statutory carryforward periods, and conditions in the housing market and the broader economy. The ultimate realization of our deferred tax assets depends primarily on our ability to generate future taxable income during the periods in which the related deferred tax assets become deductible. The value of our deferred tax assets in our consolidated balance sheets depends on applicable income tax rates. We base our estimate of deferred tax assets and liabilities on current tax laws and rates. In certain cases, we also base this estimate on business plan forecasts and other expectations about future outcomes. Changes in positive and negative evidence, including differences between our future operating results and estimates, could result in the establishment of an additional valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets. Accounting for deferred taxes is based upon estimates of future results. Judgment is required in determining the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements and/or tax returns. Differences between the anticipated and actual outcomes of these future results could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. Also, changes in existing federal and state tax laws and corporate income tax rates could affect future tax results and the realization of deferred tax assets over time.
We recognize accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in our consolidated financial statements as a component of the provision for income taxes. Our liability for unrecognized tax benefits, combined with accrued interest and penalties, is reflected as a component of accrued expenses and other liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. Judgment is required in evaluating uncertain tax positions. We evaluate our uncertain tax positions quarterly based on various factors, including changes in facts or circumstances, tax laws or the status of audits by tax authorities. Changes in the recognition or measurement of uncertain tax positions could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements in the period in which we make the change.
INFLATION
The impact of inflation on us is reflected in increased costs for land, land development, construction, and overhead. Inflation may also raise our financing costs. We generally enter into contracts to acquire land a significant period of time before development and sales efforts commence. Accordingly, to the extent land acquisition costs are fixed, subsequent increases or decreases in our home selling prices will affect our profits. As the selling price of each of our homes is fixed at the time a buyer enters into a home purchase contract, and because we generally commence construction of a home only after we have a signed purchase contract with a homebuyer, any construction-related cost inflation can result in lower housing gross profit margins. In order to help moderate that effect, we typically enter into fixed-price contracts with our larger trade partners and building material suppliers for specified periods of time.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recent accounting pronouncements are discussed in Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in this report.
OUTLOOK
We believe several long-term housing market fundamental factors will remain positive in 2022, including favorable demographics, a housing supply-demand imbalance resulting from a decade-plus underproduction of new homes in relation to population growth, a limited supply of resale homes available for sale and relatively low mortgage loan interest rates. We believe our highly customer-centric, personalized approach to homebuilding and operational capabilities will enable us to effectively adapt to evolving buyer preferences and needs and, together with an expected year-over-year increase in our community count, drive further growth in our results in 2022, subject to business conditions and other factors described in this report.
Our present 2022 outlook is as follows:
2022 First Quarter -
•We expect to generate housing revenues in the range of $1.43 billion to $1.53 billion, an increase from $1.14 billion in the corresponding period of 2021, and anticipate our average selling price to be approximately $472,000, compared to $397,100 in the year-earlier period.
•We expect our homebuilding operating income margin will be approximately 12.0%, assuming no inventory-related charges, up from 10.4% for the year-earlier quarter.
◦We expect our housing gross profit margin to be in the range of 22.0% to 22.6%, assuming no inventory-related charges, compared to 21.1% for the corresponding 2021 quarter.
◦We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to be approximately 10.4%, an improvement of 30 basis points from the 2021 first quarter.
•We expect the effective tax rate will be approximately 25%, excluding any favorable impacts from federal tax credits for building energy-efficient homes. The effective tax rate for the year-earlier quarter was approximately 21%.
•We expect our ending community count will be relatively flat sequentially and represent the likely low point for 2022, and expect our average community count to decline by a low single-digit percentage from the 2021 first quarter.
2022 Full Year -
•We expect our housing revenues to be in the range of $7.20 billion to $7.60 billion, an increase of 30% at the mid-point of the range, from $5.69 billion in 2021, and anticipate our average selling price to be in the range of $480,000 to $490,000, an increase of between 14% and 16% from 2021.
•We expect our homebuilding operating income margin to be in the range of 15.7% to 16.5%, assuming no inventory-related charges, compared to 11.8% for 2021.
◦We expect our housing gross profit margin to be in the range of 25.4% to 26.2%, assuming no inventory-related charges, compared to 21.8% for 2021, reflecting sequential expansion beginning in the second quarter.
◦We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses as a percentage of housing revenues to be in the range of 9.4% to 9.9%, compared to 10.1% in the prior year.
•We expect the effective tax rate will be approximately 25%, assuming no federal energy tax credit extension is enacted. The effective tax rate for 2021 was approximately 19%, which reflected the favorable effect of federal tax credits we earned primarily from building energy-efficient homes.
•We expect our ending community count will increase 20% to 25% from 2021.
•We expect our return on equity to be in excess of 26%, an improvement of more than 600 basis points compared to 19.9% for 2021.
We believe we are well-positioned for 2022 due to, among other things, our strong backlog, planned new community openings, investments in land and land development and current positive economic and demographic trends, to varying degrees, in many of our served markets.
However, our future performance and the strategies we implement (and adjust or refine as necessary or appropriate) will depend significantly on prevailing economic, homebuilding industry and capital, credit and financial market conditions and on a fairly stable and constructive political and regulatory environment (particularly in regards to housing and mortgage loan financing policies). In particular, we and other residential construction firms continue to experience services and supply constraints and rising and volatile raw material prices, particularly for lumber. Although we continue to work with our suppliers and trade partners to resolve these issues, we believe they will generally persist into 2022 and potentially throughout the year. Continued supply chain disruptions, construction services and building material shortages, and delays with respect to state and municipal construction permitting, inspections and utilities could further extend our construction cycle times, delay our new community openings and intensify construction-related cost pressures beyond our experience in 2021. In addition, consumer demand for our homes and our ability to grow our scale, revenues, net orders, backlog and returns in 2022 could be materially and negatively affected by persistent inflation in the U.S. economy, the severity of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and related COVID-19 control responses (including new or more restrictive “stay-at-home” orders and other new or revised
public health requirements recommended or imposed by federal, state and local authorities), and/or other factors that cause mortgage loan interest rates to increase or that temper mortgage loan availability, employment or income levels or consumer confidence in the U.S. or in our served markets. The potential effect of these factors on our business is highly uncertain, unpredictable and outside our control, and our past performance should not be considered indicative of our future results on any metric or set of metrics.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Investors are cautioned that certain statements contained in this report, as well as some statements by us in periodic press releases and other public disclosures and some oral statements by us to securities analysts, stockholders and others during presentations, are “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (the “Act”). Statements that are predictive in nature, that depend upon or refer to future events or conditions, or that include words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “estimate,” “hope,” and similar expressions constitute forward-looking statements. In addition, any statements that we may make or provide concerning future financial or operating performance (including without limitation future revenues, community count, homes delivered, net orders, selling prices, sales pace per new community, expenses, expense ratios, housing gross profits, housing gross profit margins, earnings or earnings per share, or growth or growth rates), future market conditions, future interest rates, and other economic conditions, ongoing business strategies or prospects, future dividends and changes in dividend levels, the value of our backlog (including amounts that we expect to realize upon delivery of homes included in our backlog and the timing of those deliveries), the value of our net orders, potential future asset acquisitions and the impact of completed acquisitions, future share issuances or repurchases, future debt issuances, repurchases or redemptions and other possible future actions are also forward-looking statements as defined by the Act. Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and projections about future events and are subject to risks, uncertainties, and assumptions about our operations, economic and market factors, and the homebuilding industry, among other things. These statements are not guarantees of future performance, and we have no specific policy or intention to update these statements. In addition, forward-looking and other statements in this report and in other public or oral disclosures that express or contain opinions, views or assumptions about market or economic conditions; the success, performance, effectiveness and/or relative positioning of our strategies, initiatives or operational activities; and other matters, may be based in whole or in part on general observations of our management, limited or anecdotal evidence and/or business or industry experience without in-depth or any particular empirical investigation, inquiry or analysis.
Actual events and results may differ materially from those expressed or forecasted in forward-looking statements due to a number of factors. The most important risk factors that could cause our actual performance and future events and actions to differ materially from such forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, the following:
•general economic, employment and business conditions;
•population growth, household formations and demographic trends;
•conditions in the capital, credit and financial markets;
•our ability to access external financing sources and raise capital through the issuance of common stock, debt or other securities, and/or project financing, on favorable terms;
•the execution of any securities repurchases pursuant to our board of directors’ authorization;
•material and trade costs and availability, including building materials and appliances;
•consumer and producer price inflation;
•changes in interest rates;
•our debt level, including our ratio of debt to capital, and our ability to adjust our debt level and maturity schedule;
•our compliance with the terms of the Credit Facility;
•volatility in the market price of our common stock;
•home selling prices, including our homes’ selling prices, increasing at a faster rate than consumer incomes;
•weak or declining consumer confidence, either generally or specifically with respect to purchasing homes;
•competition from other sellers of new and resale homes;
•weather events, significant natural disasters and other climate and environmental factors;
•any failure of lawmakers to agree on a budget or appropriation legislation to fund the federal government’s operations, and financial markets’ and businesses’ reactions to any such failure;
•government actions, policies, programs and regulations directed at or affecting the housing market (including the tax benefits associated with purchasing and owning a home, and the standards, fees and size limits applicable to the purchase or insuring of mortgage loans by government-sponsored enterprises and government agencies), the homebuilding industry, or construction activities;
•changes in existing tax laws or enacted corporate income tax rates, including those resulting from regulatory guidance and interpretations issued with respect thereto;
•changes in U.S. trade policies, including the imposition of tariffs and duties on homebuilding materials and products, and related trade disputes with and retaliatory measures taken by other countries;
•the adoption of new or amended financial accounting standards and the guidance and/or interpretations with respect thereto;
•the availability and cost of land in desirable areas and our ability to timely develop acquired land parcels and open new communities;
•our warranty claims experience with respect to homes previously delivered and actual warranty costs incurred;
•costs and/or charges arising from regulatory compliance requirements or from legal, arbitral or regulatory proceedings, investigations, claims or settlements, including unfavorable outcomes in any such matters resulting in actual or potential monetary damage awards, penalties, fines or other direct or indirect payments, or injunctions, consent decrees or other voluntary or involuntary restrictions or adjustments to our business operations or practices that are beyond our current expectations and/or accruals;
•our ability to use/realize the net deferred tax assets we have generated;
•our ability to successfully implement our current and planned strategies and initiatives related to our product, geographic and market positioning, gaining share and scale in our served markets and in entering into new markets;
•our operational and investment concentration in markets in California;
•consumer interest in our new home communities and products, particularly from first-time homebuyers and higher-income consumers;
•our ability to generate orders and convert our backlog of orders to home deliveries and revenues, particularly in key markets in California;
•our ability to successfully implement our business strategies and achieve any associated financial and operational targets and objectives, including those discussed in this report or in other public filings, presentations or disclosures;
•income tax expense volatility associated with stock-based compensation;
•the ability of our homebuyers to obtain residential mortgage loans and mortgage banking services;
•the performance of mortgage lenders to our homebuyers;
•the performance of KBHS;
•information technology failures and data security breaches;
•an epidemic or pandemic (such as the outbreak and worldwide spread of COVID-19), and the control response measures that international, federal, state and local governments, agencies, law enforcement and/or health authorities implement to address it, which may (as with COVID-19) precipitate or exacerbate one or more of the above-mentioned and/or other risks, and significantly disrupt or prevent us from operating our business in the ordinary course for an extended period;
•widespread protests and civil unrest, whether due to political events, efforts to institute law enforcement and other social and political reforms, and the impacts of implementing or failing to implement any such reforms, or otherwise; and
•other events outside of our control.