ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Caution Regarding Forward-Looking Information
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and result of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes to those financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties contained in this report and the other reports we file with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
The following section reflects management’s views on the financial condition as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of operations and cash flows for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. This section is provided as a supplement to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements and related notes to the consolidated financial statements contained elsewhere in this report.
Overview
Kraig Biocraft Laboratories, Inc. is a corporation organized under the laws of Wyoming on April 25, 2006. Kraig Labs was organized to develop high strength fibers using recombinant DNA technology for commercial applications in technical textile. We use genetically engineered silkworms that produce spider silk proteins to create our recombinant spider silk. Applications include performance apparel, workwear, filtration, luxury fashion, flexible composites, medical implants, cosmetics and more. We believe that we have been a leader in the research and development of commercially scalable and cost effective spider silk for technical textile and non-fibrous applications. Our primary proprietary fiber technology includes natural and engineered variants of spider silk produced in domesticated mulberry silkworms. Our business brings twenty-first century biotechnology to the historical silk industry, permitting us to introduce materials with innovative properties and claims into an established commercial ecosystem of silkworm rearing, silk spinning and weaving, and manufacture of garments and other products that can include our specialty fibers and textiles. Specialty fibers are engineered for specific uses that require exceptional strength, flexibility, heat resistance and/or chemical resistance. The specialty fiber market is exemplified by two synthetic fiber products that come from petroleum derivatives: (1) aramid fibers; and (2) ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene fibers. The technical textile industry involves products for both industrial and consumer products, such as filtration fabrics, medical textiles (e.g., sutures and artificial ligaments), safety and protective clothing and fabrics used in military and aerospace applications (e.g., high-strength composite materials).
We are using genetic engineering technologies to develop fibers with greater strength, resiliency and flexibility for use in our target markets, namely the specialty fiber and technical textile industries.
In 2020, we developed a new technology platform, based on a non-CRISPR Cas9 gene editing knock-in knock-out technology. This is our first knock-in knock-out technology which we are now using for the development of advanced materials. This system is built on our eco-friendly and cost-effective silkworm production system, which we believe is more advanced than current competing methods. Knock-in knock-out technology allows for the targeting of specific locations and genetic traits for modification, addition, and removal. This capability should allow us to accelerate new product developments and bring products to market more quickly. This capability also allows for genetic trait modifications that were previously impractical, creating opportunities for products outside of silk fibers and increased flexibility in production location.
Based on our internal analysis, management believes that this new platform technology will allow us to outpace and surpass Dragon Silk, a fiber that we developed with our previous tools. Samples of Dragon Silk have already demonstrated to be tougher than many fibers used in bullet proof vests. We expect that this new approach will yield materials beyond those capabilities based upon its potential for significantly improved purity.
In August 2019, we received authorization from governmental authorities to begin rearing genetically enhanced silkworms at our production facility in Vietnam. In October 2019, the Company delivered the first batch of these silkworms and began operations. These silkworms served as the basis for the commercial expansion of our proprietary silk technology. On November 4, 2019, we reported that we had successfully completed rearing the first batch of its transgenic silkworms at the Quang Nam production factory. Seasonal challenges in late December 2019 slowed production operations and governmental restrictions imposed due to the global COVID pandemic further delayed our operations in 2020. In January of 2021 we received the first shipment of silk from our factory in Vietnam. We believe that we will be able to target metric tons of capacity of our recombinant spider silk fiber per annum from this factory once it reaches maximum utilization. This capacity will allow us to address initial demand for our products and materials for various applications in the protective, performance, and luxury textile markets.
On November 23, 2020, we entered into a Strategic Partnership Agreement (the “SPA”) with Mthemovement Kings Pte Ltd (“Kings”). Kings is an eco-friendly luxury streetwear apparel line, part of the Kings Group of Companies and its affiliated companies. On January 25, 2021, the parties exchanged signatures for an amendment to the Agreement, which amended the procedures for termination of the SPA to only allow for the termination of the SPA by mutual agreement of the Company and Kings following a consultation period of 120 (one hundred and twenty) calendar days or such period as agreed otherwise between the parties (the “Amendment,” together with the SPA, the “Agreement”).
Pursuant to the Agreement, the parties formed a joint venture, Spydasilk Enterprises Pte. Ltd., to develop and sell the Company’s spider silk fibers under the new innovative apparel and fashion brand, trade named SpydaSilk™ and potential other trademarks to be announced. All intellectual property related to SpydaSilk™ will be jointly owned by the Company and Kings.
Under the terms of the Agreement, the Company granted the joint venture and the SpydaSilk brand an exclusive geographic license to all the Company’s technologies for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, in exchange for a 4-year firm commitment to purchase up to $32 million of the Company’s raw recombinant spider silk over the 4-year period, with an initial payment of $250,000 to the Company. Kings is projected to purchase an additional $8 million of material in the fourth year, but there is no guarantee that such additional purchase will be made.
In consideration for its ownership position in the joint venture, the Company shall issue 1,000,000 shares of its common stock to Kings. The Agreement has a 60-month term, which can be terminated at any time by mutual agreement following a consultation period of 120 days, or such other period as agreed by the parties. If applicable, the parties will honor their share of committed expenditures of the joint venture and King will repay the Company any unused brand funds.
Experiencing our strongest cash position to date, we plan to expand production, expand product offering and accelerate R&D on near term products.
The Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm to our financial statements as of December 31, 2021 includes an explanatory paragraph stating that our net loss from operations and net capital deficiency at December 31, 2021 raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Plan of Operations
During the next twelve months, we expect to take the following steps in connection with the further development of our business and the implementation of our plan of operations:
● We plan to develop a line of fabrics and apparel under a joint venture with Kings to create a line of fashion wear under Spydasilk Enterprises Pte. Ltd., with trade names including SpydasilkTM, SpydraTM and others.
● We plan to continue the expansion of our production operations at our facilities in Quang Nam, Vietnam in accordance with our investment and enterprise registration certificates, including the planting of additional mulberry fields in collaboration with local farming cooperatives and the hiring of additional direct staff for our factory, as needed.
● We plan to accelerate both our microbiology and selective breeding programs, as well as provide more resources for our material testing protocols. We spent approximately $383,900 over the last 12 months on research and development of high strength polymers. In 2021, we directed our research and development efforts on growing our internal capabilities; we plan to continue to dedicate our efforts in 2022 to grow our internal research and development programs.
● We will consider buying an established revenue producing company in a compatible business, in order to broaden our financial base and facilitate the commercialization of our products; as of the date hereof, we have not had any formal discussion or entered into any definitive agreements regarding any such purchase.
● We will also actively consider pursuing collaborative research opportunities with private laboratories in areas of research which overlap the company’s existing research and development. One such potential area for collaborative research which the company is considering is protein expression platforms. If our financing allows, management will strongly consider increasing the breadth of our research to include protein expression platform technologies.
● We plan to actively pursue collaborative research and product testing opportunities with companies in the biotechnology, materials, textile and other industries.
● We plan to actively pursue additional collaborative commercialization, marketing and manufacturing opportunities with companies in the textile and material sectors for the fibers we developed and for any new polymers that we create in 2022 and going forward.
● We plan to actively pursue the development of commercial scale production of our recombinant materials including Monster Silk®, Dragon SilkTM, SpydasilkTM, and SpydraTM
● We have initiated and plan to accelerate our efforts for large scale U.S. production. This work will include the research and possible production of a new transgenic tailored specifically domestic production.
Limited Operating History
We have not previously demonstrated that we will be able to expand our business through an increased investment in our research and development efforts. We cannot guarantee that the research and development efforts described in this filing will be successful. Our business is subject to risks inherent in growing an enterprise, including limited capital resources, risks inherent in the research and development process and possible rejection of our products in development.
If financing is not available on satisfactory terms, we may be unable to continue our research and development and other operations. Equity financing will result in dilution to existing stockholders.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5131771/
https://www.yourgenome.org/facts/what-is-genome-editing
https://ghr.nlm.nih.gov/primer/genomicresearch/genomeediting
Impact of COVID-19 Outbreak
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the coronavirus outbreak a “Public Health Emergency of International Concern” and on March 10, 2020, declared it to be a pandemic. Actions taken around the world to help mitigate the spread of the coronavirus include restrictions on travel, and quarantines in certain areas, and forced closures for certain types of public places and businesses. The coronavirus and actions taken to mitigate it have had and are expected to continue to have an adverse impact on the economies and financial markets of many countries, including the geographical area in which the Company operates. While the closures and limitations on movement, domestically and internationally, are expected to be temporary, if the outbreak continues the duration of the supply chain disruption could reduce the availability, or result in delays, of materials or supplies to and from the Company, which in turn could materially interrupt the Company’s business operations. Given the speed and frequency of the continuously evolving developments with respect to this pandemic, the Company cannot reasonably estimate the magnitude of the impact to its consolidated results of operations. We have taken every known precaution possible to ensure the safety of our employees.
On March 19, 2020, we furloughed non-essential staff in response to governmental regulations relating to COVID. This decision primarily impacted staff at our fully owned subsidiary, Prodigy Textiles, in Vietnam and resulted in the temporary closing of silk rearing operations at that facility. As of the date hereof, we have resumed silk production operations at the factory in Vietnam. The Company supported its furloughed staff and paid their salaries during all mandatory closures. During the duration of the furlough, the Company’s CEO voluntarily waved the payment or accrual of his salary. The Company leveraged this forced closure time to improve its production infrastructure based on the lessons learned from its operations. After the mandated closure, the Company has enhanced its production operations with process automation, moved its production headquarters to a facility designed for silk production, created a more self-reliant supply chain, and established a microbiology laboratory in its factory for enhanced quality control. On October 24, 2020, silk production operations at the factory resumed.
The global COVID pandemic and government regulations associated with the pandemic continue to evolve. We will continue to monitor the situation closely, including its potential effect on our plans and timelines. The actions of governments in response to COVID, both domestic and foreign, have impacted our ability to transport goods, people, essential equipment, and other items essential to our production. In turn, these restrictions are impacting our ability to produce intermediate and end products and are delaying our timelines for commercialization and revenue.
Additionally, it is reasonably possible that estimates made in the financial statements have been, or will be, materially and adversely impacted in the near term as a result of these conditions, including losses on inventory; impairment losses related to goodwill and other long-lived assets and current obligations.
Note Financing
December
On December 11, 2020, the Company issued a $1,000,000, thirteen-month (13), unsecured, convertible note, which was due and paid on January 11, 2022. The convertible note had an interest at 10%, with a 5% original issue discount ($50,000), resulting in net proceeds of $950,000. The note contained a discount to market feature, whereby, the lender was able to purchase stock at 90% of the lowest trading price for a period of ten (10) days preceding the conversion date. As a result, we issued approximately 15,000,000 shares upon conversion of the note. Additionally, the Company issued 3,125,000 five-year (5) warrants to the note holder. The warrants had a fair value of $2,599,066, based upon using a black-scholes option pricing model.
March
On March 25, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with YA II PN, LTD., a Cayman Islands exempt company (“Yorkville”), pursuant to which Yorkville purchased secured convertible debentures (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) in the aggregate principal amount of USD$4,000,000 (the “Convertible Debentures”), which are convertible into shares of Common Stock (as converted, the “Conversion Shares”), of which a secured convertible debenture (the “First Convertible Debenture”) in the principal amount of $500,000 (the “First Convertible Debenture Purchase Price”) shall be issued within 1 business day following the initial closing, a secured convertible debenture (the “Second Convertible Debenture”) in the principal amount of $500,000 (the “Second Convertible Debenture Purchase Price”) shall be issued within 1 business day following the satisfaction of conditions for a second closing and a secured convertible debenture (the “Third Convertible Debenture,” together with the First Convertible Debenture and the Second Convertible Debenture, each a “Convertible Debenture” and collectively, the “Convertible Debentures”) in the principal amount of $3,000,000 (the “Third Convertible Debenture Purchase Price”) shall be issued within 1 business day following satisfaction of conditions for a third closing (the first closing, second closing and third closing are each referred to as a “Closing” or collectively as the “Closings) and (collectively, the First Convertible Debenture Purchase Price, the Second Convertible Debenture Purchase Price and the Third Convertible Debenture Purchase Price shall collectively be referred to as the “Purchase Price”) (the “Yorkville Transaction”).
Each Convertible Debenture shall mature twelve (12) months after the date of issuance and accrues interest at the rate of 10% per annum. The principal must be paid in cash, but the Company has the right to extend the maturity date by 30 days, during which time interest will continue to accrue, upon written notice of same to the holder. Interest shall be provided in cash, unless certain conditions as specified in the Convertible Debenture are satisfied, in which case the company has the right to pay interest in shares of common stock at the then applicable conversion price on the trading day immediately prior to the pay date. The debenture holder may convert each Convertible Debenture into shares of common stock at any time after issuance at a price equal to 80% of the lowest volume weighted average price of the Company’s Common Stock during the 10 trading days immediately preceding the date they convert the debenture; provided, however if the Company’s Common Stock is uplisted to the Nasdaq, the conversion price shall not be less than 20% of the conversion price used in the first conversion thereunder. The debenture holder may not convert the Convertible Debenture if such conversion would result in such holder holding in excess of in excess of 4.99% of the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such conversion or receipt of shares as payment of interest, unless waived by the holder with at least 65 days prior notice to the Company (the “Ownership Cap”).
The Company held the first closing on March 25, 2021 and contemporaneously therewith, the Company issued Yorkville a warrant (the “Yorkville Warrant”) to purchase 8,000,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock (the “Warrant Shares”). The Yorkville Warrant has a term of five (5) years and is initially exercisable at $0.25 per share, subject to adjustment and can be exercise via cashless exercise. If the Company issues or sells securities at a price less than the exercise price, the exercise price shall be reduced to such lower price. The Yorkville Warrant also has the same Ownership Cap as set forth in the Convertible Debenture.
In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement with Yorkville, pursuant to which the Company agreed to register the shares of common stock underling the Debentures and the Yorkville Warrant.
Following fulfillment of the requirements in the Securities Purchase Agreement, on April 6, 2021, the Company issued the Second Convertible Debenture to Yorkville in the amount of $500,000.
Following fulfillment of the requirements in the Securities Purchase Agreement, on April 22, 2021, the Company issued the Third Convertible Debenture to Yorkville in the amount of $3,000,000.
As of February 16, 2022, all of the Convertible Debentures issued pursuant to the Security Purchase Agreement signed with Yorkville on March 25, 2021 have been converted and there is no remaining balance.
January
On January 18, 2022, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with YA II PN, LTD., a Cayman Islands exempt company (“Yorkville”), pursuant to which Yorkville purchased secured convertible debentures (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) in the aggregate principal amount of USD$3,000,000 (the “Convertible Debentures”), which are convertible into shares of Common Stock (as converted, the “Conversion Shares”), of which a secured convertible debenture (the “First Convertible Debenture”) in the principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “First Convertible Debenture Purchase Price”) shall be issued upon signing the Securities Purchase Agreement and a secured convertible debenture (the “Second Convertible Debenture,” together with the First Convertible Debenture, each a “Convertible Debenture” and collectively, the “Convertible Debentures”) in the principal amount of $1,500,000 (the “Second Convertible Debenture Purchase Price”) shall be issued on or about the date that the Securities and Exchange Commission declares the registration statement registering the shares of common stock underlying the notes effective (collectively, the First Convertible Debenture Purchase Price and the Second Convertible Debenture Purchase Price shall collectively be referred to as the “Purchase Price”) (the “Yorkville Transaction”). These additional funds, together with those from the previously completed transactions we conducted with Yorkville between December 2020 and March 2021, account for an $8 million total Yorkville investment; as of the date hereof, $250,000 remains under the debentures previously issued to Yorkville pursuant thereto. The Company also issued Yorkville a warrant to purchase 12,500,000 shares of the Company’s Common Stock, at an initial exercise price of $0.12 per share and a warrant to purchase 4,285,714 shares of the Company’s Common Stock, at an initial exercise price of $0.14 per share. The warrants have a term of five (5) years and can be exercised via cashless exercise. If the Company issues or sells securities at a price less than the applicable warrant exercise price, the exercise price of the applicable warrant shall be reduced to such lower price. The warrants also have the same ownership cap as set forth in the Convertible Debentures, as described below. The Company is also required to reserve no less than 300% of the maximum number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of all the outstanding Convertible Debentures. Pursuant to the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company is prohibited from incurring specified indebtedness, liens, except with the prior written consent from the holders of at least 75% of the then outstanding principal amount of Convertible Debentures.
Each Convertible Debenture shall mature thirteen (13) months after the date of issuance, unless extended by the Yorkville, and accrues interest at the rate of 10% per annum. Principal, interest and any other payments due under the Convertible Debentures shall be paid in cash. The debenture holder may convert all or part of the Convertible Debentures into shares of common stock at any time after issuance at a conversion rate equal to 85% of the lowest daily volume weighted average price of the Common Stock during the 10 consecutive trading days immediately preceding the conversion date or other date of determination. The debenture holder may not convert the Convertible Debenture if such conversion would result in such holder holding in excess of in excess of 4.99% of the number of shares of Common Stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such conversion or receipt of shares as payment of interest, unless waived by the holder with at least 65 days prior notice to the Company (the “Ownership Cap”). The Company also has the option to redeem, in part or in whole, the outstanding principal and interest under a Convertible Debenture prior to the maturity date. The Company shall pay an amount equal to the principal and interest amount being redeemed plus a redemption premium equal to 15% of the outstanding principal amount. Standard events of default are included in the Convertible Debenture, pursuant to which the holder may declare it immediately due and payable. During an event of default, the interest rate shall increase to 15% per annum until the event of default is cured; the holder also has the right to convert the Convertible Debenture into shares of common stock during an event of default.
The Convertible Debentures are secured by all assets of the Company and its subsidiaries subject to (i) that certain amended and restated security agreement by and between Yorkville, the Company and the Company’s subsidiaries (all such security agreements shall be referred to as the “Security Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries agree to provide Yorkville a security interest in all personal property of the Prodigy Textiles, the Company’s subsidiary organized under the laws of Vietnam (“Prodigy”), (ii) the amended and restated intellectual property security agreement by and between Yorkville, the Company and the Company’s subsidiaries referenced therein dated January 18, 2022 (all such security agreements shall be referred to as the “IP Security Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company and its wholly owned subsidiaries agree to provide Yorkville a security interest in the intellectual property collateral (as this term is defined in the IP Security Agreement), and (iii) the amended and restated global guaranty by and between Prodigy, in favor of Yorkville, with respect to all of the Company’s obligations to Yorkville dated as of January 18, 2022 (the “Guaranty” and collectively with the Security Agreement and the IP Security Agreement shall be referred to as the “Security Documents”). Pursuant to the Guaranty, Prodigy guarantees the payment and performance of all of the Company’s obligations under the Convertible Debentures, Warrants and related transaction documents.
In connection with the Securities Purchase Agreement, the Company also entered into a Registration Rights Agreement with Yorkville, pursuant to which the Company agreed to register all of the shares of Common Stock underlying the Convertible Debentures and warrants and with respect to subsequent registration statements, if any, such number of shares of Common Stock as requested by Yorkville not to exceed 300% of the maximum number of shares of Common Stock issuable upon conversion of all Convertible Debentures then outstanding (assuming for purposes hereof that (x) such Convertible Debentures are convertible at the then current conversion price and (y) any such conversion shall not take into account any limitations on the conversion of the Convertible Debentures set forth therein, in each case subject to any cutbacks set forth in the Registration Rights Agreement.
Upon signing the letter of intent for the Yorkville Transaction, the Company paid $10,000 to an affiliate of Yorkville, for due diligence and structuring.
The Securities Purchase Agreement also contains customary representation and warranties of the Company and the Investor, indemnification obligations of the Company, termination provisions, and other obligations and rights of the parties.
The foregoing description of the Securities Purchase Agreement, Convertible Debentures, Warrant, Security Agreement, IP Security Agreement, Registration Rights Agreement and Guaranty Agreement is qualified by reference to the full text of the forms of Securities Purchase Agreement, Convertible Debenture and Warrant, which are filed as Exhibits hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
Maxim Group LLC received a cash placement agent fee of $230,000.
Results of Operations for the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our revenue, operating expenses, and net loss from operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, were as follows - some balances on the prior period’s combined financial statements have been reclassified to conform to the current period presentation:
Net Revenues: During the year ended December 31, 2021, we realized $0 of revenues from our business. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we realized $0 of revenues from our business. Accordingly, there was no change in revenues between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and development expenses: During year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $197,745 research and development expenses. During year ended December 31, 2020, we incurred $88,4700 of research and development expenses, an increase of $109,275 or 123.52% compared with the same period in 2020. The research and development expenses are attributable to the research and development with the Notre Dame University; the decrease was due to the timing of research related activity and costs by insources the Company’s research operations.
Professional Fees: During year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $326,982 professional expenses, which decreased by $70,745 or 17.79% from $397,727 for year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in professional fees expense was attributable to decreased expenses related to investor relations services during year ended December 31, 2021.
Officers Salary: During year ended December 31, 2021, officers’ salary expenses increased to $734,427 or 42.24% compared to $516,332 for year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to the Company’s staff having been furloughed from March 19, 2020 - June 30, 2020, due to the COVID pandemic, during which the CEO also did not receive or accrue any salary.
General and Administrative Expense: General and administrative expenses decreased by $2,021,802 or 57.46% to $1,496,725 for year ended December 31, 2021 from $3,518,527 for year ended December 31, 2020. Our general and administrative expenses for year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of other general and administrative expenses (which includes expenses such as Auto, Business Development, SEC Filing, Investor Relations, General Office, warrant Compensation) of $856,158, Travel of $13,957, office salary of $266,190 for a total of $1,496,725. Our general and administrative expenses for year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of other general and administrative expenses (which includes expenses such as Auto, Business Development, SEC Filing, Investor Relations, General Office, warrant Compensation) of $3,177,652 Travel of $29,528, office salary of $311,347 for a total of $3,518,527. The primary reason for the decrease in general and administrative expenses comparing the year ended December 31, 2021 to the corresponding period for 2020 was mainly due to general business expenses and warrants issuances for services.
Rent - Related Party: During the year ended December 31 2021, rent-related party expense decreased to $3,683 or 71.87% compared to $13,092 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The rent-related party expense was attributable to the Company signing an eight-year property lease with the Company’s President on January 23, 2017. On April 5, 2021, the Company ended this lease agreement with its President.
Net Change in Unrealized Depreciation on Investment in Gold Bullion: Net change in unrealized depreciation on investment in gold bullion decreased by $13,004 to $13,004 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a net change in unrealized depreciation on investment in gold bullion.
Interest Expense: Interest expense increased to $660,419, or 70.82% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $386,624 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to interest on the related party loans and accounts payable and accrued expenses to the related parties.
Amortization of original issue and debt discounts: Amortization of original issue and debt discount increased to $4,702,918, or 9,211.79% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $50,505 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to amortization of original issue and debt discounts on convertible loans.
Net Loss: Net loss increased by $3,074,526, or 61.85%, to a net loss of $8,045,803 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from a net loss of $4,971,277 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in net loss was driven primarily by increased in warrant compensation, amortization of original issue discount and professional fees.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that we have a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. As presented in the financial statements, we incurred a net loss of $8,045,803 during the year ended December 31, 2021, and losses are expected to continue in the near term. The accumulated deficit is $42,814,986 at December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 2 for our discussion of stockholder deficit. We have been funding our operations through private loans and the sale of common stock in private placement transactions. Refer to Note 6 and Note 7 in the financial statements for our discussion of notes payable and shares issued, respectively. Our cash resources are insufficient to meet our planned business objectives without additional financing. These and other factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the possible inability of our company to continue as a going concern.
Management anticipates that significant additional expenditures will be necessary to develop and expand our business before significant positive operating cash flows can be achieved. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to raise additional capital and to ultimately achieve sustainable revenues and profitable operations. At December 31, 2021, we had $2,355,060 of cash on hand. These funds are insufficient to complete our business plan and as a consequence, we will need to seek additional funds, primarily through the issuance of debt or equity securities for cash to operate our business. No assurance can be given that any future financing will be available or, if available, that it will be on terms that are satisfactory to us. Even if we are able to obtain additional financing, it may contain undue restrictions on our operations, in the case of debt financing or cause substantial dilution for our stockholders, in the case of equity financing.
Management has undertaken steps as part of a plan to improve operations with the goal of sustaining our operations for the next twelve months and beyond. These steps include (a) raising additional capital and/or obtaining financing; (b) controlling overhead and expenses; and (c) executing material sales or research contracts. There can be no assurance that the Company can successfully accomplish these steps and it is uncertain that the Company will achieve a profitable level of operations and obtain additional financing. There can be no assurance that any additional financing will be available to the Company on satisfactory terms and conditions, if at all. As of the date of this Report, we have not entered into any formal agreements regarding the above.
In the event the Company is unable to continue as a going concern, the Company may elect or be required to seek protection from its creditors by filing a voluntary petition in bankruptcy or may be subject to an involuntary petition in bankruptcy. To date, management has not considered this alternative, nor does management view it as a likely occurrence.
Cash, total current assets, total assets, total current liabilities and total liabilities as of December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020, were as follows:
At December 31, 2021, we had a working capital deficit of $5,796,531, compared to a working capital deficit of $6,631,299 at December 31, 2020. Current liabilities increased to $8,162,646 at December 31, 2021 from $7,450,794 at December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of primarily as a result of accounts payable and accrued compensation - related party, and convertible note payable.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operations of $1,800,809 was the result of a net loss of $8,045,803 offset by depreciation expense of $26,137, gain on debt extinguishment of PPP loan of $90,100, net change in unrealized depreciation in gold bullions of $13,004, stock issued for services of $242,100, loss on disposal of fixed assets of $49,321, amortization of debt discount of $4,702,918, warrants issuance of $600,278, imputed interest on related party loans of $82,851, increase in prepaid expenses of $8,467 and a decrease in operating lease right of use of $90,072, an increase of accrued expenses and other payables-related party of $441,574, increase in accounts payable of $199,723 and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $104,417.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operations of $1,254,712 was the result of a net loss of $4,971,277 offset by depreciation expense of $28,074, amortization of original issue and debt discount of $50,505, options issued to related parties of $2,845,459, imputed interest on related party loans of $58,817, decrease in prepaid expenses of $29,159, a decrease in operating lease right of use of $108,217, an increase of accrued expenses and other payables-related party of $657,520, an increase in accounts payable of $39,055 and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $100,239.
Net cash used in our investing activities were $547,370 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our cash outflow of $547,370, is represented by $450,216 investment in gold bullion and purchase of fixed assets of $97,154.
Our financing activities resulted in a cash inflow of $3,850,985 for the year ended December 31, 2021, which is represented by proceeds from convertible notes payable, net of $3,670,000, $50,000 loan repayment and proceeds from a warrant exercise for $266,332.
Our financing activities resulted in a cash inflow of $1,946,595 for the year ended December 31, 2020, which is represented by $1,015,000 proceeds from a shareholder note payable, proceeds from convertible note payable, net of $950,000, payment of debt offering costs of $86,000 related to convertible note payable, $40,000 loan repayment, contributed capital by related party of $17,495 and proceeds from SBA Paychex Protection Loan of $90,100.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). GAAP requires the use of estimates; assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, and revenue and expense amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently and conservatively applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1 of our financial statements. While all these significant accounting policies impact its financial condition and results of operations, we view certain of these policies as critical. Policies determined to be critical are those policies that have the most significant impact on our financial statements and require management to use a greater degree of judgment and estimates. Actual results may differ from those estimates. Our management believes that given current facts and circumstances, it is unlikely that applying any other reasonable judgments or estimate methodologies would cause effect on our results of operations, financial position or liquidity for the periods presented in this report.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Changes to accounting principles are established by the FASB in the form of ASU’s to the FASB’s Codification. We consider the applicability and impact of all ASU’s on our financial position, results of operations, stockholders’ deficit, cash flows, or presentation thereof.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13 - Financial Instruments-Credit Losses-Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. Codification Improvements to Topic 326, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses, have been released in November 2018 (2018-19), November 2019 (2019-10 and 2019-11) and a January 2020 Update (2020-02) that provided additional guidance on this Topic. This guidance replaces the current incurred loss impairment methodology with a methodology that reflects expected credit losses and requires consideration of a broader range of reasonable and supportable information to inform credit loss estimates. For SEC filers meeting certain criteria, the amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. For SEC filers that meet the criteria of a smaller reporting company (including this Company) and for non-SEC registrant public companies and other organizations, the amendments in this ASU are effective for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2022. Early adoption will be permitted for all organizations for fiscal years, and interim periods within those fiscal years, beginning after December 15, 2019. The Company is currently in the process of its analysis of the impact of this guidance on its financial statements and does not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This guidance, among other provisions, eliminates certain exceptions to existing guidance related to the approach for intra period tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also requires an entity to reflect the effect of an enacted change in tax laws or rates in its effective income tax rate in the first interim period that includes the enactment date of the new legislation, aligning the timing of recognition of the effects from enacted tax law changes on the effective income tax rate with the effects on deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Under existing guidance, an entity recognizes the effects of the enacted tax law change on the effective income tax rate in the period that includes the effective date of the tax law. ASU 2019-12 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this pronouncement on January 1, 2021; however, the adoption of this standard will not have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”, to reduce complexity in applying U.S. GAAP to certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. ASU 2020-06 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2023, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this pronouncement on January 1, 2021; however, the adoption of this standard will not have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “special purpose entities” (SPEs).