Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The purpose of the MD&A is to provide our stockholders and other interested parties with information necessary to gain an understanding of our financial condition and disclose changes in our financial condition since the most recent fiscal year-end and results of operations during the current fiscal period as compared to the corresponding period of the preceding fiscal year. The MD&A should be read in conjunction with Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K as well as the consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
KBR Inc., a Delaware corporation, delivers science, technology and engineering solutions to governments and companies around the world. Drawing from its rich 100-year history and culture of innovation and mission focus, KBR creates sustainable value by combining deep domain expertise with its full life cycle capabilities to help clients meet their most pressing challenges. Our capabilities and offerings include the following:
•Scientific research such as quantum science and computing; health and human performance; materials science; life science research; and earth sciences;
•Defense systems engineering such as rapid prototyping; test and evaluation; aerospace acquisition support; systems and platform integration; and sustainment engineering;
•Operational support such as space domain awareness; C4ISR; human spaceflight and satellite operations; integrated supply chain and logistics; and military aviation support;
•Information operations such as cyber analytics and cybersecurity; data analytics; mission planning systems; virtual/augmented reality and technical training; artificial intelligence and machine learning; and
•Technology such as proprietary, sustainability-focused process licensing; advisory services focused on energy transition; and digitally-enabled asset optimization solutions.
KBR's strategic growth vectors include:
•Defense modernization;
•Space superiority;
•Health and human performance; and
•Sustainable technology.
Key customers include U.S. DoD agencies such as the U.S. Army, U.S. Navy and U.S. Air Force, Missile Defense Agency, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency, National Reconnaissance Office and other intelligence agencies; U.S. civilian agencies such as NASA, U.S. Geological Survey and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; the U.K. Ministry of Defence, London Metropolitan Police, and other U.K. Crown Services; the Royal Australian Air Force, Navy and Army; other national governments; and a wide range of commercial and industrial companies.
Our deployment priorities are to fund organic growth, maintain responsible leverage, maintain an attractive dividend, make strategic, accretive acquisitions and repurchase shares. Our acquisition thesis is centered around moving upmarket, expanding capabilities and broadening customer sets across strategic growth vectors. KBR also develops and prioritizes investment in technologies that are disruptive, innovative and sustainability- and safety-focused. These technologies and solutions enable clients to achieve a cleaner, greener, more energy efficient global future.
On October 1, 2020, we acquired Centauri, a provider of high-end engineering and development solutions for critical, well-funded, national security missions associated with space, intelligence, cyber and emerging technologies such as directed energy and missile defense. Additional information relating to the Centauri acquisition is described in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.
On October 20, 2021, we acquired Frazer-Nash Consultancy Limited ("Frazer-Nash"), a leading provider of high-end systems engineering, assurance and technology advisory services used to solve complex challenges. Frazer-Nash provides a broad range of professional advisory services across the defense, renewable energy and critical infrastructure sectors primarily in the U.K. and Australia. Additional information relating to the Frazer-Nash acquisition is described in Part II of this Annual Report on Form 10-K in Note 4 to our consolidated financial statements.
Business Environment and Trends
Government Outlook
The proposed fiscal year 2022 U.S. defense spending budget prioritizes and furthers a national security strategy to confront near peer threats around the world, enhances the DoD’s cybersecurity strategy and cyber warfare capabilities, increases the priority of military space superiority, directs innovation to meet long-range emerging threats and continues the restoration of military readiness. The budget includes a number of measures to strengthen emerging technologies including cyber-science and technologies, artificial intelligence, directed energy, hypersonics and biotechnologies. The National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2022 reflects a 5% increase in defense spending over last year's enacted budget and represents an increase from the president's requested amount. The unapproved fiscal 2022 non-defense discretionary spending proposal includes a 16% increase in funding, including a 6.5% increase in funding for NASA to support the continuation of scientific research and exploration as well as increased funding across all agencies to tackle climate change. However, as the U.S. Government has not yet enacted an annual budget for fiscal year 2022, these proposed amounts are subject to change. To avert a government shutdown, a series of continuing resolution funding measures have been enacted to finance all U.S. Government activities through March 11, 2022. Under the continuing resolution, partial-year funding at amounts consistent with appropriated levels for fiscal year 2021 are available, subject to certain restrictions, but new spending initiatives are not authorized. Importantly, our key programs continue to be supported and funded despite the continuing resolution financing mechanism. In the coming months, Congress will need to approve or revise President Biden’s fiscal year 2022 budget proposal through enactment of appropriations bills and other policy legislation, which would then require final approval from President Biden to become law and complete the budget process. Additionally, on December 16, 2021, President Biden signed legislation increasing the federal debt limit by $2.5 trillion. The measure increases the debt limit to $31.4 trillion from the previous level of $28.9 trillion and is estimated to provide sufficient government borrowing capacity to last until early 2023.
In early 2021, the U.S. announced a full withdrawal of U.S. forces from Afghanistan. In connection with Operation Allies Welcome ("OAW"), KBR has been engaged by the U.S. DoD to provide humanitarian support across numerous military bases to those awaiting resettlement. Such support includes temporary housing, food service, medical care and other services. We expect this non-recurring OAW support to be substantially completed in early 2022.
Internationally, our Government Solutions work is performed primarily for the U.K. Ministry of Defence and the Australian Department of Defence. The U.K. government has committed a 14% increase in defense spending over the coming four years. Recognizing the importance of strong defense and the role the U.K. plays across the globe, the U.K. has prioritized investment in military research and investment in key areas to advance and develop capabilities around artificial intelligence, cyber security and space superiority. The Australian government continues to invest in defense spending, with particular focus on enhancing regional security, modernizing defense capabilities, strengthening cyber defenses and promoting broader economic stability.
In November 2021, we announced that HomeSafe Alliance LLC (“HomeSafe”), a KBR led joint venture with Tier One Relocation, was awarded the global household goods contract by U.S. Transportation Command. The contract ceiling value is $20 billion with a potential 9-year term, inclusive of all options periods. HomeSafe is expected to be the exclusive household goods move management service provider for the U.S. Armed Forces, Department of Defense civilians and their families. Under this contract, HomeSafe plans to modernize and infuse technology to improve the domestic and international relocation experience for all military personnel and their families. The contract award is currently under protest.
With defense and civil budgets driven in part by political instability, military conflicts, aging platforms and infrastructure and the need for technology advances, we expect continued opportunities to provide solutions and technologies to mission critical work aligned with our customers’ and our nation’s critical priorities.
Sustainable Technology Outlook
Long-range commercial market fundamentals are supported by global population growth and acceleration of demand for energy transition and renewable energy sources for which momentum continues to build. Clients continue to prioritize investment in digital solutions to increase end-product flexibility and energy efficiency and to reduce their environmental footprint. As companies continue to commit to near-term carbon neutrality and longer-range net-zero carbon emissions, we expect spending to continue in areas such as decarbonization; carbon capture, utilization and sequestration; biofuels; and circular economy. Further, leading companies across the world are proactively evaluating clean energy alternatives, including hydrogen and green ammonia which complements KBR's proprietary process technology and capabilities.
We expect climate change and energy transition to continue to be areas of priority and investment as many countries, including the U.S., look to boost their economies and invest in a cleaner future. In advance of the Conference of the Parties 26 meeting in Scotland, the White House released details on its strategy to achieve greenhouse gas emission reduction targets as part of their agenda. On November 15, 2021, President Biden signed the bi-partisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act bill into law which includes climate provisions focused on transportation and resiliency.
Our Business
KBR's business is organized into two core business segments and one non-core business segment as follows:
Core business segments
•Government Solutions
•Sustainable Technology Solutions
Non-core business segment
•Other
See additional information on our business segments, including detail with respect to changes to our reportable segments, in Note 1 and 2 to our consolidated financial statements and under "Item 1. Business" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview of 2021 Financial Results and Significant Bookings
2021 was a year of significant achievement for KBR as we continued to execute toward our long-term vision. The Company benefits from a significant base of long-term enduring contracts in our government business, a diverse portfolio of high quality proprietary process technologies, market tailwinds that benefit our capabilities and technologies in areas such as defense modernization and energy transition and a truly global client base. Together, these attributes distinguish KBR and have contributed directly to the company’s growth in revenue and profit during the year. While the historic humanitarian efforts in connection with OAW amplified revenue and profit, the core business in GS delivered strong organic growth during the year, and STS delivered significantly increased 2021 earnings growth. Our teams continued to deliver operational performance, healthy profitability and strong cash flow. Importantly, we drove innovation and extended our footprint through new program wins and technology advances and development. We continued our track record of innovation, bringing new technologies to market and advising, consulting and delivering expertise in the vital area of energy transition, hydrogen future and plastics circular economy. We progressed in our strategic journey to advance upmarket to deliver innovative, digitally-enabled solutions by completing the Frazer-Nash acquisition. We also obtained a full and final resolution with the client on the Ichthys LNG project regarding material outstanding claims and disputes and we intend to pursue recovery from the consortium of subcontractors of the Combined Cycle Power Plant.
Bookings to underpin the future were strong in our GS and STS businesses. Our GS business landed $6.7 billion in bookings and options, including a $127 million recompete award from the U.S. Department of Transportation Volpe Center to modernize technical and safety-related transportation systems; a $539 million U.S. Air Force award to support rapid prototyping and fielding of systems; a $195 million U.S. Air Force award to provide trusted microelectronics solutions; and more. Our STS business landed $1.1 billion in bookings, including numerous projects across the ammonia landscape, including traditional, blue and green ammonia, and multiple Hydro-PRT licenses and studies.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented, including by segment. A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 is included in Item 7. of Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations of our Current Report on Form 8-K, which was filed with the SEC on July 29, 2021. This Current Report on Form 8-K was filed to reflect changes to the presentation of our financial information as set forth in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, as filed with the SEC on February 25, 2021, effective January 1, 2021, in order to give effect to a change in our segment reporting.
Revenues increased by $1.6 billion, or 27%, to $7.3 billion in 2021, compared to $5.8 billion in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by our GS business segment attributable to continued organic growth in our GS business units, including the OAW program which contributed $1.6 billion in 2021, and the acquisitions of Centauri in October 2020 and Frazer-Nash in October 2021. This growth was partially offset by a reduction in revenue in our STS business segment following the Company's exit from commoditized construction services in 2020 and reduced activity in our GS business segment due to reduced activity in the Middle East and lower volume associated with the successful completion of non-recurring construction work on our Aspire program.
The $140 million increase in gross profit was primarily driven by improvements in our STS business segment due to improved execution and market recovery in 2021, legacy provisions recognized in 2020 that did not recur in 2021 and the net favorable resolution of and provisioning for legacy matters in 2021. Gross profits also increased in our GS business segment that were driven by organic growth, including activity of the OAW program, and the acquisitions of Centauri in October 2020 and Frazer-Nash in in October 2021. The increase was partially offset by higher amortization of intangibles from the Centauri and Frazer-Nash acquisitions and reduced activity in our GS business segment due to reduced activity in the Middle East and lower volume associated with the successful completion of non-recurring construction work on our Aspire program.
The overall decrease in equity in earnings (losses) of unconsolidated affiliates was primarily driven by a non-cash charge in the amount of $193 million recognized in the second quarter of 2021 and an additional charge in the amount of $10 million for final warranty items associated with the joint venture's full and final settlement completed with the Ichthys LNG client in our STS business segment. In October 2021, JKC entered into a Settlement Agreement that resolved the outstanding claims and disputes between JKC and its client. As a result of the Settlement Agreement, the Parties agreed to withdraw all claims and terminate all ongoing arbitrations and court proceedings between the Parties.
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $58 million higher in 2021 compared to 2020, which was primarily driven by increased expenses attributable to the Centauri and Frazer-Nash acquisitions and other corporate costs, partially offset by cost reductions to right-size the cost base in line with the business shift to exit non-strategic areas in our STS business segment.
The increase in acquisition and integration related costs was associated with the Company's acquisitions of Centauri in October 2020 and Frazer-Nash in October 2021.
In 2020, as a result of the economic and market volatility, management initiated a restructuring plan and we recognized goodwill impairments, restructuring charges and asset impairments resulting from that plan.
The decrease in gain on disposition of assets and investments of $16 million was primarily driven by the liquidation of a joint venture in 2020.
The increase in interest expense was primarily driven by increased expense associated with borrowings to finance the acquisitions of Centauri and Frazer-Nash.
Other non-operating income (expense) includes interest income, foreign exchange gains and losses and other non-operating income or expense items. The increase in expense was primarily driven by foreign exchange gains and losses.
The increase in tax expense in 2021 compared to 2020 was driven by the following factors: a) an increase in income year over year since the impairment and restructuring charges of 2020 were non-recurring b) an equity adjustment on the LNG project and c) the enactment of a tax rate change in the U.K.
A reconciliation of our effective tax rates for 2021, 2020 and 2019 to the U.S. statutory federal rate and further information on the effects of the Tax Act is presented in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements.
The decrease in net income attributable to noncontrolling interests was primarily driven by the resolution of a contingency matter on a completed LNG project and liquidation of the joint venture in 2020, partially offset by income earned related to a Middle East joint venture project in our STS business segment.
Results of Operations by Business Segment
We analyze the financial results for each of our two core business segments. The business segments presented are consistent with our reportable segments discussed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
n/m - not meaningful
Government Solutions
GS revenues increased by $2.1 billion, or 52%, to $6.1 billion in 2021 compared to $4.1 billion in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by organic revenue growth across each of our GS business units, including new work associated with the OAW program which contributed $1.6 billion in 2021. Additionally, the increase is attributed to the acquisitions of Centauri in October 2020 and Frazer-Nash in October 2021. These increases were partially offset by reduced activity in the Middle East and lower volume associated with the successful completion of non-recurring services on the Aspire program.
GS gross profit increased by $82 million, or 17%, to $575 million in 2021 compared to $493 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by organic growth, including new work under the OAW program, and the Centauri and Frazer-Nash acquisitions discussed above. This was partially offset by the higher amortization of intangibles from the acquisitions, reduced activity in the Middle East and lower volume associated with the successful completion of non-recurring work on our Aspire program.
GS equity earnings of unconsolidated affiliates increased by $1 million to $29 million in 2021 compared to $28 million in 2020, which was primarily driven by better performance of joint ventures and increased work in our International business, partially offset by changes in project estimates in a domestic joint venture.
Sustainable Technology Solutions
STS revenues decreased by $522 million, or 30%, to $1.2 billion in 2021, compared to $1.7 billion in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by the Company's exit from commoditized construction services in 2020.
STS gross profit increased by $58 million, or 34%, to $231 million in 2021, compared to $173 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by strong execution and market recovery in 2021, expenses recognized in 2020 that did not recur in 2021 and the net favorable resolution of and provision for legacy matters in 2021.
STS equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates decreased by $201 million to $199 million loss in 2021, compared to $2 million in equity earnings in 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a non-cash charge in the amount of $193 million that was recognized during the second quarter of 2021 and an additional charge in the amount of $10 million for final warranty items associated with the Ichthys LNG project recognized in the third quarter of 2021.
Backlog of Unfilled Orders
Backlog generally represents the dollar amount of revenues we expect to realize in the future as a result of performing work on contracts and our pro-rata share of work to be performed by unconsolidated joint ventures. We generally include total expected revenues in backlog when a contract is awarded under a legally binding agreement. In many instances, arrangements included in backlog are complex, nonrepetitive and may fluctuate over the contract period due to the release of contracted work in phases by the customer. Additionally, nearly all contracts allow customers to terminate the agreement at any time for convenience. Certain contracts provide maximum dollar limits, with actual authorization to perform work under the contract agreed upon on a periodic basis with the customer. In these arrangements, only the amounts authorized are included in backlog. For projects where we act solely in a project management capacity, we only include the expected value of our services in backlog.
We define backlog, as it relates to U.S. government contracts, as our estimate of the remaining future revenue from existing signed contracts over the remaining base contract performance period (including customer approved option periods) for which work scope and price have been agreed with the customer. We define funded backlog as the portion of backlog for which funding currently is appropriated, less the amount of revenue we have previously recognized. We define unfunded backlog as the total backlog less the funded backlog. Our GS backlog does not include any estimate of future potential delivery orders that might be awarded under our government-wide acquisition contracts, agency-specific indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contracts or other multiple-award contract vehicles, nor does it include option periods that have not been exercised by the customer.
Within our GS business segment, we calculate estimated backlog for long-term contracts associated with the U.K. government's PFIs based on the aggregate amount that our client would contractually be obligated to pay us over the life of the project. We update our estimates of the future work to be executed under these contracts on a quarterly basis and adjust backlog if necessary.
Refer to "Item 1A. Risk Factors" contained in Part 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of other factors that may cause backlog to ultimately convert into revenues at different amounts.
We have included in the table below our proportionate share of unconsolidated joint ventures' estimated backlog. As these projects are accounted for under the equity method, only our share of future earnings from these projects will be recorded in our results of operations. Our proportionate share of backlog for projects related to unconsolidated joint ventures totaled $2.6 billion and $2.4 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our backlog included in the table below for projects related to consolidated joint ventures with noncontrolling interests includes 100% of the backlog associated with those joint ventures and totaled $37 million and $52 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table summarizes our backlog by business segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively:
We estimate as of December 31, 2021, 30% of our backlog will be executed within one year. Of this amount, 91% will be recognized in revenues on our consolidated statement of operations and 9% will be recorded by our unconsolidated joint ventures. As of December 31, 2021, $180 million of our backlog relates to active contracts that are in a loss position.
As of December 31, 2021, 12% of our backlog was attributable to fixed-price contracts, 46% was attributable to PFIs, 29% was attributable to cost-reimbursable contracts and 13% was attributable to time-and-materials contracts. For contracts that contain fixed-price, cost-reimbursable and time-and-materials components, we classify the individual components as either fixed-price, cost-reimbursable or time-and materials according to the composition of the contract; however, for smaller contracts, we characterize the entire contract based on the predominant component. As of December 31, 2021, $9.5 billion of our GS backlog was currently funded by our customers.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $4.7 billion of priced option periods for U.S. government contracts that are not included in the backlog amounts presented above.
The difference between backlog of $15.0 billion and the remaining performance obligation as defined by ASC 606 of $11.7 billion is primarily due to our proportionate share of backlog related to unconsolidated joint ventures which is not included in our remaining performance obligation. See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of the remaining performance obligations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity is provided by available cash and equivalents, cash generated from operations, our Senior Credit Facility and access to capital markets. Our operating cash flow can vary significantly from year to year and is affected by the mix, terms, timing and stage of completion of our projects. We often receive cash in the early phases of our technology projects. On time-and-material and cost reimbursable contracts, we may utilize cash on hand or availability under our Senior Credit Facility to satisfy any periodic operating cash requirements for working capital, as we incur costs and subsequently invoice our customers.
STS services projects may require us to provide credit support for our performance obligations to our customers in the form of letters of credit, surety bonds or guarantees. Our ability to obtain new project awards in the future may be dependent on our ability to maintain or increase our letter of credit and surety bonding capacity, which may be further dependent on the timely release of existing letters of credit and surety bonds. As the need for credit support arises, letters of credit may be issued under our $1 billion bank Revolver or with lending counterparties on a bilateral, syndicated or other basis.
As discussed in Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" of our consolidated financial statements, on November 18, 2021, we entered into Amendment No. 5 under our existing Credit Agreement, dated as of April 25, 2018 ("Pro Rata Facilities") consisting of a $1 billion revolving credit facility (the "Revolver"), a $442 million Term Loan A, ("Term Loan A") with debt tranches denominated in US dollars, Australian dollars and British pound sterling and a $512 million Term Loan B ("Term Loan B"), with an aggregate capacity of $1.954 billion. The Amendment, among other things, (i) established an additional tranche of £122.1 million in Term Loan A incurred by Kellogg Brown & Root Limited, a wholly owned indirect
subsidiary of KBR, Inc., organized under the laws of England and Wales, (ii) increased capacity and flexibility under certain negative covenants, (iii) permits the netting of unrestricted cash up to a specified cap for purposes of calculating the leverage ratio and (iv) reduced the interest rate payable for applicable margins and commitment fees and extended the maturity dates to November 2026 for Term Loan A and the Revolver. The maturity date of Term Loan B remained unchanged maturing February 2027.
We believe that existing cash balances, internally generated cash flows, availability under our Senior Credit Facility and other lines of credit are sufficient to support our business operations for the next 12 months. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants related to our debt agreements.
Cash and equivalents totaled $370 million at December 31, 2021 and $436 million at December 31, 2020 and consisted of the following:
Our cash balances are held in numerous accounts throughout the world to fund our global activities. Domestic cash relates to cash balances held by U.S. entities and is largely used to support project activities of those businesses as well as general corporate needs such as the payment of dividends to shareholders, repayment of debt and potential repurchases of our outstanding common stock.
Our international cash balances may be available for general corporate purposes but are subject to local restrictions, such as capital adequacy requirements and maintaining sufficient cash balances to support our U.K. pension plan and other obligations incurred in the normal course of business by those foreign entities. Repatriations of our undistributed foreign earnings are generally free of U.S. tax but may incur withholding and/or state taxes. We consider our future U.S. and non-U.S. cash needs as 1) our anticipated foreign working capital requirements, including funding of our U.K. pension plan, 2) the expected growth opportunities across all geographical markets and 3) our plans to invest in strategic growth opportunities, which may include acquisitions around the world, including whether foreign earnings are permanently reinvested.
In 2021, we changed our permanent reinvestment assertion on the unremitted earnings, as well as all current and future earnings in a wholly owned subsidiary in India. We determined that the past unremitted earnings of $30 million is available for future repatriation for deployment in the U.S. Accordingly, we have recorded the income tax expense expected with the repatriation in 2021, which was less than $2 million. In addition, we changed our permanent reinvestment assertion on all current and future earnings in our subsidiaries in Saudi Arabia. The income tax expense associated with the current and future earnings will be reflected in the interim and annual periods in which the earnings are generated. The impact is not material to income tax expense. If management were to completely remove the indefinite investment assertion on all foreign subsidiaries, the exposure to local withholding taxes would be less than $9 million.
Joint venture cash and Aspire Defence project cash balances reflect the amounts held by joint venture entities that we consolidate for financial reporting purposes. These amounts are limited to those entities' activities and are not readily available for general corporate purposes; however, portions of such amounts may become available to us in the future should there be a distribution of dividends to the joint venture partners. We expect that the majority of the joint venture cash balances will be utilized for the corresponding joint venture purposes or for paying dividends. Joint venture cash and Aspire Defence project cash balances reflect the amounts held by joint venture entities that we consolidate for financial reporting purposes. These amounts are limited to those entities' activities and are not readily available for general corporate purposes; however, portions of such amounts may become available to us in the future should there be a distribution of dividends to the joint venture partners. We expect that the majority of the joint venture cash balances will be utilized for the corresponding joint venture purposes or for paying dividends.
As of December 31, 2021, substantially all of our excess cash was held in interest bearing operating accounts or short-term investment accounts with the primary objectives of preserving capital and maintaining liquidity.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operations totaled $278 million and $367 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively as compared to net income of $26 million and net loss of $51 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash flows from operating activities result primarily from earnings and are affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities, which consist primarily of working capital balances for projects. Working capital levels vary from year to year and are primarily affected by the Company's volume of work. These levels are also impacted by the mix, stage of completion and commercial terms of projects. Working capital requirements also vary by project depending on the type of client and location throughout the world.
The primary components of our working capital accounts are accounts receivable, contract assets, accounts payable and contract liabilities. These components are impacted by the size and changes in the mix of our cost-reimbursable and time-and-material projects versus fixed price projects, and as a result, fluctuations in these components are not uncommon in our business. Specifically, the $476 million unfavorable cash flow impact related to accounts receivable and the $447 million favorable cash flow impact related to accounts payable were primarily driven by increased volume associated with the OAW program.
Investing activities. Cash used in investing activities totaled $428 million in 2021, which included $406 million net cash used for the acquisition of Frazer-Nash and Harmonic and acquisition of a technology license, $29 million of cash used primarily for funding our proportionate share of JKC's ongoing legal and commercial costs and an investment in a plastics recycling technology and $30 million used for capital expenditures, partially offset by proceeds received of $44 million, which was primarily from the sale of our investment interest in the Middle East Petroleum Corporation (EBIC Ammonia project).
Cash used in investing activities totaled $877 million in 2020 and was primarily attributable to the acquisition of Centauri, net of cash acquired of $823 million, the acquisition of SMA and funding our proportionate share of JKC's ongoing legal and commercial costs.
Financing activities. Cash provided by financing activities totaled $87 million in 2021 and was primarily due to borrowings of $290 million on our Senior Credit Facility and $12 million in net proceeds received from the issuance of common stock, offset by $82 million for the repurchase of common stock under our share repurchase program, $61 million of dividend payments to common shareholders, $27 million in payments on borrowings related to our Senior Credit Facility, $13 million repayment on our finance lease obligations, $4 million repayment on our non-recourse debt associated with our Fasttrax joint venture and dividends paid to NCI shareholders of $23 million (of which $15 million was driven by the dividends paid to the minority interest of the sale of the EBIC Ammonia plant).
Cash provided by financing activities totaled $225 million in 2020 and was primarily due to approximately $245 million of net proceeds from the offering of our 4.750% Senior Notes due 2028 and borrowings of $260 million on our Senior Credit Facility, offset by $410 million in net payments on borrowings which includes voluntary principal payments related to the refinancing of our Senior Credit Facility, $11 million repayment on our non-recourse debt associated with our Fasttrax joint venture, $11 million repayment on our finance lease obligations, $54 million of dividend payments to common shareholders and $47 million for the repurchase of common stock under our share repurchase program. See Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" for further discussion of our Senior Credit Facility and Note 19 "Share Repurchases" for further discussion on our share repurchase program.
Future sources of cash. We believe that future sources of cash include cash flows from operations (including accounts receivable monetization arrangements), cash derived from working capital management and cash borrowings under the Senior Credit Facility.
Future uses of cash. We believe that future uses of cash include working capital requirements, joint venture capital calls, capital expenditures, dividends, pension funding obligations, repayments of borrowings, share repurchases and strategic investments including acquisitions. Our capital expenditures will be focused primarily on facilities and equipment to support our businesses. In addition, we will use cash to make payments under leases and various other obligations, including potential litigation payments, as they arise.
Other factors potentially affecting liquidity
Ichthys LNG Project. In reference to Note 6 "Unapproved Change Orders, and Claims, Against Clients and Estimated Recoveries of Claims Against Suppliers and Subcontractors” to our consolidated financial statements, in October 2021, JKC entered into a binding settlement agreement (the “Settlement Agreement”) that resolved the outstanding claims and disputes between JKC and its client, Ichthys LNG Pty, Ltd (collectively, “the Parties”). As a result of the Settlement Agreement, the Parties agreed to withdraw all claims and terminate all ongoing arbitrations and court proceedings between the Parties, including the following:
•Under the cost-reimbursable scope of the contract, JKC believed amounts paid or payable to the suppliers and subcontractors in settlement of their contract claims related to the cost-reimbursable scope were an adjustment to the contract price. JKC made claims for such contract price adjustments; however, the client disputed some of these contract price adjustments. In order to facilitate the continuation of work, the client agreed to a contractual mechanism (“Funding Deed”) in 2016 providing funding in the form of an interim contract price adjustment to JKC and consented to settlement of subcontractor claims as of that date related to the cost-reimbursable scope. In 2017, additional settlements pertaining to suppliers and subcontractors under the cost-reimbursable scope of the contract were presented to the client, and the client consented to payment to JKC but reserved its contractual rights. The Settlement Agreement fully resolved these matters.
•JKC was entitled to an amount of profit and overhead (“TRC Fee”) which was a fixed percentage of the target reimbursable costs ("TRC") under the reimbursable component of the contract which was to be agreed by the Parties. The Parties were unable to reach agreement. The Settlement Agreement fully resolved this matter.
•Claims for incurred costs related to scope increases and other factors for which JKC believed it is entitled to reimbursement under the contract.
In connection with preliminary settlement discussions, the Company recorded a non-cash charge to equity in earnings of unconsolidated affiliates in the amount of $193 million in the quarter ended June 30, 2021, which reflected KBR’s proportionate share of the unpaid, unapproved change orders and claims. This non-cash charge does not impact JKC’s pursuit of subcontractor claims associated with the combined cycle power. In the quarter ended September 30, 2021, KBR recorded an additional charge of approximately $10 million for its proportionate share of final warranty items.
As part of the Settlement Agreement, KBR’s letters of credit were also reduced to $82 million from $164 million.
The Settlement Agreement does not impact pursuit of, or positions related to, JKC’s subcontractor claims associated with the combined cycle power plant, of which JKC incurred substantial costs to complete the power plant under the fixed-price portion of the Ichthys LNG contract. JKC believes these costs are recoverable from the Consortium who abandoned their contractual obligation to complete the power plant as the original subcontractor. We have initiated arbitrations and other legal proceedings to recover these costs which may take several years to resolve. As a result, we funded our proportionate share of JKC's capital requirements to complete the power plant as these legal proceedings progress.
U.K. pension obligation. We have recognized on our consolidated balance sheet a funding deficit of $88 million (measured as the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the projected benefit obligation as of December 31, 2021) for our frozen defined benefit pension plans. The total amounts of employer pension contributions paid for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $46 million and primarily related to our defined benefit plan in the U.K. The funding requirements for our U.K. pension plan are determined based on the U.K. Pensions Act 1995. Annual minimum funding requirements are based on a binding agreement with the trustees of the U.K. pension plan that is negotiated on a triennial basis which is slated to commence in 2021 and is required to be completed by April 2022. The current agreement calls for minimum annual contributions of £33 million ($45 million at current exchange rates) until the next minimum funding requirements are finalized. In the future, pension funding may increase or decrease depending on changes in the levels of interest rates, pension plan asset return performance and other factors. A significant increase in our funding requirements for the U.K. pension plan could result in a material adverse impact on our financial position.
Senior Credit Facility
Information relating to our Senior Credit Facility is described in Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Senior Notes
Information relating to our Senior Notes is described in Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Convertible Senior Notes
Information relating to our Convertible Senior Notes is described in Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Nonrecourse Project Finance Debt
Information relating to our nonrecourse project debt is described in Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Letters of credit, surety bonds and guarantees. In the ordinary course of business, we may enter into various arrangements providing financial or performance assurance to customers on behalf of certain consolidated and unconsolidated subsidiaries, joint ventures and other jointly executed contracts. Such off-balance sheet arrangements include letters of credit, surety bonds and corporate guarantees to support the creditworthiness or project execution commitments of these entities and typically have various expiration dates ranging from mechanical completion of the project being constructed to a period beyond completion in certain circumstances such as for warranties. We may also guarantee that a project, once completed, will achieve specified performance standards. If the project subsequently fails to meet guaranteed performance standards, we may incur additional costs, pay liquidated damages or be held responsible for the costs incurred by the client to achieve the required performance standards. The potential amount of future payments that we could be required to make under an outstanding performance arrangement is typically the remaining estimated cost of work to be performed by or on behalf of third parties. For cost reimbursable contracts, amounts that may become payable pursuant to guarantee provisions are normally recoverable from the client for work performed under the contract. For lump-sum or fixed-price contracts, the performance guarantee amount is the cost to complete the contracted work, less amounts remaining to be billed to the client under the contract. Remaining billable amounts could be greater or less than the cost to complete the project. If costs exceed the remaining amounts payable under the contract, we may have recourse to third parties, such as owners, subcontractors or vendors for claims.
In our joint venture arrangements, the liability of each partner is usually joint and several. This means that each joint venture partner may become liable for the entire risk of performance guarantees provided by each partner to the customer. Typically each joint venture partner indemnifies the other partners for any liabilities incurred in excess of the liabilities the other party is obligated to bear under the respective joint venture agreement. We are unable to estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments that we could be required to make under outstanding performance guarantees related to joint venture projects due to a number of factors, including but not limited to, the nature and extent of any contractual defaults by our joint venture partners, resource availability, potential performance delays caused by the defaults, the location of the projects and the terms of the related contracts. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” contained in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information regarding our fixed-price contracts and operations through joint ventures and partnerships.
In certain limited circumstances, we enter into financial guarantees in the ordinary course of business, with financial institutions and other credit grantors, which generally obligate us to make payment in the event of a default by the borrower. These arrangements generally require the borrower to pledge collateral to support the fulfillment of the borrower’s obligation. We account for both financial and performance guarantees at fair value at issuance in accordance with ASC 460-10 Guarantees and, as of December 31, 2021, we had no material guarantees of the work or obligations of third parties recorded.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $1 billion in a committed line of credit under the Senior Credit Facility and $522
million of uncommitted lines of credit to support the issuance of letters of credit. As of December 31, 2021, with respect to our Senior Credit Facility, we had $364 million of outstanding borrowings previously issued to fund the acquisitions of Centauri and Frazer-Nash and $48 million of outstanding letters of credit. With respect to our $522 million of uncommitted lines of credit, we had utilized $229 million for letters of credit as of December 31, 2021. The total remaining capacity of these committed and uncommitted lines of credit was approximately $880 million. Information relating to our letters of credit is described in Note 12 "Debt and Other Credit Facilities" to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7. Other than as discussed in this report, we have not engaged in any material off-balance sheet financing arrangements through special purpose entities.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Significant contractual obligations and commercial commitments as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
(a)Determined based on long-term debt borrowings outstanding at the end of 2021 using the interest rates in effect for the individual borrowings as of December 31, 2021, including the effects of interest rate swaps. The payments due for interest reflect the cash interest that will be paid, which includes interest on outstanding borrowings and commitment fees. These amounts exclude the amortization of discounts or debt issuance costs.
(b)Included in our pension funding obligations are payments related to our agreement with the trustees of our U.K. pension plan. The agreement for this plan calls for minimum annual contributions of £33 million ($45 million at current exchange rates) from 2022 through the next valuation.
(c)In the ordinary course of business, we enter into commitments to purchase software and related maintenance, materials, supplies and similar items. The purchase obligations disclosed above do not include purchase obligations that we enter into with vendors in the normal course of business that support direct project costs on existing contracting arrangements with our customers. We expect to recover such obligations from our customers.
(d)The Cares Act permitted deferral of the employer portion of payroll taxes through December 31, 2020 of which 50% was due by December 31, 2021 and the remaining 50% is due by December 31, 2022. We paid $30 million in 2021 and the remaining $30 million is expected to be paid in the fourth quarter of 2022.
(e)We have excluded uncertain tax positions totaling $89 million as of December 31, 2021. The ultimate timing of settlement of these obligations cannot be determined with reasonable assurance. See Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion on income taxes.
Transactions with Joint Ventures
In the normal course of business, we form incorporated and unincorporated joint ventures to execute projects. In addition to participating as a joint venture partner, we often provide engineering, procurement, construction, operations or maintenance services to the joint venture as a subcontractor. Where we provide services to a joint venture that we control and therefore consolidate for financial reporting purposes, we eliminate intercompany revenues and expenses on such transactions. In situations where we account for our interest in the joint venture under the equity method of accounting, we do not eliminate any portion of our subcontractor revenues or expenses, however, we recognize profit on our subcontractor scope of work only to the extent the joint venture's scope of work to the end customer is complete. We recognize profit over time on our services provided to joint ventures that we consolidate and joint ventures that we record under the equity method of accounting. See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information. The information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Information relating to recent accounting pronouncements is described in Note 23 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
U.S. Government Matters
Information relating to U.S. government matters commitments and contingencies is described in Note 15 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Legal Proceedings
Information relating to various commitments and contingencies is described in Notes 6, 14 and 15 to our consolidated financial statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K and the information discussed therein is incorporated by reference into this Part II, Item 7.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based upon our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the determination of financial positions, results of operations, cash flows and related disclosures. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion is intended to highlight and describe those accounting policies that are especially critical to the preparation of our consolidated financial statements and to provide a better understanding of our significant accounting estimates and assumptions about future events that affect the amounts reported in our consolidated financial statements. Significant accounting estimates are important to the representation of our financial position and results of operations and involve our most difficult, subjective or complex judgments. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable according to the current facts and circumstances through the date of the issuance of our financial statements.
Contract Revenue. Our policy on revenue recognition is provided in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. We recognize revenue on substantially all of our contracts over time, as performance obligations are satisfied, due to the continuous transfer of control to the customer. Our contracts are generally accounted for as a single performance obligation and are not segmented between types of services provided. We recognize revenue on those contracts over time using the cost-to-cost method, based primarily on contract costs incurred to date compared to total estimated contract costs at completion. Contract costs include all direct materials, labor and subcontractors costs and indirect costs related to contract performance. We believe this method is the most accurate measure of contract performance because it directly measures the value of the goods and services transferred to the customer. For all other contracts where we have the right to consideration from the customer in an amount that corresponds directly with the value received by the customer based on our performance to date, we recognize revenue when services are performed and contractually billable.
The cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition requires us to prepare estimates of cost to complete for contracts in progress. Due to the nature of the work performed on many of our performance obligations, the estimates of total revenue and cost at completion is complex, subject to many variables and require significant judgment. In making such estimates, judgments are required to evaluate contingencies such as weather, potential variances in schedule and the cost of materials, labor and productivity, the impact of change orders, liability claims, contract disputes and achievement of contractual performance standards. As a significant change in one or more of these estimates could affect the profitability of our contracts, we routinely review and update our significant contract estimates through a disciplined project review process in which management reviews the progress and execution of our performance obligations and estimates at completion. We have a long history of working with multiple types of projects and in preparing cost estimates. However, there are many factors that impact future cost as outlined in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” contained in Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These factors can affect the accuracy of our estimates and materially impact our future reported earnings. Changes in total estimated contract costs and losses, if any, are recognized on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the changes are identified at the contract level. Such changes in contract estimates can result in the recognition of revenue in a current period for performance obligations which were satisfied or partially satisfied in a prior period. Changes in contract estimates may also result in the reversal of previously recognized revenue if the current estimate differs from the previous estimate.
It is common for our contracts to contain variable consideration in the form of incentive fees, performance bonuses, award fees, liquidated damages or penalties that may increase or decrease the transaction price. Other contract provisions also give rise to variable consideration such as unapproved change orders and claims, and on certain contracts, index-based price adjustments. We estimate the amount of variable consideration at the most likely amount we expect to be entitled and include in the transaction price when it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. Our estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include such amounts in the transaction price are based largely on our assessment of legal enforceability, anticipated performance and any other information (historical, current or forecasted) that is reasonably available to us. Variable consideration associated with claims and unapproved change orders is included in the transaction price only to the extent of costs incurred. We recognize claims against suppliers and subcontractors as a reduction in recognized costs when enforceability is established by the contract and the amounts are reasonably estimable and probable of recovery. Reductions in costs are recognized to the extent of the lesser of the amounts management expects to recover or actual costs incurred. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had recorded $426 million and $1.0 billion, respectively, of claim revenue and subcontractor recoveries for costs incurred to date and such costs are included in our estimates at completion. See Note 6 to our consolidated financial statements for our discussion on unapproved change orders and claims.
Purchase Price Allocation. We allocate the purchase price of an acquired business to the identifiable assets and liabilities of the acquiree based on estimated fair values. The excess of the purchase price over the amount allocated to the identifiable assets and liabilities, if any, is recorded as goodwill. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset and are developed using widely accepted valuation techniques such as discounted cash flows. When determining the fair value of the assets and liabilities of an acquired business, we make judgments and estimates using all available information to us including, but not limited to, quoted market prices, carrying values, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates and margins, attrition rates, future changes in technology and brand awareness, loyalty and position and discount rates. We engage third-party appraisal firms when appropriate to assist in the fair value determination of intangible assets. The purchase price allocation recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets. Goodwill is tested annually for possible impairment as of October 1 of each fiscal year, and on an interim basis when indicators of possible impairment exist. For purposes of impairment testing, goodwill is assigned to the applicable reporting units based on our current reporting structure. We have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Qualitative factors assessed for each of the applicable reporting units include, but are not limited to, changes in macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, discount rates, competitive environments and financial performance of the reporting units. If the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the carrying value of a reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, a quantitative test is required.
We also have the option to proceed directly to the quantitative test. Under the quantitative impairment test, the estimated fair value of each reporting unit is compared to its carrying value, including goodwill. If the carrying value of the reporting unit including goodwill exceeds its fair value, an impairment charge equal to the excess would be recognized, up to a maximum amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. We can resume the qualitative assessment in any subsequent period for any reporting unit.
For 2021, management performed a qualitative impairment assessment of our reporting units, of which there were no indications that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our reporting units were less than their respective carrying values. As such, a quantitative goodwill test was not required, and no goodwill impairment was recognized in 2021.
For the 2020 annual goodwill impairment test, we utilized the two-step process to compare the estimated fair value of each reporting unit to the to its carrying value resulting in goodwill impairment of $99 million. The fair values of reporting units were determined using a combination of two methods, one utilizing market revenue and earnings multiples (the market approach) and the other derived from discounted cash flow models with estimated cash flows based on internal forecasts of revenues and expenses over a specified period plus a terminal value (the income approach). Under the market approach, we estimated fair value by applying earnings and revenue market multiples ranging from 4.31 to 11.59 times earnings and 0.31 to 2.09 times revenue. Under the income approach, we estimated fair value by discounting each reporting unit’s estimated future cash flows using a weighted-average cost of capital reflecting current market conditions and the risk profile of the reporting unit. To arrive at our future cash flows, we used estimates of economic and market assumptions, including growth rates in revenues, costs, tax rates and future expected changes in operating margins and cash expenditures that are consistent with changes in our business strategy. The risk-adjusted discount rates applied to our future cash flows under the income approach in 2020 ranged from 9.0% to 10.2%. We believe these two approaches are appropriate valuation techniques and we generally
weight the two resulting values equally as an estimate of a reporting unit's fair value for the purposes of our impairment testing. However, we may weigh one value more heavily than the other when conditions merit doing so. Other significant estimates and assumptions include terminal value growth rates, future estimates of capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The fair value derived from the weighting of these two methods provides appropriate valuations that, in the aggregate, reasonably reconcile to our market capitalization, taking into account observable control premiums.
Intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized but are subject to annual impairment tests or on an interim basis when indicators of potential impairment exist. An intangible asset with an indefinite life is impaired if its carrying value exceeds its fair value. During the year ended December 31, 2021, there were no triggering events identified. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an impairment loss on indefinite-lived intangible assets associated with certain trade names acquired through previous business combinations of our legacy ES business of approximately $11 million.
Intangible assets with finite lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over the useful life of those assets, ranging from 1 year to 25 years. We perform an impairment test of finite-lived intangibles whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate their carrying value may be impaired. If events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of a finite-lived intangible may be impaired, the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset group would be compared to the asset group’s carrying value. If the asset group’s carrying amount exceed the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows, we would determine the fair value of the asset group and record an impairment loss.
Deferred Taxes, Valuation Allowances and Tax Contingencies. As discussed in Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. We record a valuation allowance to reduce certain deferred tax assets to amounts that are more likely than not to be realized. We evaluate the realizability of our deferred tax assets by assessing the valuation allowance and by adjusting the amount of such allowance, if necessary. The factors used to assess the likelihood of realization include our forecast of the timing and character of future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, income available from carryback years and available tax planning strategies that could be implemented to realize the net deferred tax assets.
We consider both positive and negative evidence when evaluating the need for a valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets in accordance with ASC 740. Available evidence includes historical financial information supplemented by currently available information about future years. Generally, historical financial information is more objectively verifiable than projections of future income and is therefore given more weight in our assessment. We consider cumulative losses in the most recent twelve quarters to be significant negative evidence that is difficult to overcome in considering whether a valuation allowance is required. Conversely, we consider a cumulative income position over the most recent twelve quarters, to be significant positive evidence that a valuation allowance may not be required. Changes in the amount, timing and character of our forecasted taxable income could have a significant impact of our ability to utilize deferred tax assets and related valuation allowance.
We believe there is a reasonable possibility that within the next 12 months sufficient positive evidence may become available to allow us to conclude that a significant portion of the valuation allowance will no longer be needed. The release of the valuation allowance could be in the range of $15 million to $25 million and result in a decrease to income tax expense. The timing of any release is dependent upon the potential HomeSafe contract booking.
Our ability to utilize the unreserved foreign tax credit carryforwards is based on our ability to generate income from foreign sources of approximately $662 million prior to their expiration whereas our ability to utilize other net deferred tax assets exclusive of those associated with indefinite-lived intangible assets is based on our ability to generate U.S. forecasted taxable income of approximately $610 million. Changes in our forecasted taxable income, in the appropriate character and source as well as jurisdiction, could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets.
Income tax positions must meet a more likely than not recognition threshold to be recognized. Income tax positions that previously failed to meet the more likely than not threshold are recognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is met. Previously recognized tax positions that no longer meet the more likely than not threshold are derecognized in the first subsequent financial reporting period in which that threshold is no longer met. We recognize potential interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
Legal, Investigation and Other Contingent Matters. We record liabilities for loss contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount is reasonably estimable. We provide disclosure when there is a reasonable possibility that the ultimate loss will exceed our recorded liability by a material amount or if the loss is not reasonably estimable but is expected to be material to our financial statements. Generally, our estimates related to these matters are developed in
consultation with internal and external legal counsel. Our estimates are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. The precision of these estimates and the likelihood of future changes depend on a number of underlying assumptions and a range of possible outcomes. When possible, we attempt to resolve these matters through settlements, mediation and arbitration proceedings. If the actual settlement costs, final judgments or fines differ from our estimates, our future financial results may be materially and adversely affected. We record adjustments to our initial estimates of these types of contingencies in the periods when the change in estimate is identified. All legal expenses associated with these matters are expensed as incurred. See Notes 6, 14 and 15 to our consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our significant legal, investigation and other contingent matters.
Pensions. Our pension benefit obligations and expenses are calculated using actuarial models and methods. The more critical assumption and estimate used in the actuarial calculations is the discount rate for determining the current value of benefit obligations. Other assumptions and estimates used in determining benefit obligations and plan expenses include expected rate of return on plan assets, inflation rates and demographic factors such as retirement age, mortality and turnover. These assumptions and estimates are evaluated periodically and are updated accordingly to reflect our actual experience and expectations.
The discount rate used to determine the benefit obligations was computed using a yield curve approach that matches plan specific cash flows to a spot rate yield curve based on high quality corporate bonds. The expected long-term rate of return on assets was determined by a stochastic projection that takes into account asset allocation strategies, historical long-term performance of individual asset classes, an analysis of additional return (net of fees) generated by active management, risks using standard deviations and correlations of returns among the asset classes that comprise the plans' asset mix. Plan assets are comprised primarily of equity securities, fixed income funds and securities, hedge funds, real estate and other funds. As we have both domestic and international plans, these assumptions differ based on varying factors specific to each particular country or economic environment.
The discount rate utilized to calculate the projected benefit obligation at the measurement date for our U.S. pension plan increased to 2.45% at December 31, 2021 from 2.00% at December 31, 2020. The discount rate utilized to determine the projected benefit obligation at the measurement date for our U.K. pension plan, which constitutes 97% of all plans, increased to 1.80% at December 31, 2021 from 1.40% at December 31, 2020. Our expected long-term rates of return on plan assets utilized at the measurement date decreased to 5.19% from 5.72% for our U.S. pension plans and increased to 4.67% from 3.70% for our U.K. pension plans, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table illustrates the sensitivity to changes in certain assumptions, holding all other assumptions constant, for our pension plans:
Unrecognized actuarial gains and losses are generally recognized using the corridor method over a period of approximately 22 years, which represents a reasonable systematic method for amortizing gains and losses for the employee group. Our unrecognized actuarial gains and losses arise from several factors, including experience and assumption changes in the obligations and the difference between expected returns and actual returns on plan assets. The difference between actual and expected returns is deferred as an unrecognized actuarial gain or loss on our consolidated statement of comprehensive income (loss) and is recognized as a decrease or an increase in future pension expense. Our pretax unrecognized net actuarial loss in accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31, 2021 was $787 million, of which $26 million is expected to be recognized as a component of our expected 2022 pension expense compared to $33 million in 2021.
The actuarial assumptions used in determining our pension benefits may differ materially from actual results due to changing market and economic conditions, changes in the legislative or regulatory environment, higher or lower withdrawal rates and longer or shorter life spans of participants. While we believe that the assumptions used are appropriate, differences in actual experience, expectations or changes in assumptions may materially affect our financial position or results of operations.
Our actuarial estimates of pension expense and expected return on plan assets are discussed in Note 11 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.