Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations:
Overview
Included below are year-over-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. For further information on year-over-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 not covered in the “Segment Results” below, refer to “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Form 10 for the period, which was filed with the SEC on September 28, 2021.
(1) Revenue growth in constant currency and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial metrics. For definitions of these metrics and a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, see “⸺Segment Results.”
Organization of Information
Kyndryl was formed as a wholly-owned subsidiary of IBM in September 2021 to hold the operations of the managed infrastructure services unit of IBM’s Global Technology Services segment. On November 3, 2021, IBM distributed shares representing 80.1% of Kyndryl’s outstanding common stock to holders of record of IBM’s common stock as of the close of business on October 25, 2021, in a Spin-off that is tax-free for U.S. federal tax purposes. Following the distribution, Kyndryl became an independent, publicly-traded company and is the world’s leading managed infrastructure services provider.
Kyndryl utilized allocations and carve-out methodologies through the date of distribution to prepare historical financial statements. The consolidated financial statements for periods prior to the Separation herein may not be indicative of our future performance, do not necessarily include the actual expenses that would have been incurred by us and may not reflect our results of operations, financial position and cash flows had we been a separate, standalone company during the historical periods presented. For additional information, see “Basis of Presentation” in Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies to the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Financial Performance Summary
Macro Dynamics
The COVID-19 pandemic and related macroeconomic uncertainty beginning in March 2020 caused many clients to experience declines in their business volumes and resulted in client priorities shifting toward maintaining operational stability, flexibility, and preservation of cash. The declines in business volumes and shifting client priorities negatively impacted demand for technology services in 2020.
In 2021, we saw a broad-based macroeconomic recovery in most regions of the world. Demand for technology services rebounded, as large organizations again demonstrated a need for assistance in designing, building, managing
and modernizing their technology systems. Most economists, including the International Monetary Fund, expect global macroeconomic growth to continue in 2022.
2021 Financial Performance
In 2021, we reported $18.7 billion in revenue, a decline of 4 percent when compared to the prior year primarily driven by lower contract volumes due to existing and new clients pausing activities during our planned Separation from our former Parent, as well as expected price declines in certain new and renewed customer contracts. This was a consistent trend across all segments. United States revenue declined 5 percent, Japan declined 4 percent, Principal Markets declined 1 percent and Strategic Markets declined 5 percent compared to 2020. Net loss of $2.3 billion increased by $308 million versus the prior year. The current year Net loss includes a goodwill impairment charge of $469 million, transaction-related costs of $627 million and litigation charges for certain long-standing claims and disputes of $52 million, as well as cost allocations from our former Parent.
2020 Financial Performance
In 2020, we reported $19.4 billion in revenue, a decline of 5 percent when compared to the prior year which was primarily driven by declines in the United States. Revenue declined primarily due to a reduction in client volumes within industries heavily impacted by the global pandemic. Net loss was $2.0 billion, an increase of $1.1 billion when compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher workforce rebalancing charges of $759 million. We took these structural actions to simplify and optimize our operating model.
Basis of Presentation
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and assumptions that impact the amounts reported and disclosed in our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes. We prepared these estimates based on the most current and best available information, but actual results could differ materially from these estimates and assumptions. COVID-19 has had and we expect will continue to have, significant effects on economic activity, on demand for our services and on our results of operations in 2022.
Prior to November 4, 2021, the accompanying financial statements of Kyndryl were derived from the consolidated financial statements and accounting records of the Parent as if the Company operated on a standalone basis during the periods presented and were prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC. Historically, the Company consisted of the managed infrastructure services unit of the Parent’s Global Technology Services segment and did not operate as a separate standalone company. Accordingly, the Parent had reported the financial position and results of operations, cash flows and changes in equity of the Company in the Parent’s consolidated financial statements.
The accompanying financial statements through the Separation date reflect allocations of certain IBM corporate, infrastructure and shared services expenses, including centralized research, legal, human resources, payroll, finance and accounting, employee benefits, real estate, insurance, information technology, telecommunications, treasury and other expenses. Where possible, these charges were allocated based on direct usage, with the remainder allocated on a pro rata basis of headcount, gross profit, asset or other allocation methodologies that are considered to be a reasonable reflection of the utilization of services provided or the benefit received by Kyndryl during the periods presented. The accompanying financial statements through the Separation date may not be indicative of the Company’s future performance and do not necessarily reflect what the financial position, results of operations and cash flows would have been had it operated as an independent company during the periods presented.
After the Separation on November 3, 2021, the Company’s financial statements for the periods from November 4, 2021, through December 31, 2021, are consolidated financial statements based on our reported results as a standalone company. All significant transactions and accounts between Kyndryl entities were eliminated. All significant intercompany transactions between IBM and Kyndryl prior to the Separation were included within Net Parent investment on the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements.
Prior to the Separation, our operations were included in the consolidated U.S. federal and certain state and local and foreign income tax returns filed by IBM, where applicable. The Company also files certain separate foreign income tax returns. For purposes of the historical periods presented on a “carve-out” basis, the income tax provisions have been calculated using the separate return basis, as if we filed separate tax returns.
Post-Separation, the income tax provisions are calculated based on Kyndryl’s operating footprint, as well as tax return elections and assertions. Current income tax liabilities including amounts for unrecognized tax benefits related to our activities included in IBM’s income tax returns were deemed to be immediately settled with IBM through the Net Parent investment account in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and reflected in Net transfers from Parent in the financing activities section in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain items have been recast to conform to current-period presentation.
Segment Results
As a result of the Separation, in the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company implemented a new operating model and reporting structure resulting in four reportable segments: United States, Japan, Principal Markets and Strategic Markets. Principal Markets consists of our operations in Australia/New Zealand, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, India, Spain/Portugal and United Kingdom/Ireland. Strategic Markets consists of our operations in all other countries. In addition to this change, the measures of segment operating performance changed to revenue and adjusted EBITDA.
The following table presents our reportable segments’ revenue and adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Segment revenue and revenue growth in constant currency exclude any transactions between the segments.
NM - not meaningful
(1) Revenue growth in constant currency and adjusted EBITDA are non-GAAP financial metrics. See the information below for definitions of these metrics and a reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
(2) Represents net amounts not allocated to segments
We report our financial results in accordance with GAAP. We also present certain non-GAAP financial measures to provide useful supplemental information to investors. We provide these non-GAAP financial measures as
we believe it improves visibility to underlying results and the impact of management decisions on operational performance and enables better comparison to peer companies.
Revenue growth in constant currency is a non-GAAP measure that eliminates the effects of exchange rate fluctuations when translating from foreign currencies to the United States dollar. It is calculated by using the average exchange rates that existed for the same period of the prior year. Constant-currency measures are provided so that revenue can be viewed without the effect of fluctuations in currency exchange rates, which is consistent with how management evaluates our revenue results and trends.
Additionally, management uses adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our performance. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure and defined as net income (loss) excluding net interest expense, depreciation and amortization (excluding depreciation of right-of-use assets and amortization of capitalized contract costs), pension costs other than pension servicing costs and multi-employer plan costs, early extinguishment of debt charges, workforce rebalancing and restructuring charges, transaction-related and integration-related items, goodwill and long-lived asset impairment charges, foreign currency impacts of highly inflationary countries, significant litigation costs, stock-based compensation expense and income taxes. We believe that adjusted EBITDA is a helpful supplemental measure to assist investors in evaluating our operating results as it excludes certain items whose fluctuation from period to period does not necessarily correspond to changes in the operations of our business. We provide this non-GAAP financial measure as we believe it improves visibility to underlying results and the impact of management decisions on operational performance, enables better comparison to peer companies and allows us to provide a long-term strategic view of the business.
These disclosures are provided in addition to and not as a substitute for the percentage change in revenue and profit or loss measures on a GAAP basis compared to the corresponding period in the prior year. Other companies may calculate and define similarly labeled items differently, which may limit the usefulness of this measure for comparative purposes.
The following table provides a reconciliation of GAAP net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA:
* Other adjustments represents pension expense other than pension servicing costs and multi-employer plan costs, significant litigation costs and currency impacts of highly inflationary countries.
United States
For the year ended December 31, 2021, United States revenue of $4.8 billion decreased 5 percent as compared to the prior year, primarily driven by lower contract volumes due to clients pausing activities during the pandemic and our planned Separation as well as lower pricing. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $102 million from the prior year, primarily due to lower revenue, partially offset by cost reductions. For the year ended December 31, 2020, United States
revenue of $5.1 billion decreased 5 percent as compared to the prior year, driven by declines across the contract portfolio and impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. Adjusted EBITDA increased $4 million from the prior year benefited from travel and discretionary cost reductions due to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as realizing benefits from structural actions taken in first quarter of 2020.
Japan
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Japan revenue of $2.9 billion decreased 4 percent as compared to the prior year. Revenue decreased primarily as a result of currency exchange rates. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $101 million from the prior year largely due to decreased revenue. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Japan revenue of $3.0 billion increased 4 percent as compared to the prior year driven by strong performance in new client contracts. Adjusted EBITDA increased $167 million from the prior year behind the strength of revenue growth mixed with lower travel and discretionary costs due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Principal Markets
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Principal Markets revenue of $7.1 billion decreased 1 percent as compared to the prior year. Revenue decreased due to certain joint ventures not transferring to us in connection with the Separation partially offset by a favorable currency exchange rate impact of 4 points, primarily driven by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the euro and British pound. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $18 million from the prior year, primarily due to lower revenue, partially offset by cost reductions from structural actions taken in the prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Principal Markets revenue of $7.2 billion decreased 5 percent as compared to the prior year, driven by declines across the contract portfolio and impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $268 million from the prior year, primarily due to revenue decline in these higher fixed-cost European countries.
Strategic Markets
For the year ended December 31, 2021, Strategic Markets revenue of $3.8 billion decreased 5 percent as compared to the prior year. Revenue decreased due to certain joint-ventures not transferring to us in connection with the Separation and impacts from exiting low-margin accounts, partially offset by a favorable currency exchange rate impact of 2 points, primarily driven by the weakening of the U.S. dollar against the euro. Adjusted EBITDA increased $93 million from the prior year, primarily due to exiting low-margin accounts and realizing benefits from structural actions taken in the prior year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, Strategic Markets revenue of $4.0 billion decreased 9 percent as compared to the prior year, driven primarily by strategic decisions to exit certain loss-making contracts to strengthen our go-forward profit position. Adjusted EBITDA decreased $276 million from the prior year, primarily due
to lower revenue as a result of both client volumes and pause of small-deal signings after the announcement of our Separation in the higher fixed-cost European countries.
Corporate and Other
Corporate and other had an adjusted EBITDA loss of $154 million in 2021 compared to a loss of $153 million in 2020. Corporate and other had an adjusted EBITDA loss of $144 million in 2019.
Costs and Expenses
NM - not meaningful
Costs of services were 88.8% of revenue in 2021 compared to 88.6% in 2020, primarily driven by the impact of revenue decrease of advisory & implementation services and price decreases embedded in certain new and renewed contracts mostly offset by benefits realized from prior-year structural actions. Selling, general and administrative expenses were 14.9% of revenue in 2021 compared to 15.2% in 2020, primarily driven by benefits realized from prior-year structural actions, partially offset by additional legal liabilities recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021. Workforce rebalancing charges arising from structural actions to enhance productivity and cost-competitiveness and to rebalance skills that result in payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business. Workforce rebalancing charges were 0.2% of revenue in 2021 compared to 4.7% in 2020, when the Company announced a significant workforce reduction, primarily in Europe, in the fourth quarter of 2020. Transaction-related costs were 3.4% of revenue in 2021 compared to 0.1% in 2020, primarily driven by costs related to our Separation, including legal, consulting, audit and other professional fees, information technology transition costs, and employee retention expenses. Impairment expenses were 2.5% of revenue in 2021, primarily driven by an impairment of goodwill we recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021. Interest expense was 0.3% of revenue in 2021 compared to 0.3% in 2020, and includes interest expense associated with the indebtedness we incurred in connection with our Separation. Other (income) and expenses were 0.2% of revenue in 2021 compared to 0.1% in 2020.
Transaction-related Charges
The process of completing our Separation involves significant costs and expenses. Transaction-related charges are primarily related to additional spend to establish certain standalone functions and information technology systems, professional services fees, employee retention expenses and other spend related to contract and supplier novation agreements. These costs primarily include items that are incremental and one-time in nature. Transaction-related charges totaled $627 million in 2021. Transaction-related charges recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 were $21 million and $0, respectively. The $498 million of transaction-related charges incurred in the periods prior to Separation had no tax effect due to the valuation allowances discussed in Note 5 - Taxes. The tax impact of the $129 million of transaction-related charges incurred post-Separation was $33 million.
Income Taxes
The Company’s consolidated provision for income taxes and effective tax rate were as follows:
In 2021 and 2020, we recorded income tax expense of $397 million and $246 million, respectively, on a pretax book loss, which resulted in a negative effective tax rate. Our 2021 income tax expense was primarily related to taxes on foreign operations generating taxable income, uncertain tax positions, and tax charges related to the transfer of Kyndryl’s operations from Parent in contemplation of the Company’s Separation from IBM.
The effective tax rate for 2021 was lower compared to 2020 due primarily to tax charges related to the transfer of Kyndryl’s operations from Parent in contemplation of the Company’s Separation and nondeductible goodwill impairment. For more information, see Note 5 - Taxes.
Financial Position
Dynamics
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021, were $2.2 billion, an increase of $2.2 billion when compared to prior year-end since Kyndryl’s cash was managed by the Parent’s centralized treasury system in 2020.
Total assets of $13.2 billion increased by $2.0 billion from December 31, 2020 predominantly driven by an increase in cash and cash equivalents of $2.2 billion driven by proceeds from debt issuances net of payment made to former Parent; an increase in accounts receivable of $835 million primarily driven by a reduction in factoring of receivables, new commercial activity with our former Parent, and receivables with the former Parent that are no longer settled immediately post-Separation; and an increase in right-of-use assets of $230 million primarily due to entering into post-Separation leases with the former Parent for spaces that are partially occupied by Kyndryl employees. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in property and equipment of $1.1 billion mainly driven by the disposal of certain properties with net book value of approximately $200 million, removal of property and equipment of approximately $300 million that were previously attributable to Kyndryl but did not transfer to Kyndryl upon Separation and depreciation outpacing capital expenditures in 2021, a decrease of goodwill of $497 million primarily due to an impairment charge of $469 million recorded in the fourth quarter of 2021 and a decrease of deferred costs of $460 million driven by lower revenue and joint ventures previously attributed to Kyndryl that did not transfer to Kyndryl upon Separation.
Total liabilities of $10.5 billion increased by $4.2 billion from December 31, 2020 primarily as a result of a $3.0 billion increase in indebtedness, an increase in value-added and income tax liabilities of $357 million because the Company’s tax liabilities were paid by the Parent through the Separation date, an increase of accounts payable of $221 million primarily due to commercial activity with our former Parent and balances owed to our former Parent that are no longer settled immediately post-Separation, an increase in right-of-use liabilities of $184 million primarily due to entering into post-Separation leases with the former Parent for spaces that are partially occupied by Kyndryl employees, and an increase in retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations of $307 million driven by pension obligations transferred to Kyndryl after establishment of Kyndryl’s legal entities in the third quarter of 2021; see Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies for more details. This was partially offset by a decrease in workforce rebalancing liabilities of $513 million driven by payments to employees. Total equity of $2.7 billion decreased $2.2 billion from year-end 2020, mainly driven by our loss from operations of $2.3 billion.
Overall pension funded status as of December 31, 2021, was 64% of estimated pension benefit obligation, an increase from 55% at year-end 2020.
Working Capital
Working capital increased $2.3 billion from the year-end 2020 position. Current assets increased $2.9 billion due to an increase of $2.2 billion in cash and cash equivalents primarily driven by proceeds from our debt issuance and an increase of $835 million in accounts receivable primarily driven by a reduction in factoring of receivables, new commercial activity with our former Parent, and receivables with the former Parent that are no longer settled immediately post-Separation. Current liabilities increased $633 million as a result of an increase in value-added and income taxes of $357 million, and an increase in accounts payable of $221 million primarily due to commercial activity with our former Parent and balances owed to our former Parent that are no longer settled immediately post-Separation.
Cash Flow
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows are summarized in the table below.
The change in net cash used of $119 million compared to a net cash provided by operating activities of $628 million in prior year was driven by payments of workforce rebalancing liabilities of $370 million arising from restructuring actions taken by the former Parent in the fourth quarter of 2020 and cash used due to an increase in accounts receivable of $1.1 billion primarily driven by a reduction in factoring of receivables, new commercial activity with our former Parent, and receivables with the former Parent that are no longer settled immediately post-Separation; partially offset by an increase in operating liabilities and accrued costs of approximately $400 million that were established by the Company for the first time as an independent entity.
Net cash used by investing activities decreased $381 million in 2021 when compared to the prior year driven by sales of two data centers and lower capital expenditures than in 2020.
Net cash provided by financing activities increased $2.6 billion in 2021 when compared to the prior year driven by debt issuances of $3.0 billion, partially offset by a reduction in transfer from former Parent of $408 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and the Revolving Credit Agreement entered into in October 2021 will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next twelve months.
Senior Unsecured Notes
In October 2021, in preparation for our Spin-off, we completed the offering of $2.4 billion in aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured fixed-rate notes as follows: $700 million aggregate principal amount of 2.05% Senior Notes due 2026, $500 million aggregate principal amount of 2.70% Senior Notes due 2028, $650 million
aggregate principal amount of 3.15% Senior Notes due 2031 and $550 million aggregate principal amount of 4.10% Senior Notes due 2041 (the “Notes”). The Notes were offered and sold to qualified institutional buyers in reliance on Rule 144A under the Securities Act and to non-U.S. persons in reliance on Regulation S of the Securities Act. The Notes are subject to customary affirmative covenants, negative covenants and events of default for financings of this type and are redeemable at our option in a customary manner. In connection with the issuance of the Notes, we entered into a registration rights agreement with the initial purchasers of the Notes, pursuant to which we will use commercially reasonable efforts to file and have declared effective a registration statement with respect to a registered offer to exchange each series of Notes for new notes with substantially identical terms by October 15, 2022. If the exchange offer is not completed on or before October 15, 2022, and under certain other circumstances, we are required to use commercially reasonable efforts to file and have declared effective a shelf registration statement relating to the resale of the Notes.
Term Loan and Revolving Credit Facility
In October 2021, we entered into a $500 million three-year variable rate term loan credit agreement (the “Term Loan Credit Agreement”). In November 2021, we drew down the full $500 million available under the Term Loan Credit Agreement.
In October 2021, we entered into a $3.15 billion multi-currency revolving credit agreement (the “Revolving Credit Agreement” and, together with the Term Loan Credit Agreement, the “Credit Agreements”) for our future liquidity needs. The Revolving Credit Agreement expires, unless extended, in October 2026, and the Term Loan Credit Agreement matures, unless extended, in November 2024. Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Agreements will be based on prevailing market interest rates, plus a margin, as further described in the Credit Agreements.
The Notes and the Credit Agreements were initially guaranteed by IBM. Approximately $900 million of the net proceeds from the term loan and the sale of the Notes was transferred to IBM in conjunction with the Separation. Following the completion of the Separation, the guarantee was released, and the Notes and the Credit Agreements are no longer obligations of IBM.
We expect to be able to voluntarily prepay borrowings under the Credit Agreements without premium or penalty, subject to customary “breakage” costs. The Credit Agreements include certain customary mandatory prepayment provisions. In addition, the Credit Agreements include customary events of default and affirmative and negative covenants as well as a maintenance covenant that will require that the ratio of our indebtedness for borrowed money to consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the Credit Agreements) for any period of four consecutive fiscal quarters be no greater than 3.50 to 1.00.
Receivables Purchase Agreement
A portion of our receivables with extended payment terms were historically assigned to IBM’s Global Financing business. In connection with the assignment, these receivables were not recognized on the Company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet. In October 2021, in preparation for the Separation, we entered into a receivables purchase agreement with an unaffiliated bank with similar volumes to the amounts historically financed by IBM (the “Receivables Agreement”). Pursuant to the Receivables Agreement, we may sell at any one time, on a revolving basis, up to $1.1 billion of our trade receivables. Under the Receivables Agreement, from time to time, we sell certain customers’ trade receivables with extended payment terms at a discount on a non-recourse basis. These transactions are accounted for as sales. The initial term of the Receivables Agreement is 18 months.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Contractual Obligations
From time to time, we may enter into (i) off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations.” or (ii) purchase commitments, which we expect to use in the ordinary course of business.
At December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, we had no such off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. We do not have retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
At December 31, 2021, the Company’s material future contractual obligations were related to tax indemnifications, leases, debt and pension liabilities. See Note 5 - Taxes, Note 9 - Leases, Note 11 - Borrowings, Note 12 - Other Liabilities and Note 16 - Retirement-Related Benefits of Notes to the Company’s consolidated financial statements. Additionally, the Company uses several software and cloud partners to provides services to its customers. The majority of the Company’s purchase obligations relate to noncancelable commitments to those third parties. At December 31, 2021, we had short-term (in 2022), mid-term (in 2023 and 2024) and long-term (after 2024) purchase commitments in the amount of $0.8 billion, $1.5 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively.
Other Information
Signings
The following table presents the Company’s signings for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
A significant portion of the year-over-year decline in signings was driven by large renewals of existing client contracts in the first and third quarters of 2020.
The following table presents the total contract value for the Company’s signings greater than $100 million for new and existing customers for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We believe that the estimated values of signings provide insight into the Company’s potential future revenue and a tool to monitor trends in the business, including the business’ ability to attract new customers and sell additional scope into our existing customer base, and we believe signings are helpful information for investors. There are no third-party standards or requirements governing the calculation of signings. We define signings as an initial estimate of the value of a customer’s commitment under a contract. The calculation involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a customer’s commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs. Contract extensions and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of the incremental new value. Signings can vary over time due to a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the timing of signing a small number of larger outsourcing contracts. The conversion of signings into revenue may vary based on the types of services and solutions, customer decisions and other factors, which may include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic environment or external events.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly affect our reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to our financial statements. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements.
The inputs into certain of our critical accounting estimates considered the macroeconomic impacts of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. These estimates included but were not limited to, the allowances for credit losses, the carrying values of goodwill and intangible assets and other long-lived assets, valuation allowances for tax assets and revenue recognition. The macroeconomic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material impact on our critical accounting estimates reflected in our 2021 results. Given the inherent uncertainty of the magnitude of future impacts from and/or the duration of the pandemic, our estimates may change materially in future periods.
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides material information to investors. The amounts used to assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users of this report to understand a general effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Revenue Recognition
Application of GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether promised goods and services specified in an arrangement are distinct performance obligations. In certain arrangements revenue is recognized based on progress toward completion of the performance obligation using a cost-to-cost measure of progress. The estimation of cost at completion is complex and requires us to make judgements and estimates. Other significant judgments include determining whether we are acting as the principal in a transaction and whether separate contracts should be combined and considered part of one arrangement.
Revenue recognition is also impacted by our ability to determine when a contract is probable of collection and to estimate variable consideration, including, for example, rebates, price concessions, service-level penalties and performance bonuses. We consider various factors when making these judgments, including a review of specific transactions, historical experience and market and economic conditions. Evaluations are conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If the estimates were changed by 10 percent in 2021, the impact on net income would have been immaterial.
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
During the contractual period, revenue, cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which we use cost-to-cost method to measure progress. If at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. We perform ongoing profitability analyses of these services contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed to estimate the future costs to complete each contract are future labor costs and product costs and expected productivity efficiencies.
Capitalization of Contract Costs
In connection with services arrangements, we incur and capitalize direct costs for transition and setup activities performed at the inception of these long-term contracts that are necessary to enable us to perform under the terms of the arrangement. These costs are capitalized and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit. We perform periodic reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup costs. To assess recoverability, undiscounted estimated cash flows of the contract are projected over its remaining life and compared to the carrying amount of contract-related assets, including the unamortized deferred cost balance. Such estimates require judgment and assumptions, and actual future cash flows could differ from these estimates. A significant change in an estimate or assumption on one or more contracts could have a material effect on our results of operations.
Pension Assumptions
For Company-sponsored and co-sponsored defined benefit pension plans, the measurement of the benefit obligation to plan participants and net periodic benefit cost requires the use of certain assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount rates and expected return on plan assets.
Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the actuarial (gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic benefit cost calculation and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). If the average discount rate assumption for the non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans had increased or decreased by 25 basis points from 1.19 percent on December 31, 2021, this would not result in a material change to pretax income recognized in 2022. Further changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact our funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate would result in an approximate corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, of $85 million in the Plans’ estimated PBO and accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO) based upon December 31, 2021 data.
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is used in calculating the net periodic benefit cost. Expected returns on plan assets are calculated based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic benefit cost. The differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets are recognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic benefit cost and also as a component of actuarial (gains)/losses, which are recognized over the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by accounting standards.
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such that management changes its expected long-term return on plan assets assumption, a 50 basis point increase or decrease in the expected long-term return on plan assets assumption would not have a material estimated decrease or increase on the following year’s pretax net periodic benefit cost (based upon plan assets at December 31, 2021 and expected contributions and benefit payments for 2022).
We may voluntarily make contributions or be required, by law, to make contributions to our pension plans. Actual results that differ from the estimates may result in more or less future funding into the pension plans than is planned by management. Impacts of these types of changes on our pension plans would vary depending upon the status of each respective plan.
In addition to the above, we evaluate other pension assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement age and mortality and update these assumptions to reflect experience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic and other factors.
For additional information on our pension plans and the development of these assumptions, see Note 16 - Retirement-Related Benefits to our consolidated financial statements.
Income Taxes
Prior to the Separation, our operations were included in the consolidated U.S. federal and certain state and local and foreign income tax returns filed by IBM. The Company also filed certain separate foreign income tax returns. For purposes of the financial statements presented on a “carve-out” basis, the income tax provisions were calculated as if we filed separate tax returns and include transactions related to our Separation attributed to us, even if the related tax liabilities were our former Parent’s responsibility.
Post-Separation, our income tax provisions are calculated based on Kyndryl’s operating footprint, as well as our tax return elections and assertions. Current income tax liabilities including amounts for unrecognized tax benefits related to our activities included in IBM’s income tax returns were deemed to be immediately settled with IBM through the Net Parent investment account in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and reflected in Net transfers from Parent in the financing activities section in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Post-Separation, liabilities related to unrecognized tax
benefits for which the Company is liable are reported within the Consolidated Balance Sheet based upon tax authorities’ ability to assert the Company may be the primary obligor for historical taxes, among other factors. Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies and actions. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust the valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
Prior to the Separation, the Company recorded deferred tax assets for stock-based compensation awards that result in tax deductions in the consolidated financial statements calculated using the separate return basis based on the amount of compensation cost recognized and the relevant statutory tax rates. Post-Separation, the differences between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the Company’s income tax return are recorded as a benefit or expense to the provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Valuation of Assets
The application of valuation and impairment accounting requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill, requires the allocation of cash flows to those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of assets. Our estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur. Assumptions used to perform a recoverability test are consistent with those used for goodwill impairment; see “Valuation of Goodwill” for further detail.
Valuation of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable by first assessing qualitative factors to determine if it is more likely than not that fair value is less than carrying value. The fair values of the reporting units were determined using a discounted cash flow model. Significant assumptions inherent in the valuation methodologies include estimates of future projected business results, long-term growth rates and the weighted-average cost of capital.
We assess qualitative factors in each of our reporting units that carry goodwill including relevant events and circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units. Examples include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, as well as other individual factors such as:
● A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition;
● Significant pending litigation;
● A loss of key personnel;
● A more-likely-than-not expectation that a reporting unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise disposed of; and
● An adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
We assess these qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. This quantitative test is required only if we conclude that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. After performing the annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis during the fourth quarter of 2021, the Company determined it was necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test.
We use an income-based approach where fair value is determined using a discounted cash flow model that requires significant judgment with respect to revenue and growth rates, based upon annual budgets and long-term strategic plans. Fair value estimates employed in our annual impairment review of goodwill involve using various assumptions. Assumptions critical to our fair value were discount rates used in determining the fair value of the reporting unit, expected revenue growth and projected EBITDA margins. These and other assumptions are impacted by economic conditions and expectations of management and may change based on different facts and circumstances. We believe the assumptions used to estimate future cash flows are reasonable, but there can be no assurance that the expected cash flows will be realized. The use of different assumptions would increase or decrease discounted cash flows or earnings projections and therefore, could change impairment determinations.
As a result of the impairment testing performed in the fourth quarter, we determined that $293 million of the goodwill balance was impaired in our legacy EMEA segment and $176 million of the goodwill was impaired in our new United States segment. As of October 1, 2021, the estimated fair value of the Strategic Markets reporting unit, which had goodwill of $176 million, exceeded its carrying amount by greater than 50 percent. Management’s cash flow projections for this reporting unit included significant judgments and assumptions relating to expected revenue growth and projected EBITDA margins. A decline in the expected revenue growth rate of 50 basis points or projected EBITDA margins of 50 basis points would not have resulted in an impairment of the Strategic Market reporting unit. See Note 10 - Intangible Assets Including Goodwill for further discussion.
Loss Contingencies
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. At least quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter and assess our potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the determination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available, we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims and litigation and may revise our estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
Cybersecurity
While cybersecurity risk can never be completely eliminated, our approach draws on the depth and breadth of our global capabilities, both in terms of our offerings to clients and our internal approaches to risk management. In cooperation with partners, we offer commercial security solutions that deliver capabilities in areas such as identity and access management, data security, application security, network security and endpoint security. These solutions include pervasive encryption, threat intelligence, analytics, cognitive and artificial intelligence and forensic capabilities that analyze client security events, yielding insights about attacks, threats and vulnerabilities facing the client. We also offer professional consulting and technical services solutions for security from assessment and incident response to deployment and resource augmentation. In addition, we offer managed and outsourced security solutions from multiple security operations centers around the world. Finally, security is embedded in a multitude of our offerings through secure engineering and operations and by critical functions (e.g., encryption, access control) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
From an enterprise perspective, we implement a multi-faceted risk-management approach based on the National Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework to identify and address cybersecurity risks. In addition, we have established policies and procedures that provide the foundation upon which our infrastructure and data are managed. We regularly assess and adjust our technical controls and methods to identify and mitigate emerging cybersecurity risks. We use a layered approach with overlapping controls to defend against cybersecurity attacks and threats on networks, end-user devices, servers, applications, data and cloud solutions. We also have threat intelligence and security monitoring programs, as well as a global incident response process to respond to cybersecurity threats and attacks. In addition, we utilize a combination of online training, educational tools, videos and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture of security awareness and responsibility among our workforce.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this report, including statements concerning the Company’s plans, objectives, goals, beliefs, business strategies, future events, business condition, results of operations, financial position, business outlook and business trends and other non-historical statements in this report are forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements often contain words such as “will,” “anticipate,” “predict,” “project,” “contemplate,” “plan,” “forecast,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “target,” “may,” “should,” “would,” “could,” “seek,” “aim” and other similar words or expressions or the negative thereof or other variations thereon. Forward-looking statements are based on the Company’s current assumptions and beliefs regarding future business and financial performance. The Company’s actual business, financial condition or results of operations may differ materially from those suggested by forward-looking statements as a result of risks and uncertainties which include, among others:
● risks related to the Company’s recent Spin-off from IBM;
● failure to attract new customers, retain existing customers or sell additional services to customers;
● technological developments and the Company’s response to such developments;
● failure to meet growth and productivity objectives;
● competition;
● impacts of relationships with critical suppliers;
● inability to attract and retain key personnel and other skilled employees;
● impact of local legal, economic, political, health and other conditions, including the COVID-19 pandemic;
● a downturn in economic environment and customer spending budgets;
● damage to the Company’s reputation;
● inability to accurately estimate the cost of services and the timeline for completion of contracts;
● service delivery issues;
● the Company’s ability to successfully manage acquisitions, alliances and dispositions, including integration challenges, failure to achieve objectives, the assumption of liabilities and higher debt levels;
● the impact of our business with government customers;
● failure of the Company’s intellectual property rights to prevent competitive offerings and the failure of the Company to obtain necessary licenses;
● risks relating to cybersecurity and data privacy;
● adverse effects from tax matters and environmental matters;
● legal proceedings and investigatory risks;
● impact of changes in market liquidity conditions and customer credit risk on receivables;
● the Company’s pension plans;
● the impact of foreign currency fluctuations; and
● risks related to the Company’s common stock and the securities market.
Additional risks and uncertainties include, among others, those risks and uncertainties described in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, as such factors may be updated from time to time in the Company’s periodic filings with the SEC. Any forward-looking statement in this report speaks only as of the date on which it is made. Except as required by law, the Company assumes no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements.