Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this report, our actual results could differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on discovering, developing and commercializing precision medicines for kidney diseases. Our pipeline is focused on rare, severe chronic kidney diseases with well-defined clinical pathways. Our lead clinical program is atrasentan, an endothelin A receptor antagonist. In March 2021 we initiated the phase 3 ALIGN trial of atrasentan for IgA nephropathy, or IgAN, and in April 2021 we initiated the phase 2 AFFINITY basket trial for proteinuric glomerular diseases. Our second product candidate, BION-1301, is an anti-APRIL monoclonal antibody also in development for patients with IgAN, and we presented results from the ongoing phase 1/2 trial at the American Society of Nephrology (ASN) Kidney Week in November 2021. We plan to maintain commercial rights for atrasentan and BION-1301 in North America and possibly Europe. In November 2021, we also established SanReno, a joint venture to develop, manufacture and commercialize kidney disease therapies in the Territory. East-Asian populations have a higher incidence and prevalence of IgAN than in the United States and Europe. We believe that a strong local presence in East-Asia may allow us to accelerate the clinical development and maximize the commercial potential of atrasentan and BION-1301 in the region. We are also advancing our third program, CHK-336 towards an expected start of a phase 1 clinical trial in healthy volunteers in the first half of 2022. We are developing CHK-336 for the treatment of primary hyperoxaluria, or PH, as well as secondary hyperoxaluria and idiopathic kidney stone formation. In addition, we are conducting research programs in several other rare, severe chronic kidney diseases. We seek to build our pipeline by leveraging insights from kidney single cell RNA sequencing, human-derived organoids and new translational models, to discover and develop therapeutic candidates with mechanisms of action targeted against key kidney disease pathways. To support these efforts, we have entered into a strategic collaboration with Evotec SE, or Evotec, to jointly identify, characterize and validate novel mechanisms and discover precision medicines for lupus nephritis, IgAN, polycystic kidney disease, or PKD, and other primary glomerular diseases. The collaboration with Evotec will also involve further characterization of pathways and patient stratification strategies for programs currently in Chinook’s clinical and preclinical pipeline.
Our approach to precision medicines leverages recent advances in identifying targeted kidney therapies linked to mechanistic biomarkers by the application of systems biology approaches in nephrology. The application of systems biology to nephrology has advanced over the past decade through the study of multiple patient groups across a wide variety of kidney diseases and their associated multilevel data sets, including genome, transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, pathology and prospective long-term clinical characteristics and outcomes. A key objective of these investigations is to define kidney diseases in molecular terms to drive the development of targeted treatments. We believe we are well-positioned to exploit the insights provided into the key molecular drivers and classifiers of kidney diseases by the application of these systems biology tools to nephrology. Our strategy is to use these mechanistic insights to select compelling drug targets and deliver novel and differentiated product candidates for rare and severe kidney diseases with high unmet medical need.
For additional information regarding our product candidates, clinical development candidates and other research and discovery programs, refer to “Overview” within Part I, Item 1. Business in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Components of Operating Results
Collaboration and License Revenue
We have not generated any revenue from product sales. Our revenue to date has been primarily derived from our collaboration and license agreements.
SanReno Therapeutics
In November 2021, we entered into a License Agreement with SanReno, or the China License Agreement. The China License Agreement includes the transfer of intellectual property rights in the form of a development and commercialization license in the Territory; manufacturing and supply services; and participation in opt-in global studies with the collaboration party. In exchange for the development and commercialization license, we received non-cash consideration in the form of preferred shares in SanReno. The terms of the China License Agreement also include potential payment to us for the following: progress-dependent milestone payment; royalties on the net sales of a licensed product and reimbursement for certain expenses incurred. As of December 31, 2021, these potential payments are not considered probable of being achieved and they relate to promised goods or services for which revenue will be recognized upon our satisfaction of the underlying performance obligations.
Pre-existing Collaboration Agreements
Prior to the completion of the Merger, Aduro generated revenue from collaboration and license agreements. These collaboration agreements may have included the transfer of intellectual property rights in the form of licenses, promises to provide research and development services and promises to participate on certain development committees with the collaboration party. The terms of such agreements included payment to Aduro of one or more of the following: nonrefundable upfront fees, payment for research and development services, development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments, and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
Potential milestone payments related to development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments may be earned in the future under these pre-existing agreements, but all such payments are uncertain and beyond our or our collaborators’ control and would be recorded as revenue upon receipt or over a period following receipt, such as under the CAPM model, if and when such payments are earned. We evaluated the remaining performance obligations under these pre-existing agreements and concluded that we do not expect to recognize material revenue under these pre-existing agreements in the near term.
For additional information, refer to Note 11 “Collaboration and License Agreements” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development Expenses
The largest component of our operating expenses is our investment in research and development activities, including the clinical development of our product candidates. Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates, as well as the development of product candidates pursuant to Aduro’s pre-existing collaboration and license agreements. Research and development costs include employee-related costs; licensing costs; materials and supplies; contracted research and manufacturing; consulting arrangements; allocated costs, such as facility costs; and other expenses incurred to advance our research and development activities. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. Clinical trial costs, contract manufacturing and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase in the future as we advance our product candidates into and through clinical trials and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming. The probability of success for our product candidates and technologies may be affected by a variety of factors including: the quality of our product candidates, early clinical data, investment in our clinical programs, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include employee-related costs, expenses for outside professional services, and other allocated expenses. Employee-related costs consist of salaries, bonuses, severance and benefits. Consulting and outside services consist of legal, accounting and audit services, insurance expenses, investor relations activities, administrative services and other consulting fees. Allocated expenses consist of rent expense related to our offices and research and development facility.
Change in Fair Value of Contingent Consideration and Contingent Value Rights Liabilities
At the effective time of the Merger, we also entered into an agreement, or CVR Agreement, pursuant to which Aduro’s common stockholders of record as of the close of business on October 2, 2020 received one CVR for each outstanding share of Aduro common stock held by such stockholder on such date. Each CVR represents the contractual right to receive payments from us upon the receipt of consideration resulting from milestones and royalties from certain pre-existing agreements and the disposition or licensing of any of Aduro’s non-renal assets, net of deductions permitted under the CVR Agreement, including taxes and certain other expenses. Change in the fair value of the contingent consideration and CVR liabilities at each reporting consists of the changes in the values of these contractual rights.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets, excluding goodwill results from the amortization of finite-lived intangible assets acquired in the Merger. Amortization is over a period of 9 to 17 years, with an original weighted average period of 16.7 years.
Gain on Sale of Assets to Equity Method Investment
In 2021, we entered into an agreement with Sairopa B.V., or Sairopa, to acquire certain of our non-renal assets in exchange for preferred stock in Sairopa. The sale of the non-renal assets to Sairopa resulted in a $7.2 million gain, which is the difference between the fair value of the equity received and the carrying value of the non-renal assets sold. The gain is reported in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income and expense, foreign currency gains and losses, and various income or expense items of a non-recurring nature.
Change in Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
As a private company, we issued Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock (Series A stock). The terms of the Series A stock agreement included provisions requiring the investors to purchase, and obligating the Company to deliver, additional shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock at a specified price in the future based on the achievement of certain development-based milestones.
We estimated the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability related to each milestone utilizing the income approach using unobservable inputs including (a) future per share value of Series A stock upon achievement of the milestone, (b) estimated term until date of milestone achievement, and (c) probability of milestone achievement. The future per share value of Series A stock upon achievement of the milestone and the probability of milestone achievement for each tranche were calculated on a probability-weighted basis giving equal weighting to public offering and private exit scenarios. The future cash flows were discounted to their fair values as of the valuation date using one or more discount rates, depending on the number of probability-weighted scenarios employed.
Upon issuance, the fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability was recorded as a reduction in the amounts paid by investors for the purchase of Series A stock.
Upon closing of the Merger, the outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche rights terminated pursuant to the terms of the Merger agreement.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and foreign jurisdictions in which we do business. These foreign jurisdictions have statutory tax rates different from those in the United States. Accordingly, our effective tax rates will vary depending on the relative proportion of foreign to U.S. income, the availability of research and development tax credits, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in tax laws. We regularly assess the likelihood of adverse outcomes resulting from the examination of our tax returns by the Internal Revenue Service, or IRS, and other tax authorities to determine the adequacy of our income tax reserves and expense. Should actual events or results differ from our current expectations, charges or credits to our income tax expense may become necessary.
Share of Net Loss of Equity Method Investment
Share of net loss of equity method investment represents our share of net loss of the Sairopa investment, which is reported in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss on a one quarter lag.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Collaboration and License Revenue
Total revenue was $51.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $50.8 million compared to $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily due to $41.2 million of non-cash revenue recognized under our license agreement with SanReno and a development milestone of $10.0 million recognized under our agreement with Merck and Co, Inc., or Merck. The agreement with Merck was acquired through the Merger. For additional information, refer to Note 11 “Collaboration and License Agreements”.
Research and Development Expenses
The following tables summarize our research and development expenses by program and by category incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and development expenses were $97.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $60.9 million compared to $36.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in research and development expenses was primarily due to external clinical and manufacturing expenses related to the atrasentan and BION-1301 clinical programs; higher employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense, associated with hiring staff to build out our clinical and development capabilities; increased spending for consulting and outside services; and higher facilities and other costs. The year ended December 31, 2021 also includes an upfront fee of $3.3 million paid to Evotec International GmbH under a research collaboration and license agreement entered into in February 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
The following table summarizes our general and administrative expenses incurred during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
General and administrative expenses were $31.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $12.8 million compared to $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily due to higher employee-related costs, including salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expense associated with the addition of administrative staff to build out our public company infrastructure; higher legal, consulting and other professional services costs; and an increase in facilities and other costs.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration and contingent value rights liabilities
Change in fair value of contingent consideration and contingent value rights liabilities expense was $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $25.8 million compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase primarily resulted from a change in estimate of the potential future proceeds derived from Aduro’s license agreement with Merck and from the sale of certain of our non-renal assets in exchange for preferred shares in Sairopa during the second quarter of 2021. The fair value of the contingent value rights liability also increased during 2021 due to the achievement of a development milestone under the terms of the agreement with Merck, which is payable to the CVR holders, net of permitted deductions. During the second quarter of 2021, Merck informed us that they intend to explore the potential benefits of the product candidate MK-5890, previously out-licensed to Merck by Aduro, in a phase 2 clinical study for a new indication. This could result in potential milestone and royalty payments for the benefit of the CVR holders.
Amortization of intangible assets
Amortization of intangible assets expense increased by $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to amortization of finite-lived intangible assets acquired in the Merger during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Gain on sale of assets to equity method investment
Gain on sale of assets to equity method investment increased $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting from the sale of certain non-renal assets in exchange for stock in Sairopa during the second quarter of 2021. The gain is the difference between the fair value of the equity received and the carrying value of the non-renal assets sold.
Change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability
Change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability decreased by $27.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the termination of the convertible preferred stock tranche rights pursuant to the terms of the Merger agreement.
Income tax (expense) benefit
We recorded income tax expense of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily resulting from the reduction of deferred tax liabilities related to our foreign entities.
Share of net loss of equity method investment
Share of net loss of equity method investment increased by $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting from our share of net loss of the Sairopa investment, net of any taxes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
As of December 31, 2021, we had $355.1 million in cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative expenses will increase, and, as a result, we anticipate that we will continue to incur increasing losses in the foreseeable future. We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 24 months.
In November 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 9.5 million shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $14.00 per share, which included the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional 1.7 million shares of our common stock. In addition, we sold to certain investors pre-funded warrants (the “Pre-Funded Warrants”) to purchase up to an aggregate of 3.6 million shares of common stock at a purchase price of $13.9999 per pre-funded warrant, which represents the per share public offering price for the common stock less the $0.0001 per share exercise price for each such warrant. The Pre-Funded Warrants are exercisable at any time after the date of issuance and do not expire. A holder of Pre-Funded Warrants may not exercise the warrant if the holder, together with its affiliates, would beneficially own more than 4.99% of the number of shares of common stock outstanding immediately after giving effect to such exercise. A holder of Pre-Funded Warrants may increase or decrease this percentage, but not in excess of 19.99%, by providing at least 61 days’ prior notice to Chinook. The underwritten public offering resulted in gross proceeds to us of $183.5 million, before $11.3 million of transaction costs.
In April 2021, we entered into an “at-the-market” sales agreement (the “2021 Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and SVB Leerink LLC, through which we may offer and sell shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering of up to $75.0 million through our sales agents, Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and SVB Leerink LLC. We will pay the sales agents a commission of up to 3% of the gross proceeds of sales made through the 2021 Sales Agreement. In 2021, we sold 2.2 million shares for net proceeds of $33.9 million under the 2021 Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we have $40.0 million remaining under the 2021 Sales Agreement.
Funding Requirements
We have not generated any revenue from product sales, and we do not know when, or if, we will generate any revenue from product sales. We do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales unless and until we obtain regulatory approval of and commercialize any of our product candidates. At the same time, we expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing development activities, particularly as we continue the research, development and clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, our product candidates. Accordingly, we anticipate that we will need substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations.
Until we can generate a sufficient amount of product revenue to finance our cash requirements, we expect to finance our future cash needs primarily through the issuance of additional equity, borrowings and strategic alliances with partner companies. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the issuance of additional equity, including through our at-the-market offering program or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include
liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of existing stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through marketing and distribution arrangements or other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates to third parties that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $102.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $46.9 million compared to $55.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increased operating loss resulting from increased research and development and general and administrative spending.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $112.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $222.3 million compared to $109.7 million cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to net purchases of marketable securities during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, cash provided by investing activities in the prior year included the receipt of cash and cash equivalents acquired in connection with the Merger and net proceeds from maturities of marketable securities, with no corresponding amounts during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $209.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $85.2 million compared to $124.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to aggregate net proceeds of $206.1 million received from the sale of common stock in the November 2021 underwritten public offering and the at-the-market sales agreement; option exercises during the year ended December 31, 2021, which increased over the prior period by $2.1 million; and an increase in proceeds from the employee stock purchase plan. These increases were partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock in the prior year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue generated and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Business Combination
Accounting for acquisitions requires extensive use of estimates and judgment to measure the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development and liabilities assumed. Additionally, we must determine whether an acquired entity is considered a business or a set of net assets because the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets acquired can only be recognized as goodwill in a business combination. We accounted for the Merger with Aduro as a business combination under the acquisition method of accounting. Consideration paid to acquire Aduro was measured at fair value and included the exchange of Aduro’s common stock, assumption of Aduro stock options and warrants, and assumption of contingent value rights.
We allocated the purchase price to the acquired tangible and intangible assets and assumed liabilities of Aduro based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The allocation of the purchase price resulted in recognition of intangible assets related to an acquired license agreement, an in-place sublease broker commission, in-process research and development and goodwill. The fair value of the identifiable intangible assets is based on detailed valuations using information and assumptions such as the timing and estimated costs to complete the in-process projects, projecting regulatory approvals, developing an appropriate discount rate and estimating future cash flows.
Contingent Value Rights and Contingent Consideration Liabilities
The estimated fair value of the contingent value rights and contingent consideration liabilities, initially measured and recorded on the Merger date, are considered to be Level 3 instruments. The contingent value rights and contingent consideration liabilities are recorded at fair value at the end of each reporting period with changes in estimated fair values recorded in change in fair value of contingent consideration and contingent value rights liabilities in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. In determining the fair value of the CVR and the contingent consideration liabilities, we used the income approach, primarily discounted cash flow models. The discounted cash flow models require the use of significant judgment, estimates and assumptions, including estimated revenues and costs, the probability of technical and regulatory success, and discount rates.
Intangible Assets
Our intangible assets include an acquired out-license agreement and indefinite-life in-process research and development assets (“IPR&D”) acquired in the Merger with Aduro. The acquired out-license agreement represents the estimated fair value of an agreement with Merck and Co, Inc. (“Merck”) related to a product candidate currently being studied in phase 2 clinical testing. The IPR&D represents the estimated fair value as of the acquisition date of two substantive in-process projects that have not reached technological feasibility: the BION-1301 product candidate currently being tested in a phase 1 clinical trial and the non-renal assets intended to be disposed of. The primary basis for determining technological feasibility of these assets is, in the case of BION-1301 and the Merck agreement, obtaining regulatory approval. In the case of the non-renal assets, it is completing transactions for the out-license or sale of the assets. The fair value of the Merck out-license agreement and in-process BION-1301 research and development intangible assets were determined using probability-weighted discounted cash flow models, including a multi-period excess earnings method and use of a Monte Carlo simulation. Projecting discounted future cash flows requires management to make significant estimates regarding future revenue and expenses, probability of technological and regulatory success, revenue volatility and discount rates. The discount rate used is determined at the time of acquisition and includes a rate of return which accounts for the time value of money, as well as risk factors reflecting the economic risk that the projected cash flows may not be realized. The fair value of the non-renal IPR&D intangible assets were determined using a probability-weighted discounted cash flow model, including assumptions regarding probabilities, timing and prices for the sale or out-license of these assets.
We review our intangible assets at least annually, on October 1 of each year, for possible impairment. Intangible assets are reviewed for possible impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of the assets below their carrying values. Our intangible assets totaled $62.6 million at December 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses represent costs incurred to conduct research, such as the discovery and development of our product candidates. Research and development costs include employee-related costs; licensing costs, materials and supplies, contracted research and manufacturing, consulting arrangements; allocated costs, such as facility costs; and other expenses incurred to advance our research and development activities. We recognize all research and development costs as they are incurred. In-licensing fees and other costs to acquire technologies that are utilized in research and development, and that are not expected to have alternative future use, are expensed when incurred. Clinical trial costs, contract manufacturing and other development costs incurred by third parties are expensed as the contracted work is performed. For service contracts that include a nonrefundable prepayment for future service, the upfront payment is deferred and recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss as the services are rendered.
Estimated Fair Value of Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock Tranche Liability
We had a liability related to future tranche options for purchase of our Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock. Such redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche rights terminated upon the closing of the Merger. The tranche options were accounted for as a liability at its estimated fair value at the inception of the obligation and was remeasured to fair value as of each balance sheet date, with the related re-measurement adjustment recognized as a component of other income (expense) in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The estimated fair value of the tranche options was determined using an option pricing model that considered the redeemable convertible preferred stock price, the exercise price of the option, the estimated time period the option would have been outstanding, the volatility of the underlying stock, the risk-free interest rate associated with the life of the option, and the dividend yield of the underlying Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock. The value derived from the option pricing model was adjusted for the probability of the related milestones not being met. Our management used its judgment to estimate many of these variables. We recorded adjustments to the estimated fair value of the redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche liability until which time the tranche options expired upon closing of the Merger.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
We measure and recognize compensation expense for all stock-based awards granted to employees and non-employees based on the estimated fair value of the award on the date of grant.
We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to measure the fair value of stock option awards when they are granted. We make several estimates in determining stock-based compensation and these estimates generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop, including (i) the expected share price volatility, (ii) the expected term of the award, (iii) the risk-free interest rate and (iv) the expected dividend yield. Prior to the Merger, due to the lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded, which have characteristics similar to those of Private Chinook, including stage of product development and focus on the life science industry. For options granted after the Merger, we are using historical volatility of Aduro’s and the Company’s common stock, as it approximates the volatility of the formerly utilized peer group. The historical volatility is calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption. The expected term for options granted to employees represents the weighted-average period the awards are expected to remain outstanding and our estimates were determined using the simplified method. The risk-free interest rate is based on a treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. We use an assumed dividend yield of zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
Stock-based compensation expense for restricted stock and stock options is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We record forfeitures as incurred.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, stock-based compensation expense was $12.8 million and $3.6 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had $34.6 million of total unrecognized stock-based compensation costs, which we expect to recognize over a weighted-average period of 2.5 years.
Revenue Recognition
At inception, we determine whether contracts are within the scope of ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC Topic 606”). For contracts that are determined to be within the scope of ASC Topic 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to receive in exchange for these goods and services, which is determined by applying the following five steps:
(i)
identifying the contract with the customer;
(ii)
identifying the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determining the transaction price;
(iv)
allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognizing revenue when or as we satisfy a performance obligation.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when we determine that collection of substantially all consideration for goods and services that are transferred is probable based on the customer’s intent and ability to pay the promised consideration.
Performance obligations promised in a contract are identified based on the goods and services that will be transferred to the customer that are both capable of being distinct and are distinct in the context of the contract. To the extent a contract includes multiple promised goods and services, we apply judgment to determine whether promised goods and services are both capable of being distinct and distinct in the context of the contract. If these criteria are not met, the promised goods and services are accounted for as a combined performance obligation.
Determining the transaction price requires significant judgment. The transaction price in the contract is measured at fair value and reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for the goods and services. In the transaction price, variable consideration is only included to the extent that it is highly probable that a significant future reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized under the contract will not occur. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation according to their stand-alone selling prices ("SSP") and is recognized when control of the goods or services are transferred to the customer, either over time or at a point in time, depending on the specific terms and conditions in the contracts. Judgment is required to determine the SSP. In instances where the SSP is not directly observable, such as when a license or service is not sold separately, the SSP is determined using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs.
In November 2021, we entered into a License Agreement with SanReno (“China License Agreement”). In addition, we assumed several existing collaboration agreements in conjunction with the Merger. These agreements may include the transfer of intellectual property rights in the form of licenses and obligations to provide research and development services, participate on certain development committees with the collaboration party and to provide manufacturing supply. The terms of such agreements generally include payment in the form of cash or equity securities to us for one or more of the following: development and commercialization licenses; research and development services; manufacturing supply; development, regulatory and commercial milestone fees; and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Judgment is required to determine whether the license to our intellectual property is distinct from the research and development services or participation on development committees.
As of the closing of the Merger, we considered all remaining performance obligations under the assumed agreements to determine appropriate revenue recognition. For agreements that include development, regulatory or commercial milestone payments, we evaluated whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and concluded that all such milestones are not within the control of us or the licensee, such as regulatory approvals, and are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received or the underlying activity has been completed. Accordingly, any future milestone payments received under the assumed agreements will be analogized to ASC Topic 606 and recorded as revenue upon or over a period following receipt, if such milestone payments are received.
We also assumed an existing out-license agreement with Merck under which all performance obligations of Aduro were completed prior to the Merger. We are eligible to receive future contingent payments pursuant to Merck’s achievement of certain development, commercial and net sales milestones for a product candidate. In addition, we are eligible to receive royalties based on net sales of the product. Any such milestones and royalties earned will be payable by us to the CVR holders, net of deductions permitted under the CVR Agreement, including taxes and certain other expenses.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the consolidated financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities at the applicable enacted tax rates. We establish a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that these items will expire before we are able to realize its benefits or that future deductibility is uncertain.
We recognize the tax benefit from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the tax authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax position is measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense if incurred.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For information regarding recent accounting pronouncements, refer to Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements under Part II, Item 8 of this report.