Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, the six month transition period ended December 31, 2020, and the year ended June 30, 2020, and the related notes thereto, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including, but not limited to, those set forth under the section heading “Item 1A. Risk Factors” above and elsewhere in this report on Form 10-K. See section heading “Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” above.
Akerna is the leading provider of enterprise software solutions within the cannabis industry. By providing an integrated ecosystem of applications and services that enables compliance, regulation, consumer safety and taxation, Akerna is building the technology backbone of the cannabis industry. Our solutions provide clients with integrated security, transparency, and scalability capabilities, all while maintaining compliance with their governing regulations.
We intend to leverage our scale and capital markets access to pursue additional growth through organic initiatives and to pursue our ecosystem strategy which leverages integrations, partnerships, and inorganic growth. We believe having a scaled ecosystem gives us more opportunities to leverage our footprint and increase wallet share by providing more value to our clients through having what we believe is the most robust cannabis technology suite available. We intend to pursue additional growth through organic initiatives, including increased marketing personnel and resources, acquisitions, and strategic relationships. we will continue scaling our platform for continued growth, adding new features and functionality, supporting new products and content types, and improving the user experience.
We offer our software solutions to our customers as a subscription-based service. Subscription fees are based upon the chosen package which includes differentiated platform capabilities, support and user accounts. As customers recognize the value of our platform, we increasingly engage with them to facilitate broad adoption across other parts of their business.
We believe having a scaled ecosystem gives us more opportunities to leverage our footprint and increase wallet share by providing more value to our clients through having what we believe is the most robust cannabis technology suite available. In order to accelerate customer growth, we intend to pursue additional initiatives, including increased marketing personnel and resources, acquisitions, and strategic relationships. We believe we are underpenetrated in the overall market and have significant opportunity to expand our customer base over time.
We have invested in professional services, customer support and customer success functions to support our sales force by helping customers successfully deploy our platform. We actively engage with our customers to assess whether they are satisfied and fully realizing the benefits of our platform. While these efforts often require a substantial commitment and upfront costs, we believe our investment in product, customer support, customer success and professional services will create opportunities to expand our customer relationships over time.
We plan to continue to make investments in areas of our business to continue to expand our platform functionality to enhance current offerings and build new features.
On April 1, 2021 and October 1, 2021, we completed our acquisitions of Viridian and 365 Cannabis which is reflected in the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. The impact of the acquisition is discussed in our results of operations below.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to our results determined in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles, or GAAP, we believe earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or EBITDA, and Adjusted EBITDA are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. Please see the heading Non-GAAP Financial Measures for additional discussion and a reconciliation of GAAP net loss to these non-GAAP measures.
Impact of COVID-19
In December 2019, COVID-19 was first reported. After ongoing assessment of the rapid spread, number of cases and countries affected, on March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization characterized COVID-19 as a pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant global economic uncertainty, impacted the business of our clients, impacted our consulting business and our results of operations and could further impact our results of operations, and our cash flows in the future.
The COVID-19 pandemic impacted our clients’ business and the industry. Nearly every state and country where medical and adult use cannabis was legal declared access essential, which we believe is a significant shift in sentiment. Our clients also have experienced increased consumer demand throughout the year, including during the pandemic. We believe COVID-19 has accelerated consolidation in the cannabis industry. At the peak of the crisis, cannabis companies lost on average 75% to 90% of their value, however, industry sales in 2021 increased 40% over 2020. As we move towards economic recovery from the pandemic, more state governments are looking to cannabis legalization to generate tax revenue and create jobs. During the November 2020 election, a total of 7 initiatives in 5 states passed with overwhelming majority support, showing increased bi-partisan support. These initiatives bring the total number of states with legal, medical markets to 36 and adult-use markets to 17, plus Washington, DC. Various additional states have pending legislation aimed at expanding or adding legalization to their markets. In terms of job creation, over 107,059 jobs were added to the cannabis workforce in 2021, raising the total number of full-time equivalent jobs in the industry to 428,059.
The ultimate extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration of the outbreak, the severity of the disease, responsive actions taken by public health officials, the impacts on our clients and our sales cycles, our ability to generate new business, the impacts on our clients, employee and industry events, and the effects on our vendors, all of which are uncertain and currently cannot be predicted. As a result, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our financial condition or results of operations is uncertain. Due to our subscription-based business model, the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods. If the COVID-19 pandemic has a substantial impact on our employees’, partners’ or clients’ productivity, our results of operations and overall financial performance may be harmed.
See the section entitled “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the impact and possible future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Strategic Acquisitions
We have pursued and expect to continue to pursue acquisitions that align with our strategic objectives to build relevant content, technology, and expertise to best serve our current and future customers. Accordingly, the comparability of periods covered by our consolidated financial statements are, and in the future may be, affected by the impact of these acquisitions.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from two primary sources: (1) software and (2) consulting services. Revenue from software comprised approximately 92%, 86% and 79% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, six months ended December 31, 2020, and year ended June 30, 2020, respectively. Revenue from consulting services comprised approximately 7%, 12% and 19% of our revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, six months ended December 31, 2020, and year ended June 30, 2020, respectively.
Software. Our software is solutioned for our key markets, SMB and enterprise customers. Our SMB customers become a natural funnel for our larger, more robust enterprise offerings built on SAP and Microsoft. In either market, software revenue is generated from subscriptions and services related to the use of our commercial software platforms, MJ Platform, Ample, Trellis, Viridian, and 365 Cannabis, our government regulatory platform, Leaf Data Systems, and the sale of business intelligence, data analytics and other software related services. Software contracts are generally quarterly or annual contracts paid monthly, quarterly, or annually in advance of service and cancellable upon 30 or 90 days’ notice, although we do have many multi-year commercial software contracts. Leaf Data Systems contracts are generally multi-year contracts payable annually or quarterly in advance of service. Commercial software and Leaf Data Systems contracts generally may only be terminated early for breach of contract as defined in the respective agreements. Amounts that have been invoiced are initially recorded as deferred revenue or contract liabilities. Subscription revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the service term of the arrangement beginning on the date that our solution is made available to the customer and ending at the expiration of the subscription term.
Consulting Services. Consulting services revenue is generated by providing solutions for operators in the pre-application of licensures and pre-operational phases of development. These services include application and business plan preparation as they seek licenses to be granted. Consulting projects completed during the pre-application phase generally solidify us as the software vendor of choice for subsequent operational phases once the operator is granted the license. As a result, our consulting revenue is driven as new emerging states pass legislation, and as our client-operators gain licenses. Accordingly, we expect our consulting services to grow over time as more states emerge with legalization reforms.
Other Revenue. Our other revenue is derived primarily from point-of-sale hardware and other non-recurring revenue.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Our cost of revenue is derived from direct costs associated with operating our commercial and government regulatory software platforms and providing consulting services. The cost of revenue for our commercial and government regulatory platforms relates primarily to hosting and infrastructure costs and subcontractor expenses incurred in connection with certain government contracts. Consulting cost of revenue relates primarily to our employees’ and consultants’ salaries and other related compensation expenses. We record the cost of revenue using the direct cost method. This method requires the allocation of direct costs including support services and materials to the cost of revenue.
Product Development Expenses
Our product development expenses include salaries and benefits, nearshore contractor expenses, technology expenses, and other overhead related to the ongoing maintenance of our commercial and government regulatory software platforms and planning for new software development. Product development costs, other than software development expenses qualifying for capitalization, are expensed as incurred. Capitalized software development costs consist primarily of employee-related costs. We devote substantial resources to enhancing and maintaining our technology infrastructure, developing new and enhancing existing solutions, conducting quality assurance testing, and improving our core technology.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expense is primarily salaries and related expenses, including commissions, for our sales, marketing, and client service staff. We also categorize payments to partners and marketing programs as sales and marketing expenses. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, such as trade shows, corporate communications, brand building, and product marketing activities. We plan to continue to invest in marketing and sales by expanding our domestic and international selling and marketing activities, building brand awareness, attracting new clients, and sponsoring additional marketing events. The timing of these marketing events will affect our marketing costs in a particular quarter.
We defer the portion of sales commissions that is considered a cost of obtaining a new contract with a customer in accordance with the revenue recognition standard and amortize these deferred costs over the period of benefit, currently one year. We expense the remaining sales commissions as incurred. The rates at which sales commissions are earned varies depending on a variety of factors, including the nature of the sale (new, renewal, or add-on service offering), the type of service or solution sold, and the sales channel.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses include salaries and benefits and other costs of departments serving administrative functions, such as executives, finance and accounting, human resources, public relations and investor relations. In addition, general and administrative expense includes non-personnel costs, such as professional fees and other supporting corporate expenses not allocated to cost of revenue, product and development or sales and marketing.
Total Other (Income) Expense, Net
Total other (income) expense, net consists of interest income on cash and cash equivalents, interest expense on our debt, quarterly remeasurement of the fair value of our convertible notes and derivative liability, foreign currency gains and losses, and other nonoperating gains and losses.
Results of Operations for the Year Ended December 31, 2021 (audited) compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2020 (unaudited)
The following table highlights the various sources of revenues and operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 (unaudited). The results for the year ended December 31, 2020 were derived by combining the audited six-month transition period ended December 31, 2020 with Akerna’s three-month period ended March 31, 2020 and three-month period ended June 30, 2020:
nm - percentage change not meaningful
Total Revenue
Total revenue increased to $20.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $13.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6.8 million, or 49%. The increase in total revenue was driven primarily by growth in our software business of $7.0 million, or 59% compared to the prior period. The growth in software was offset by a decline in consulting revenue of $0.2 million, or 13%, primarily a result of government shut-down related to COVID-19 as discussed below.
Software Revenue
Total software revenue increased to $19.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $12.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an increase of $7.0 million, or 59%. Software revenue related to our enterprise offering, Viridian and 365 Cannabis, during the year ended December 31, 2021, were $4.8 million compared to $0 in the prior year and software revenue related to our non-enterprise offerings, which include MJ Platform, Ample, Trellis, Solo, and Leaf Data Systems, for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $12.8 million compared to $11.6 million in the prior year. There was also in an increase in partnership and data revenue which was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.4 million for the same period in the prior year. Software revenue accounted for 92% and 86% of total revenue in 2021 and 2020, respectively. As indicated above, the increase in software revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to our acquisitions of Ample, Viridian, and 365 Cannabis.
Consulting Revenue
Consulting revenue includes revenue generated from consulting services delivered to prospective and current cannabis, hemp and CBD businesses and business operators. Our consulting revenue was $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.2 million, or 13%. Consulting revenue was 7% and 13% of total revenue for 2021 and 2020, respectively. Due to the nature of consulting revenue, our dependence on emerging market activity as well as the ongoing pandemic as a driver of demand, the percentage of consulting revenue over total revenue has varied from period to period depending on whether state legislation has expanded to allow new market entrants or growth of existing market participant operations.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes retail/resale revenue, which was generated from point-of-sale hardware. Other revenue was $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and was approximately 1% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased to $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an increase of $1.8 million, or 28%. Total cost of revenue increased primarily as a result of our acquisitions of Ample, Viridian, and 365 Cannabis, the specific drivers being an increase in hosting expenses by $1.6 million and fees for SAP and Microsoft licenses in the amount of $0.5 million. These increases from acquisitions were partially offset by net savings of $0.6 million in Leaf Data Systems contractor costs during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased to $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an increase of $5.0 million, or 67%. Gross margin increased to 61% for the year ended December 31, 2021 from 54% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This improvement in gross margin was primarily due to operating synergies realized from our acquired assets, our ongoing initiatives to drive operating effectiveness and acquiring additional B2B customers, which have a higher gross margin.
Operating Expenses
Product Development
Product development expense increased to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an increase of $1.2 million, or 22%. Product development expense increased primarily due the acquisitions of Ample, Viridian, and 365 Cannabis which resulted in a $1.4 million increase in salary-related expenses and a $0.3 million increase in stock compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were partially offset by savings on contractor expenses in the amount of $0.7 million.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased to $9.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for an increase of $1.0 million or 13%. The increase in sales and marketing expense is primarily related to the acquisitions of Ample, Viridian, and 365 Cannabis which resulted in an increase of $1.0 million in salary-related expenses and a $0.1 million increase in stock compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to year ended December 31, 2020. These increases were slightly offset by a reduction in external marketing consulting costs as we moved more of our marketing initiatives in house.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense decreased to $10.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, for a decrease of $0.6 million, or 5%. This decrease was primarily related to a reduction in acquisition-related expenses of $2.9 million, as we completed two acquisitions, Viridian and 365 Cannabis, during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to three acquisitions, Solo, Trellis, and Ample, during 2020. There was also a decrease of $0.6 million in rental expenses related to the termination of our office spaces in Denver in December 2020 and Toronto in June 2021, a decrease in financing fees of $0.9 million, and a decrease of $0.3 million in salary-related expenses as a direct result of cost-saving measures placed into service during 2020. Partially offsetting these decreases is a $1.9 million increase in restructuring charges during 2021 attributable to a lease settlement agreement for relinquishing office space in Toronto and the related write off of leasehold improvements associated with the lease termination, as well as an increase of $0.6 million for legal, audit, tax and other professional service fees as our business has continued to grow. We also had a $2.0 million change in fair value of contingent consideration during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to the 2020 acquisitions.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $3.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in amortization expense is entirely related to the acquired intangible assets from our acquisitions completed in calendar year 2021 and 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets
Due to a continued decline in market conditions and declines in the operating results of our non-enterprise reporting unit, we recorded an impairment charge of $14.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a $6.9 million impairment charges (see Note 6 - Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the impairments recorded).
Results of Operations for the Six Months Ended December 31, 2020 (audited) compared with the Six Months Ended December 31, 2019 (unaudited)
The following table highlights the various sources of revenues and operating expenses for the six months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the six months ended December 31, 2019:
nm - percentage change not meaningful
Total Revenue
Total revenue increased to $7.8 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $6.5 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, an increase of $1.3 million, or 20%. The increase in total revenue was driven primarily by growth in our software business of $2.0 million, or 41% compared to the prior period. The growth in software was offset by a decline in consulting revenue of $0.6 million, or 41%, primarily a result of government shut-down related to COVID-19 as discussed below.
Software Revenue
Total software revenue increased to $6.8 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $4.8 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, for an increase of $2.0 million, or 41%. Total software revenue increased $2.8 million primarily as a result of the acquisition of Ample, Trellis and Solo, offset by a decline in government revenue of $0.4 million, primarily as a result of these contracts maturing to a run-and-maintain mode, and a decline in other software revenue of $0.4 million. Total software revenue accounted for 86% and 74% of total revenue for the six months ended December 31, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Consulting Revenue
Consulting revenue includes revenue generated from consulting services delivered to prospective and current cannabis, hemp and CBD businesses and business operators. Our consulting revenue was $0.9 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 compared to $1.6 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, a decrease of $0.6 million, or 41%. This decrease is mainly due to the impact of COVID-19. Consulting services are also correlated to state legalizations and other regulatory expansion activity. As a result, individual year-over-year comparisons may experience variability depending on the timing of recent legislative changes. During the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting shut-down, state legislatures have turned their focus to the pandemic and tabled work on cannabis legislation, which resulted in delays in our providing consulting services during the six months ended December 31, 2020. However, many state ballot initiatives were passed in the November 2020 election that provides for new medical or adult-use marijuana. We expect, despite the slowing of our consulting activity experienced during the pandemic, we will see increased demand for our services following the November 2020 election. As a sign consulting revenue is starting to rebound from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, consulting revenue increased to $0.6 million for the three months ended December 31, 2020 from $0.3 million for the three months ended September 30, 2020, an increase of $0.3 million, or 100%.
Consulting revenue was 12% and 24% of total revenue for the six months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Due to the nature of consulting revenue and our dependence on emerging market activity as well as the ongoing pandemic as a driver of demand, the quarters in which we recognize consulting revenue has varied from year to year depending on whether state legislation has expanded to allow new market entrants or growth of existing market participant operations.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes retail/resale revenue, which was generated from point-of-sale hardware. Other revenue was $0.1 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 and $0.1 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019. Other revenue was 2.0% and 2% of total revenue for the six months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased to $3.1 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $3 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, for an increase of $0.1 million, or 5%. Total cost of revenue increased $0.4 million as a result of the acquisition of Ample, Trellis and Solo, offset by a decline in professional services costs of $0.3 million due to declining use of third-party consulting firms for our government solution as a result of these contracts maturing to a run-and-maintain mode.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased to $4.7 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $3.5 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, for an increase of $1.2 million, or 34%. Gross margin increased to 60% for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from 54% for the six months ended December 31, 2019. Total gross profit increased $2.6 million as a result of the acquisition of Ample, Trellis and Solo, offset by the decline in consulting revenue of $0.6 million, a decline government revenue of $0.4 million, primarily as a result of these contracts maturing to a run-and-maintain mode and a decline in other software revenue of $0.4 million.
Operating Expenses
Product Development
Product development expense increased to $3.2 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $1.2 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, for an increase of $1.9 million, or 156%. The increase was due primarily to $1.3 million in employee-related costs from higher headcount and other operating cost related to acquisitions. Stock compensation expense increased $0.4 million compared to the prior period. Software costs increased $0.3 million primarily a result of additional investment in information technology security and reporting tools and software hosting costs, including data infrastructure.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased to $3.9 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $3.7 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, for an increase of $0.2 million or 5%. Total sales and marketing expense increased $0.8 million as a result of the acquisition of Ample, Trellis and Solo, offset by a decline other sales and marketing expense of $0.6 million primarily a result of decreased travel costs and a reduction in customer event spend due primarily to cancelling all in-person customer activities and events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense decreased to $4.4 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $4.7 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019, for a decrease of $0.2 million, or 5%. Total general and administrative expense increased $0.6 million as a result of the acquisition of Ample, Trellis and Solo. Bad debt expense decreased $0.6 million during the six months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the six months ended December 31, 2019, due to our improvement in the overall quality of our revenue and client portfolio, and the enhancement of our sales and marketing team which has resulted in a steady decline in the number and amount of delinquent accounts. We recorded a benefit of $1.0 million to reflect the estimated fair value of contingent consideration paid for our acquisition of Trellis and Ample. During 2020, we vacated certain leased offices in the U.S. following the dislocation of our workforce because of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we recorded a restructuring charge of $0.4 million, which was recorded in general and administrative expenses. Stock compensation expenses increased $0.3 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to the six months ended December 31, 2019
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $2.0 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020 from $0.1 million for the six months ended December 31, 2019. Amortization expense increased entirely as a result of acquired intangible assets from our acquisitions completed in calendar 2020.
Impairment of long-lived assets
As a result of delays in executing on strategic initiatives related to acquisitions completed in calendar 2020 we recorded a $6.9 million impairment adjustment during the six months ended December 31, 2020. There were no similar charges during the six months ended December 31, 2019. A goodwill impairment charge of $4.2 million was recorded related to our Ample reporting unit and an intangible asset charge of $2.7 million was recorded for intangible assets acquired from our Solo transaction (see Note 6 - Goodwill and Intangible Assets, Net to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion on the impairments recorded).
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP.
Investors are cautioned that there are material limitations associated with the use of non-GAAP financial measures as an analytical tool. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison. We attempt to compensate for these limitations by providing specific information regarding the GAAP items excluded from these non-GAAP financial measures.
Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures with their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We believe that EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, when considered with the consolidated financial statements determined in accordance with GAAP, are helpful to investors in understanding our performance and allows for comparison of our performance and credit strength to our peers. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to net loss as determined in accordance with GAAP as indicators of our performance or liquidity.
We define EBITDA as net loss before interest income and expense, changes in fair value of convertible notes, changes in fair value of derivative liabilities, provision for income taxes, and depreciation and amortization. We calculate Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA further adjusted to exclude the effects of the following items for the reasons set forth below:
● impairment of long-lived assets, as this is a non-cash, non-recurring item, which effects the comparability of results of operations and liquidity;
●
stock-based compensation expense, as this represents a non-cash charge and our mix of cash and share-based compensation may differ from other companies, which effects the comparability of results of operations and liquidity;
● costs incurred in connection with business combinations and mergers that are required to be expensed as incurred in accordance with GAAP, because business combination and merger related costs are specific to the complexity and size of the underlying transactions as well as the frequency of our acquisition activity these costs are not reflective of our ongoing operations;
● costs incurred in connection with non-recurring financing, including fees incurred as a direct result of electing the fair value option to account for our debt instruments;
● restructuring charges, which include costs to terminate a lease and the related writeoff of leasehold improvements and furniture, as we believe these costs are not representative of operating performance;
● gain on forgiveness of PPP loan, as this is a one-time forgiveness of debt that is not recurring across all periods and we believe inclusion of the gain is not representative of operating performance;
●
equity in losses of investees because our share of the operations of investees is not representative of our own operating performance and may not be monetized for a number of years;
● and changes in the fair value of contingent consideration because these adjustments are not recurring across all periods and we believe these costs are not representative of operating performance.
● other non-operating expenses which includes a one-time gain on debt extinguishment and one-time loss on disposal of fixed assets, which effects the comparability of results of operations and liquidity;
The reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA is as follows:
Going Concern and Management's Liquidity Plans
In accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) standard on going concern, Accounting Standard Update, or ASU No. 2014-15, The Company assesses going concern uncertainty in its consolidated financial statements to determine if it has sufficient cash, cash equivalents and working capital on hand, including marketable equity securities, and any available borrowings on loans, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date the consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to The Company, it will consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, estimates and will make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and its ability to delay or curtail expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, The Company makes certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent The Company deems probable those implementations can be achieved and it has the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared on the basis that we will continue as a going concern, which contemplates realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. However, since our inception we have incurred recurring operating losses, used cash from operations, and relied on capital raising transactions to continue ongoing operations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, six months ended December 31, 2020, and year ended June 30, 2020, we incurred a loss from operations of $33.4 million, $15.7 million, and $17.3 million, respectively, and used cash in operations of $8.2 million, $8.7 million, and $14.3 million, respectively. At December 31, 2021, the Company had a working capital deficit of $10.9 million with $13.9 million in cash available to fund future operations. These factors raise substantial doubt, as defined by GAAP, about the ability of the Company to continue to operate as a going concern for the twelve months following the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. These consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
On July 23, 2021, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. and A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners ("ATM Program"). Pursuant to the terms of the ATM Program, we may offer and sell from time to time, up to $25 million of shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we have raised gross proceeds of $1.9 million through the issuance of 556,388 shares through the ATM program. While no assurance can be provided that we will be able to raise further capital under the program, we intend to use the net proceeds from the sale of our shares of common stock, if any, for general corporate purposes, including working capital, marketing, product development, capital expenditures and merger and acquisition activities.
On October 5, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement with the two institutional investors that held the Company's convertible notes issued in June of 2020 (the "2020 Notes") to sell senior secured notes in a private placement (the "Senior Convertible Notes"). The Senior Convertible Notes have an aggregate principal amount of $20 million, an aggregate original issue discount of 10%, and rank senior to all our other outstanding and future indebtedness. Approximately $3.3 million of the proceeds from the Senior Convertible Notes were used to payoff the 2020 Notes, which were then to be cancelled. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Senior Convertible Notes was approximately $14.6 million, following the original issue discount and deductions for expenses and paydown of the 2020 Notes. These net proceeds will be used to support Akerna's ongoing growth initiatives and continued investment in current and future technology infrastructure. The Senior Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of common stock of Akerna at a conversion price of $4.05 per share. The Senior Convertible Notes mature on October 5, 2024 and are to be repaid in monthly installments beginning on January 1, 2022. The Senior Convertible Notes can be repaid in common shares or cash.
Management’s plan for the Company to continue as a going concern includes raising additional capital from our ATM program, subject to certain effects on the Senior Convertible Notes should we utilize the program, including resetting the conversion price of the Senior Convertible Notes should we raise more than $5 million under the ATM program, settling our contingent consideration and Senior Convertible Notes in common stock rather than cash as it comes due, and implementing certain cost cutting strategies throughout the organization, while continuing to seek to grow our customer base and realize synergies as we continue to integrate our recent acquisitions. If the Company is unable to raise sufficient additional funds through the ATM Program, it will have to develop and implement a plan to extend payables, reduce expenditures, or scale back our business plan until sufficient additional capital is raised through other equity or debt offerings to support further operations. Such offerings may include the issuance of shares of common stock, warrants to purchase common stock, preferred stock, convertible debt or other instruments that may dilute our current stockholders.
The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to successfully accomplish the plans described in the preceding paragraph and eventually secure other sources of financing and attain profitable operations. We will require additional financing in the second quarter of 2022 to meet our ongoing operational working capital requirements and continue to meet the financial covenants of the Senior Convertible Notes. As noted above, we plan to meet those requirements in part through the use of our ATM Facility, but there are no guarantees that the ATM Facility will permit us to raise sufficient cash to meet our ongoing requirements. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for one year from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements. If we are unable to raise sufficient capital we may have to reduce operations which could significantly affect our results of operations. If we fail to meet the financial covenants of the Senior Convertible Notes and cannot obtain a waiver from such provisions or otherwise come to an agreement with the holders of our debt, such holders may declare a default on the debt which could subject our assets to seizure and sale, negatively impacting our business. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of assets and liabilities that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
Our corporate liquidity requirements primarily include payroll costs and corporate general and administrative expenses and our current sources of corporate liquidity include the cash on hand from our Senior Convertible Notes as well as the proceeds we anticipate from the access to our ATM Program.
Cash Flows
Our cash and restricted cash balance was $14.4 million and $18.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Cash flow information are as follows:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our customers for subscriptions to our products. Our primary uses of cash in operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, marketing expenses and third-party hosting costs. Net cash used in operating activities is impacted by our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expenses, change in fair value of convertible notes and derivative liabilities, stock-based compensation, deferred income taxes, as well as the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $8.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and $8.7 million during the six months ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash was consumed from operations by a net loss of $31.3 million, less non-cash items of $24.0 million and a net change in assets and liabilities of $0.8 million. For the six months ended December 31, 2020, cash was consumed from operations by a net loss of $16.2 million, less non-cash items of $9.7 million and a net change in assets and liabilities of $2.2 million.
Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of capitalization of internal-use software necessary to deliver significant new features and functionality in our platform which provides value to our customers. As our business grows, we expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase. Other investing activities include cash outflows related to purchases of property and equipment, and from time-to-time, the cash paid for asset and business acquisitions.
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $10.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of net cash paid as consideration for the 365 Cannabis acquisition and amounts invested in the development of our software products. Net cash used by investing activities during the six months ended December 31, 2020 was $7.1 million as a result of amounts invested in the development of our software products and the net cash paid as consideration for the acquisition of Ample.
Financing Activities
Our financing activities have consisted primarily of proceeds from issuance of our common stock, issuances of convertible debt and proceeds from the exercise of warrants.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $14.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 and represents cash proceeds of $18.0 million from the issuance of convertible debt in October 2021, proceeds from our ATM program in the amount of $1.8 million partially offset by the value of shares withhold for tax withholdings and payments on our convertible debt in the amount of $0.5 million and $4.6 million, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities was $9.5 million for the six months ended December 31, 2020, of which $12 million was related to the common stock offering that closed on October 30, 2020, partially offset by $1.5 million in payments on our financing obligations and $1.0 million of offering costs from issuing common stock.
ATM Program
On July 23, 2021, we entered into an Equity Distribution Agreement with Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. and A.G.P./Alliance Global Partners (the "ATM Program"). Pursuant to the terms of the Agreement, we may offer and sell from time to time, up to $25 million of shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we have raised gross proceeds of $1.9 million through the issuance of 556,388 shares through the ATM program.
Senior Secured Convertible Notes Issuance
On October 5, 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement ("SPA") with the two institutional investors that held the Company's convertible notes issued on June 8, 2020 (the "2020 Notes") to sell a new series of senior secured notes in a private placement (the "Senior Convertible Notes"). The Senior Convertible Notes have an aggregate principal amount of $20,000,000, an aggregate original issue discount of 10%, and rank senior to all our other outstanding and future indebtedness. Approximately $3.3 million of the proceeds from the Senior Convertible Notes were used to payoff the 2020 Notes, which were then to be cancelled. The net proceeds from the issuance of the Senior Convertible Notes was approximately $14.6 million, following the original issue discount and deductions for expenses and paydown of the 2020 Notes. These net proceeds will be used to support Akerna's ongoing growth initiatives and continued investment in current and future technology infrastructure. The Senior Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of common stock of Akerna at a conversion price of $4.05 per share. The Senior Convertible Notes can be repaid in common shares or cash.
Maturity and Repayment Dates
The Senior Convertible Notes mature on October 5, 2024, or the Maturity Date. The principal amount is payable in monthly installments beginning on January 1, 2022. Unless deferred by the holder, on installment dates from January 1, 2022 through, and including, June 1, 2023, $1.1 million in principal amount will be payable and on installment date July 1, 2023, $0.2 million in principal amount will be payable. With respect to installment dates from August 1, 2023 through and including the maturity date of October 5, 2024, any deferred payments from prior installment dates will be payable. We may not prepay any portion of the principal amount nor interest, if any.
Interest
The Senior Convertible Notes are being sold with an original issue discount and do not bear interest except upon the occurrence of an Event of Default (described below), in which event the applicable rate will be 15.0% per annum.
Conversion
The Senior Convertible Notes are convertible at any time in whole or in part, at the option of the Note Holders, into shares of the common stock at a rate equal to the amount of principal, interest (if any) and unpaid late charges (if any), divided by a conversion price of $4.05, or the Conversion Price. The Conversion Price is subject to standard adjustments in the event of any stock split, stock dividend, stock combination, recapitalization or other similar transaction.
In connection with the occurrence of Events of Default, the Note Holders will be entitled to convert all or any portion of the Senior Convertible Notes at an alternate conversion price equal to the lower of (i) the conversion price then in effect, and (ii) 80% of the lower of (x) the volume-weighted average price, or VWAP, of the common stock as of the trading day immediately preceding the applicable date of determination and (y) the quotient of (A) the sum of the VWAP of the common stock for each of the two trading days with the lowest VWAP of the common stock during the ten consecutive trading day period ending on and including the trading day immediately prior to the applicable date of determination, divided by (B) two, but not less than the floor price of $0.54.
Events of Default
The Senior Convertible Notes are subject to certain customary events of default, see Item 1A. “Risk Factors - Risks Related to our Convertible Debt” for a short discussion of events of default under the Senior Convertible Notes.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations would be affected. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our estimates are based on historical experience and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates.
Critical accounting policies and estimates are those that we consider critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management's judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue through the sale of our cloud-based software and the delivery of consulting services. Revenues are recognized when control of these services is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. We determine revenue recognition through the following steps:
· Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer
· Identification of the performance obligations in the contract
· Determination of the transaction price
· Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract
· Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation
We recognize subscription on a ratable basis over the contract term beginning on the date that our service is made available to the customer. Our subscription contracts range from twelve months to thirty-six months in duration, are billed in advance and are non-cancelable. We consider the access to our platform and related support services in a customer contract to be a series of distinct services which comprise a single performance obligation because they are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether transfer of control to customers has occurred. We record contract liabilities to deferred revenue when cash payments are received or due. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of customer billings.
Consulting revenue contracts have an initial set of proprietary deliverables that are provided to clients upfront, which is considered a separate performance obligation. As such, 30% of the contract value is recognized upfront when deliverables are provided, with the remaining recognized over the life of the contract as the consulting services are performed.
Capitalized Software Development Costs
We capitalize software development costs incurred to develop functionality for our commercial software platforms and government regulatory software platform, as well as certain upgrades and enhancements that are expected to result in enhanced functionality. These costs include personnel and related expenses for employees, costs of third-party contractors and other services directly associated with the development projects. We capitalize certain software development costs for new offerings as well as upgrades to our existing software platforms. We amortize these development costs over the estimated useful life of two to five years on a straight-line basis. We believe there are two key estimates within the capitalized software balance, which are the determination of the amounts to be capitalized and the determination of the useful life of the software.
We determine the amount of software development costs to be capitalized based on the amount of time spent by our developers on projects in the application stage of development. Costs associated with building or significantly enhancing our commercial software platform and our government regulatory platform are capitalized, while costs associated with planning new developments and maintaining our software platforms are expensed as incurred. There is judgment involved in estimating the time allocated to a particular project in the application stage as well as the determination of whether the project is an enhancement to the existing software or maintenance thereof. A significant change in the time spent on each project or the determination of the nature of projects involving existing software platforms could have a material impact on the amount capitalized and related amortization expense in subsequent periods.
We determined that a two-to-five-year life is appropriate for our capitalized software based on our best estimate of the useful life of the software after considering factors such as continuous developments in the technology, obsolescence and anticipated life of the service offering before significant upgrades. Based on our prior experience, software will generally remain in use for a minimum of two to five years before being significantly replaced or modified to keep up with evolving client needs. While we do not anticipate any significant changes to this two-to-five-year estimate, a change in this estimate could produce a material impact on our consolidated financial statements. For example, if we received information that indicated the useful life of all software was one year rather than two to five, our capitalized software balance would materially decrease, and our expense would materially increase.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation for all employee and non-employee stock-based awards, including restricted stock units and restricted stock, is measured at fair value on the date of grant and recognized over the service period. The fair value of restricted stock units and restricted stock are calculated based on the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant.
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized over the requisite service periods of awards, which is typically one to four years for restricted stock units and restricted stock. The estimated forfeiture rate applied to employee awards is based on historical forfeiture rates. The estimated number of stock-based awards that will ultimately vest requires judgment, and to the extent actual results, or updated estimates, differ from our current estimates, such amounts will be recorded as a cumulative adjustment in the period actual results are realized or estimates are revised. A higher forfeiture rate will result in an adjustment that will decrease stock-based compensation expense, whereas a lower forfeiture rate will result in an adjustment that will increase stock-based compensation expense. We do not apply a forfeiture rate assumption to value non-employee awards, given the nature of the services provided.
Business Combinations
We account for business acquisitions using the purchase method of accounting, in accordance with which assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective fair values at the acquisition date. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed.
Significant judgment is used in determining fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as intangible assets and their estimated useful lives. Fair value and useful life determinations are based on, among other factors, estimates of future expected cash flows attributable to the acquired intangible assets and appropriate discount rates used in computing present values. Management applied significant judgement in estimating the fair value of the acquired developed technology intangible asset, which involved significant estimates and assumptions with respect to forecasted revenue growth rates, the revenue attributable to the acquired intangible asset over its estimated economic life and the discount rate. These judgments may materially impact the estimates used in allocating the purchase price consideration to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, as well as our current and future operating results. Actual results may vary from these estimates that may result in adjustments to goodwill and acquisition date fair values of assets and liabilities during a measurement period or upon a final determination of asset and liability fair values, whichever occurs first. Adjustments to the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed made after the end of the measurement period are recorded within our operating results.
Contingent Consideration Liabilities
ASC 805 requires that contingent consideration be estimated and recorded at fair value as of the acquisition date as part of the total consideration transferred. Contingent consideration is an obligation of the acquirer to transfer additional assets or equity interests to the selling shareholders in the future if certain future events occur or conditions are met, such as the attainment of product development milestones. Contingent consideration also includes additional future payments to selling shareholders based on achievement of components of earnings, such as “earn-out” provisions or percentage of future revenues, including royalties paid to the selling shareholders based on a percentage of revenues generated from CHI and Sera Labs over the contractual period.
The fair value of milestone-based contingent consideration was determined using a scenario analysis valuation method which incorporates our assumptions with respect to the likelihood of achievement of revenue and gross margin percentage milestones, as defined in the Sera Labs Merger Agreement, credit risk, timing of the contingent consideration payments and a risk-adjusted discount rate to estimate the present value of the expected payments, all of which require significant management judgment and assumptions. Since the contingent consideration payments are based on nonfinancial, binary events, management believes the use of the scenario analysis method is appropriate.
The fair value of all contingent consideration after the Sera Labs Merger Date is reassessed by us as changes in circumstances and conditions occur, with the subsequent change in fair value recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. Changes in key assumptions can materially affect the estimated fair value of contingent consideration liabilities and, accordingly, the resulting gain or loss that we record in our consolidated financial statements. See Note 17 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Report.
Impairment of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not amortized but rather tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill may be impaired. Goodwill impairment is recognized when the carrying value of goodwill exceeds our implied fair value. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually on October 31, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable.
Acquisition intangible assets consist primarily of technology, customer relationships and trade names. Purchased intangible assets are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition and amortized over their estimated useful lives following the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets will be consumed, generally straight-line. We continually evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful life of amortizable long-lived assets may warrant revision or that the remaining balance may not be recoverable. When factors indicate that acquisition intangible assets should be evaluated for possible impairment, we use an estimate of the related undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining life of the amortizable long-lived assets in measuring whether they are recoverable. if the estimated undiscounted future cash flows do not exceed the carrying value of the asset, a loss is recorded as the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value.
Determining if an impairment triggering event has occurred (which may include, but is not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate or a significant decrease in expected cash flows) requires significant management judgement.
Senior Convertible Notes
We determined at the issuance of our Senior Convertible Notes to elect the fair value option. At issuance, the carrying value of the Senior Convertible Notes was recorded at estimated fair value calculated using probability weighted valuations of various settlement scenarios. The valuations of the various settlement outcomes were calculated using Monte Carlo simulation models and discounted cash flow models. We remeasure the Senior Convertible Notes to estimated fair value on each reporting period using valuation techniques similar to those applied at issuance. The change in the fair value resulting from changes in instrument specific credit risk is recognized as other comprehensive income with the remainder of the change recognized in current earnings. We believe key estimates used in accounting for the Senior Convertible Notes are the fair value at the reporting period end as well as the determination of the portion of the change resulting from instrument specific credit risk, including assumptions regarding the probability of various outcomes and the volatility of Akerna's common stock. A significant change in the probability weighting or the volatility could have a material impact to the carrying value of the Senior Convertible Notes as well as the amount of change recognized during the period in earnings.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and the tax basis of other assets and liabilities. We provide for income taxes at the current and future enacted tax rates and laws applicable in each taxing jurisdiction. We use a two-step approach for recognizing and measuring tax benefits taken or expected to be taken in a tax return and disclosures regarding uncertainties in income tax positions. We recognize interest and penalties related to income tax matters in selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that its assets are more likely than not to be realized. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If we determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future in excess of its net recorded amount, we will make an adjustment to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
Going Concern Assessment
With the implementation of FASB’s standard on going concern, ASU No. 2014-15, we assess going concern uncertainty in our consolidated financial statements to determine if we have sufficient cash and cash equivalents on hand and working capital, including available loans or lines of credit, if any, to operate for a period of at least one year from the date our consolidated financial statements are issued, which is referred to as the “look-forward period” as defined by ASU No. 2014-15. As part of this assessment, based on conditions that are known and reasonably knowable to us, we consider various scenarios, forecasts, projections, and estimates, and we make certain key assumptions, including the timing and nature of projected cash expenditures or programs, and our ability to delay or curtail those expenditures or programs, if necessary, among other factors. Based on this assessment, as necessary or applicable, we make certain assumptions around implementing curtailments or delays in the nature and timing of programs and expenditures to the extent we deem probable those implementations can be achieved and we have the proper authority to execute them within the look-forward period in accordance with ASU No. 2014-15.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 - “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements for our discussion about new accounting pronouncements adopted and those pending.