ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes and the other financial information that are included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations, and intentions. Forward-looking statements are statements not based on historical information and which relate to future operations, strategies, financial results, or other developments. Forward-looking statements are based upon estimates, forecasts, and assumptions that are inherently subject to significant business, economic, and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control and many of which, with respect to future business decisions, are subject to change. These uncertainties and contingencies can affect actual results and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us, or on our behalf. We disclaim any obligation to update forward-looking statements. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those set forth under the “Risk Factors,” “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and “Description of Business” sections in this Annual Report. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. We and our representatives may from time to time make written or oral statements that are “forward-looking,” including statements contained in this Annual Report and other filings with the SEC, reports to our stockholders, and news releases. All statements that express expectations, estimates, forecasts, or projections are forward-looking statements. In addition, other written or oral statements which constitute forward-looking statements may be made by us or on our behalf. Words such as “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “plan,” “believe,” “seek,” “estimate,” “project,” “forecast,” “may,” “should,” variations of such words and similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. These statements are not guarantees of future performance and involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions, which are difficult to predict. Therefore, actual outcomes and results may differ materially from what is expressed or forecasted in or suggested by such forward-looking statements.
We undertake no obligation to update or revise any of the forward-looking statements after the date of this Annual Reports to confirm forward-looking statements to actual results. Important factors on which such statements are based are assumptions concerning uncertainties, including, but not limited to, uncertainties associated with the following:
● Inadequate capital and barriers to raising the additional capital or to obtaining the financing needed to implement our business plans;
● Our failure to earn revenues or profits;
● Volatility or decline of our stock price;
● Potential fluctuation in our financial results;
● Rapid and significant changes in markets;
● Litigation with or legal claims and allegations by outside parties;
● Impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic; and
● Insufficient revenues to cover operating costs.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto which are included in this Annual Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. Our actual results may differ substantially from those anticipated in any forward-looking statements included in this discussion as a result of various factors.
Results of Operations
Overview
Our business has grown rapidly since inception in 2015, and we anticipate that our business will continue to grow significantly. In the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company saw an increase in growth compared to fiscal year 2020, as distribution by our current distributors and new distributors, who were, and whose clients were, affected by COVID-19 had resumed and saw fewer COVID-19 pandemic-related distribution impacts. The Company acquired S and S in early 2021, which increased our product variety, resulting in the commencement of new distribution contracts. In the prior fiscal year 2020, the Company had unforeseen delays in signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors and grocery chains and we were additionally impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic during the fiscal year. The COVID-19 pandemic delayed our launch of a variety of new products during most of the 2020 fiscal year - drinks and non-drink line broadening items.
We derive our revenue from sales of our products to online consumers, to resellers, and to distributors, Product sales to resellers include sales to convenience stores, grocery stores, and smoke and gift shops that complement our current product offering. Product sales to distributors include our energy drinks, our HighDrate CBD-infused energy waters, and our apparel, such as t-shirts and hats. In early 2021, we broadened our product line to include Ooh La Lemin lemonade. We also distribute our products and other companies’ products at retail. In late 2021, we expanded our distribution operations with the addition of a second distribution center.
We have experienced and expect to continue to experience substantial growth in our operations as we seek to expand through additional products and acquisitions that complement our current product offerings. We expect that revenue will increase in fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021, as distribution by our current distributors, who were, and whose clients were, affected by COVID-19 has resumed and we expect to see fewer COVID-19 pandemic-related distribution impacts for fiscal year 2022. Based on those expectations, we now anticipate signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors, big box stores, and grocery chains. The following is a more detailed discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the period presented.
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year ended December 31, 2020
Overview
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of approximately $7.0 million and used cash in operations of approximately $2.7 million, compared to a net loss of approximately $3.1 million and use of cash in operations of approximately $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had a stockholders’ deficit of approximately $4.1 million.
The following is a more detailed discussion of our financial condition and results of operations for the period presented, along with prior periods.
Revenue
The following table presents our net revenues, by revenue source, and the period-over-period percentage change, for the period presented:
The following table presents our revenues by product lines for the period presented:
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported net revenues of approximately $2.5 million, which is an increase of approximately $1.6 million, or approximately 172%, compared to net revenues of approximately $910,200 for the year ended December 31, 2020. An increase of approximately $536,300 of our revenue is attributable to increased product sales, while our retail revenue increased in net revenue by approximately $1.1 million. We attribute the increase in sales of our products to our current distributors and new distributors, who had been, and whose clients had been, affected by COVID-19. We saw that those distributors had resumed a more normalized business practice and we and they saw fewer COVID-19 pandemic-related distribution impacts. Additionally, we broadened our product line to include Ooh La Lemin lemonade through an acquisition in early 2021, which resulted in signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors and grocery chains. The significant increase in our retail revenue is attributed to customers, who had been, and whose clients had been, affected by COVID-19. We also saw here that retail sales and distribution had resumed a more normalized practice and we and they saw fewer COVID-19 pandemic-related impacts. Additionally, the Company attributes the increase to our retail revenue to an increase in the Company’s sales team and the addition of a second distribution hub. We expect that our product revenue will increase in fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021, we anticipate as the Company anticipates signing more favorable agreements with larger, reputable tier 1 and mid-size distributors, big box stores, and grocery chains. In addition, we anticipate that our retail revenue will continue to increase as we broaden our customer base with increased distribution to additional grocery and convenience chains.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of expenses associated with products sold to distributors and resellers, including product and shipping costs. Costs also include credit card fees, fees incurred for sales that occur on Amazon.com, and other transaction fees related to the processing of consumer transactions. Typically, we expect that the cost of revenues will increase as a direct correlation to increases in sales. Thus, our cost of revenues increases on an absolute basis versus on a percentage of sales basis. At the same time, when sales increase, thereby increasing our orders with our co-packers, our cost of products decreases because of the volume discounts we receive from our co-packers.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported cost of revenues of approximately $2.14 million, which is an increase of approximately $1.5 million, or approximately 228%, compared to approximately $654,200 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is attributed to an increase in sales in both our products and retail distribution in 2021, compared to the prior year period. The cost of revenues increase was larger than the increase in revenues. This is primarily attributed to increased costs in obtaining our ingredients for our products, for production of our products, and for shipping our products. We expect that we will continue, to see an increased cost of revenues in fiscal year 2022, primarily due to an anticipated increase in revenues. In addition, as the cost of shipping our products continues to remain elevated, we also anticipate increased costs for obtaining our ingredients for our products, increased costs for production of our products, and increased costs of shipping our products. We continue to seek alternative methods to reduce costs for production and the cost of shipping our products in fiscal year 2022.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of professional fees, salaries and wages, advertising, rent, travel expenses, sponsorships, and general office and administrative expenses related to maintaining our facilities.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of professional fees, salaries and wages, advertising, rent, travel expenses, sponsorships, and general office and administrative expenses related to maintaining our facilities. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased in the year ended December 31, 2021, to $3.4 million from $2.6 million, an increase of $769,055 over the same period last year. The increase was driven by increased operating expenses associated with our acquisition of S&S, advertising and marketing, travel expenses, and licensing and filing fees, partially offset by lower legal settlements and stock compensation. We expect that as we expand our business operations, SG&A expenses will continue to increase.
We expect that as we expand our business operations and continue to incur additional corporate-related expenses associated with our status as a fully registered issuer with the SEC under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, SG&A expenses will continue to increase.
Impairment of Goodwill
Impairment of goodwill for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.3 million. In December 2021, we determined that our goodwill asset was impaired and recorded an impairment charge accordingly. (See Note 5 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements). No similar activity occurred during the current year period.
Other Income and Expenses
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.6 million, as compared to other expense of $766,821 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in balance was due to the recording of financing costs of $1,335,000, a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1,056,732, offset by a gain on forgiveness of PPP loans of $212,648 during the year ended December 31, 2021, all of which did not exist in the prior year period. Additionally, we realized the change in the fair value of derivative liability of $910,866, and the change in interest expense of $563,419, as compared to the prior year period.
Net Loss
We incurred a net loss of approximately $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of approximately $3.9 million compared to the previous year ending December 31, 2020, in which we incurred a net loss of approximately $3.1 million. This net loss is primarily due to our increase in gross profit, offset by increased SG&A expenses, the impairment of goodwill charge associated with our 2021 acquisition, and the increase in other expenses, as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Going Concern
We have incurred operating losses since inception and have negative cash flow from operations since inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had a stockholders’ deficit of approximately $4.1 million and we incurred a net loss of approximately $7.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. We also utilized cash in operations of approximately $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. As a result, our continuation as a going concern is dependent on our ability to obtain additional financing until we can generate sufficient cash flow from operations to meet our obligations. We intend to continue to seek additional debt or equity financing to continue our operations.
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared on a going concern basis, which implies we may not continue to meet our obligations and continue our operations for the next fiscal year. The continuation of our Company as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to obtain necessary debt or equity financing to continue operations until we begin generating positive cash flow.
There is no assurance that we will ever be profitable or that debt or equity financing will be available to us in the amounts, on terms, and at times deemed acceptable to us, if at all. The issuance of additional equity securities by us would result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. Obtaining commercial loans, assuming those loans would be available, would increase our liabilities and future cash commitments. If we are unable to obtain financing in the amounts and on terms deemed acceptable to us, we may be unable to continue our business, as planned, and as a result may be required to scale back or cease operations for our business, the result of which would be that our stockholders would lose some or all of their investment. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classifications of liabilities that may result should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Line of Credit
On May 5, 2018, Kona entered into a Line of Credit Agreement with Matthew Nicoletti as the lender, which established a revolving line of credit in the amount of up to $400,000. The line of credit matures on May 5, 2022 and is reflected as non-current on the accompanying Consolidated Balance Sheets. Advances under the line of credit bear interest at the rate of 3.75 percent per annum. Payments of principal and accrued interest are payable on the maturity date. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the line of credit had an outstanding principal balance of $0 and $398,470, respectively, and accrued interest of $0 and $32,102, respectively.
Line of Credit - Related Party
Line of credit with related party consists of the following at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(a) On April 4, 2019, Kona entered into a Line of Credit Agreement with Robert Clark. The agreement established a revolving line of credit in the amount of up to $1,500,000. Advances under this line of credit bear interest at the rate of 3.75 percent per annum. The line of credit matures on April 4, 2023, at which time all outstanding principal amounts and accrued interest are due and payable. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, outstanding principal was $1,352,651 and $1,369,651, respectively.
(b) On August 29, 2019, Gold Leaf entered into a Line of Credit Agreement with Robert Clark. The agreement established a revolving line of credit in the amount of up to $200,000. Advances under this line of credit bear interest at the rate of 3.75 percent per annum. The line of credit matures on August 29, 2022, at which time all outstanding principal amounts and accrued interest are due and payable. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, outstanding principal was $125,500 and $125,500, respectively.
At December 31, 2020, accrued interest on the notes payable to related parties was $39,942. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company added $55,930 of additional accrued interest, leaving an accrued interest on the notes payable to related parties balance of $95,873 at December 31, 2021.
Loan Payable
On August 21, 2021, the Company financed the purchase of a vehicle for $34,762, after making a down payment of $20,000. The loan term is for 60 months, annual interest rate of 5.44%, with monthly principal and interest payments of $1,994, and secured by the purchased vehicle. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, the Company made principal payments of $1,450, leaving a loan balance of $33,312 at December 31, 2021, of which $7,974 was recorded as the current portion of loan payable on the accompanying balance sheet.
Notes Payable - Related Party
Notes payable to related parties consists of the following at December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(a) On October 31, 2018, Kona Gold LLC issued a Standard Promissory Note in favor of Robert Clark, as lender, in the original principal amount of $20,000. Mr. Clark is the Company’s President, Chief Executive Officer, Secretary, and Chairman of the Board. The note bears no interest. Principal payments of $500 per month commenced in February 2019, with the final payment due in April 2021. At December 31, 2020 the balance of this note was $8,500. At December 31, 2021, this note had been paid in full.
(b) On February 19, 2019, Gold Leaf issued a Standard Promissory Note in favor of Robert Clark, as lender, in the original principal amount of $70,000. The note bears no interest. Principal payments of $500 per month commenced in March 2019, with final payment due in March 2021. On March 15, 2021, Gold Leaf issued an Amendment to the original issued Standard Promissory Note in Favor of Robert Clark for the remaining outstanding principle of $58,000. Principal payment of $500 per month, with final payment due in March 2022. The outstanding principal balance of this note at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 was $53,500 and $59,500, respectively.
Convertible Secured Debentures
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued secured debentures to an otherwise unaffiliated third-party investor (the “Selling Stockholder”) in the aggregate of $4,500,000. The debentures are secured by all tangible and intangible assets of the Company and are also convertible into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $0.03 per share or a per share amount equivalent to the weighted average (among the principal of the debentures) of 76.7% of the lowest VWAP of the Company’s common stock during the 15 trading days immediately preceding the conversion date, whichever is lower. As the ultimate determination of shares to be issued upon conversion of these debentures can exceed the current number of available authorized shares, we determined that the conversion features of these convertible debentures are not considered indexed to our Company’s own capital stock and characterized the fair value of the conversion features as derivative liability. In connection with the issuances of the debentures, we granted to the Selling Stockholder warrants to purchase up to 150 million shares of our common stock. The warrants are exercisable at $0.03 per share. Fifty million o f the warrants will expire on February 10, 2024 and 100,000,0000 of the warrants will expire on August 20, 2024. As a result of these issuances and grants, we incurred the following (a) derivative liability of $3,982,000 to related to the conversion feature of the debentures; (b) relative fair value of the warrants granted of $1,581,000; and (c) and original issue discounts of $195,000 of the debentures for a total of $5,758,000, of which, $4,423,000 was accounted as debt discount and the remaining $1,335,000 as financing costs. The debt discount is being amortized to interest expense over the term of the corresponding debentures. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we amortized debt discount of $775,000 to interest expense.
Secured Debenture
On March 25, 2022, we issued a secured debenture in the principal amount of $250,000, which matures on March 24, 2023, and bears interest at the rate of 0.97 percent per annum. The debenture is secured by 9 identified motor vehicles of Gold Leaf.
Cash Flows
In summary, our use of cash has been as follows:
Operating Activities
Cash provided by or used in operating activities primarily consists of net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, interest expense related to the Warrant issued in the Private Placement, and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities. Cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $2.7 million and consisted of a net loss of approximately $7.0 million, adjustments for non-cash items, including adjustments related to the issuance of shares of our Common Stock for services, financing costs related to the convertible debt, amortization of debt discount, impairment of goodwill, loss on extinguishment of debt, gain on change in fair value of derivative liabilities, gain on the extinguishment of PPP loan, and depreciation, which in the aggregate total approximately $4,455,363, and approximately $165,822 used in working capital and other activities.
Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $198,382 and was attributable to capital expenditures and changes in intellectual property.
Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $3.5 million and was due to changes in convertible debt of approximately $4.3 million, changes in PPP note payable of $117,487, and changes in note payable for acquisition of approximately $463,932, and approximately $415,470 was used to pay lines of credit, approximately $7,499 was used to pay finance lease obligations, and approximately $15,951 was used to pay note payables.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of results of operations and financial condition are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis, including those related to provisions for uncollectible accounts receivable, inventories, valuation of intangible assets, and contingencies and litigation. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The accounting policies that we follow are set forth in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021. These accounting policies conform to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, and have been consistently applied in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Leases
On January 1, 2019, we adopted the Financial Accounting Standards Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842) (“ASC Topic 842”), which requires an entity to recognize a liability and corresponding asset for leases that meet certain criteria. We applied ASC Topic 842 using the modified retrospective approach. Under this approach, we applied the new standards to all new leases, and leases which have remaining obligations for financial statements issued for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018. We elected the package of practical expedients permitted under the transition guidance, which allowed us to carryforward historical lease classification, and not reassess (i) whether a contract was or contained a lease, and (ii) initial direct costs for any leases that existed prior to January 1, 2019. Under this method, we did not restate comparative periods in our financial statements. We present right-of-use assets resulting from leases separately from other assets as noncurrent, and amortized accordingly. The corresponding lease liabilities are presented separately from other liabilities on the accompanying balance sheets.
We recognize a right-of-use asset and a lease liability at the lease commencement date. The right-of-use asset is initially measured at cost, which comprises the initial amount of the lease liability adjusted for any lease payments made at or before the commencement date, plus any initial direct costs incurred. The amortization period for the right-of-use asset is from the lease commencement date to the earlier of the end of the lease term or the end of the useful life of the asset.
The lease liability is initially measured at the present value of the lease payments that are not paid at the commencement date, discounted using the interest rate implicit in the lease or, if that rate cannot be readily determined, the incremental borrowing rate or the risk-free rate with the election of the practical expedient. We have elected to use the risk-free rate.
Please refer to Note 14, Lease Liabilities, to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 for additional information related to our right-of-use assets and lease liabilities.
Revenue Recognition and Deferred Revenue
We sell our products, which includes our hemp energy drink, CBD energy water, CBD water, and logo apparel, to online customers or through resellers and distributors. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to customers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. We recognize revenue from product sales to customers, distributors, and resellers when products that do not require further services by us are shipped, when there are no uncertainties surrounding customer acceptance, and when collectability is reasonably assured. Sales are made to customers under terms allowing certain limited rights of return. Amounts billed to customers in sales transactions related to shipping and handling, represent revenues earned for the goods provided and are included in net sales. Costs of shipping and handling are included in cost of products sold.
We also sell our products, and beverages purchased for resale from several other beverage manufacturers, to convenience stores, grocery stores, and smoke and gift shops. In evaluating the timing of the transfer of control of products to customers, we consider several indicators, including significant risks and rewards of products, our right to payment, and the legal title of the products. We recognize revenue from product sales to resellers when products that do not require further services by us are shipped or delivered, when there are no uncertainties surrounding customer acceptance and when collectability is reasonably assured. Cash received by us prior to shipment is recorded as deferred revenue. Sales are made to customers under terms allowing certain limited rights of return. Amounts billed to customers in sales transactions related to shipping and handling, represent revenues earned for the goods provided and are included in net sales. Costs of shipping and handling are included in cost of products sold.
On January 1, 2019, we adopted ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) (“ASC Topic 606”). The underlying principle of ASC Topic 606 is to recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to a customer at the amount expected to be collected. The implementation of Topic ASC 606 had no impact on the prior period financial statements and no cumulative effect adjustment was recognized.
To apply these principles, ASC Topic 606 outlines a five-step model that requires entities to exercise judgment when considering the terms of contract(s), which includes:
1. Identifying the contract(s) or agreement(s) with a customer;
2. Identifying the separate performance obligations in the contract or agreement;
3. Determining the transaction price;
4. Allocating the transaction price to the separate performance obligations in the contract or agreement; and
5. Recognizing revenue as each performance obligation is satisfied.
Pursuant to ASC Topic 606, we recognize revenue when performance obligations under the terms of a contract are satisfied, which occurs typically upon the transfer of control, including the risks and rewards of ownership. With respect to us, performance is deemed to occur upon shipment or delivery of products to our customers based on the written contract terms, which is also when control is transferred.
During the year, the Company consolidated and restructured its operations. The Company now operates in one segment for the manufacture and distribution of our products and those of otherwise unrelated beverage products. In accordance with the “Segment Reporting” Topic of the ASC, the Company’s chief operating decision maker has been identified as the Chief Executive Officer and President, who reviews operating results to make decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance for the entire Company. Existing guidance, which is based on a management approach to segment reporting, establishes requirements to report selected segment information quarterly and to report annually entity-wide disclosures about products and services, major customers, and the countries in which the entity holds material assets and reports revenue. All material operating units qualify for aggregation under “Segment Reporting” due to their similar customer base and similarities in: economic characteristics; nature of products and services; and procurement, manufacturing and distribution processes. Since the Company operates in one segment, all financial information required by “Segment Reporting” can be found in the accompanying financial statements.
Our revenue earned is recognized when we satisfy a single performance obligation by transferring control of our products to a customer. We have determined that disaggregated revenue by net sales by revenue source would be meaningful and allow investors to understand our business activities, historical performance, or future prospects. Disaggregated sales by revenue source, which includes sales to distributors, online sales, sales through Amazon, and distribution sales. This is the same information used by our Chief Operating Decision Maker for evaluating the financial performance of our operations and making resource decisions. We also sell merchandise and apparel that comprises approximately 1% of our gross annual sales, and solely exists to promote our beverages. Merchandise and apparel sales are included with the gross sales for our one operating segment.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Account Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded at net realizable value. We determine provisions for uncollectible accounts, sales returns, and claims based upon factors including the credit risk and activity of specific distributors and resellers, historical trends, and other information. If we become aware of a specific distributor’s or reseller’s inability to meet its financial obligations, bad debt charges are recorded based on an overall assessment of past due accounts receivable outstanding. In the opinion of management, a provision was deemed necessary for uncollectible accounts.
Inventory
The cost of inventory using the standard cost method, which approximates actual cost based on a first-in, first-out method. Our inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Our inventory consists almost entirely of finished and unfinished goods, and freight, which include CBD energy waters, CBD waters, hemp energy drinks, lemonade drinks, cans for production, merchandise and apparel, and other beverage and non-beverage products that complement the Company’s current product offering. We periodically evaluate and adjust inventories for obsolescence. The shelf life of all beverage inventory is two and one-half years, and as of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $574,800 of product in inventory, net of a reserve for obsolescence of $150,000, which was a decrease of approximately $85,700, compared to approximately $660,500 and no reserve for obsolescence at December 31, 2020. We expect the balance of inventory to increase in direct relation to the increase in sales that we expect. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Subsection Inventory, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, for an additional description of our inventory that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill arises from business combinations and is generally determined as the excess of the fair value of the consideration transferred, plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interests in the acquiree, over the fair value of the net assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of the acquisition date. Goodwill acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have an indefinite useful life are not amortized, but tested for impairment at least annually or more frequently if events and circumstances exists that indicate that a goodwill impairment test should be performed. We have selected December 31 as the date to perform the annual impairment test.
Intangible assets represent both indefinite lived and definite lived assets. Trademarks are deemed to have definite useful lives of ten years, are amortized, and are tested annually for impairment. Intangible assets are reported on the balance sheet at cost less accumulated amortization. We have selected December 31 as the date to perform the annual impairment test. See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, Subsection Goodwill and Intangible Assets, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, for an additional description of intangible assets that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
FASB’s ASC Topic 718, Stock Compensation (formerly, FASB Statement 123R), prescribes accounting and reporting standards for all stock-based payment transactions in which employee and non-employee services are acquired. We measure the cost of employee and non-employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value of the award. Fair value for restricted stock awards is valued using the closing price of our Common Stock on the date of grant. For our 2021 and 2020 fiscal years, we recognized stock-based compensation expense of approximately $213,800, and $476,000, respectively. See Note 16, Share-Based Compensation, of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 for an additional description of our stock-based compensation that had a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act, was enacted. The JOBS Act provides that, among other things, an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. As an emerging growth company, we have irrevocably elected to take “opt out” of taking advantage of the extended transition period afforded by the JOBS Act for the implementation of new or revised accounting standards and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth public companies on a case-by-case basis.
We intend to rely on certain of the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. As an emerging growth company, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b), and (ii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis).
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of (1) the last day of our fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of this offering, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenues of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC, which means the market value of our common shares that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last day of our second quarter, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.
We are also a “smaller reporting company” meaning that the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates plus the proposed aggregate amount of gross proceeds to us as a result of this offering is less than $700 million and our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year. We may continue to be a smaller reporting company after this offering if either (i) the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $250 million or (ii) our annual revenue was less than $100 million during the most recently completed fiscal year and the market value of our stock held by non-affiliates is less than $700 million. If we are a smaller reporting company at the time we cease to be an emerging growth company, we may continue to rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements that are available to smaller reporting companies. Specifically, as a smaller reporting company we may choose to present only the two most recent fiscal years of audited financial statements in our Annual Report on Form 10-K and, similar to emerging growth companies, smaller reporting companies have reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.