ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the ‘‘Risk Factors’’ section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are the only global medical device company focused exclusively on providing a comprehensive trauma and deformity correction, scoliosis and sports medicine product offering to the pediatric orthopedic market in order to improve the lives of children with orthopedic conditions. We design, develop and commercialize innovative orthopedic implants and instruments to meet the specialized needs of pediatric surgeons and their patients, who we believe have been largely neglected by the orthopedic industry. We currently serve three of the largest categories in this market. We estimate that the portion of this market that we currently serve represents a $3.3 billion opportunity globally, including over $1.5 billion in the United States.
We sell implants and instruments to our customers for use by pediatric orthopedic surgeons to treat orthopedic conditions in children. We provide our implants in sets that consist of a range of implant sizes and include the instruments necessary to perform the surgical procedure. In the United States and a few selected international markets, our customers typically expect us to have full sets of implants and instruments on site at each hospital but do not purchase the implants until they are used in surgery. Accordingly, we must make an up-front investment in inventory of consigned implants and instruments before we can generate revenue from a particular hospital and we maintain substantial levels of inventory at any given time. In the international markets where we sell to stocking distributors, we transfer control of our products to the distributor when title passes upon shipment.
We currently market 37 surgical systems that serve three of the largest categories within the pediatric orthopedic market: (i) trauma and deformity correction, (ii) scoliosis and (iii) sports medicine. We rely on a broad network of third parties to manufacture the components of our products, which we then inspect and package. We believe our innovative products promote improved surgical accuracy, increase consistency of outcomes and enhance surgeon confidence in achieving high standards of care. In the future, we expect to expand our product offering within these categories, as well as to address additional categories of the pediatric orthopedic market.
The majority of our revenue has been generated in the United States, where we sell our products through a network of 40 independent sales agencies employing 190 sales representatives specifically focused on pediatrics. These independent sales agents are trained by us, distribute our products and are compensated through sales-based commissions and performance bonuses. We do not sell our products through or participate in physician-owned distributorships, or PODs.
We market and sell our products internationally in 45 countries through independent stocking distributors and sales agencies. Our independent stocking distributors manage the billing relationship with each hospital in their respective territories and are responsible for servicing the product needs of their surgeon customers. In 2017, we began to supplement our international stocking distributors with sales agencies using direct sales programs in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand where we sell directly to the hospitals. We began selling
direct to Canada in September 2018, Belgium and the Netherlands in January 2019, Italy in March 2020 and Germany, Switzerland and Austria in January 2021. Additionally, in March 2019, we established an operating company in the Netherlands in order to enhance our operations in Europe. In these markets, we work through sales agencies that are paid a commission, similar to our U.S. sales model. These arrangements have generated an increase in revenue and gross margin. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, international sales accounted for approximately 21%, 11% and 24% of our revenue, respectively.
We believe there are significant opportunities for us to strengthen our position in U.S. and international markets by increasing investments in consigned implant and instrument sets, strengthening our global sales and distribution infrastructure and expanding our product offering.
Environmental, Social and Governance ("ESG") Activities
OrthoPediatrics was founded on the cause of impacting the lives of children with orthopedic conditions. Since inception we have impacted the lives of over 234,000 children. We believe we should continue to expand our social efforts while minimizing our impact to the environment and ensuring corporate governance. In 2021, we created an internal ESG team, which reports directly to our Board’s Governance and Nominating Committee, to identify ESG topics for disclosure by assessing both the impact on our business and the importance to our stakeholders.
We encourage you to review our ESG page under the "About" section of our corporate website for more detailed information regarding our ESG efforts and current initiatives. On our website, among other information, are the following highlights:
•OrthoPediatrics cares about our environmental impact while working in a highly regulated industry and we are certified according to ISO 13485.
•The Company and its associates regularly participate in philanthropic causes important to our local communities. We also partner with charitable organizations that provide pediatric orthopedic care around the world. In 2020 we were named as "Corporate Partner of the Year" by the World Pediatric Project - with whom we work to provide access to medical care for children in developing countries.
•We are committed to fostering an environment that is respectful, compassionate, and inclusive of everyone in our community.
•The Board of Directors understands the value of diversity and will increase the diversity of the Board over the next 18 months. The Governance and Nominating Committed engaged a global recruiting firm to assist in adding two diverse Board candidates.
We believe effectively managing our priorities, as well as increasing our transparency related to ESG programs, will help create long-term value for our stakeholders. We expect to increase our disclosures and communicate our ESG efforts in future SEC filings.
Nothing on our website shall be deemed part of or incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
A novel strain of the coronavirus disease was first identified in Wuhan, China in December 2019, and the related outbreak was subsequently declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and a national emergency by the President of the United States. As a result of the pandemic, we have experienced significant business disruption. For example, in order to meet the demand for COVID-19-related hospitalizations, various governments, governmental agencies and hospital administrators required certain hospitals to postpone some elective procedures. As a majority of our products are utilized in elective surgeries or procedures, the deferrals of such surgeries and procedures have had, and may continue to have, a significant negative impact on our business and results of operations. We encourage the readers of this document to read our risk factors in its entirety contained in Item 1A “Risk Factors” where there is additional information regarding the COVID-19 pandemic.
Despite the impact COVID-19 has had on our business, we continued to invest in research and development, invest in our people, and take steps to position ourselves for long-term success. During 2020, we raised additional capital to solidify our financial foundation. We continued to train and educate our sales team and our surgeons on our products. During 2020 and 2021, we continued to focus on developing innovative solutions, acquired multiple enabling technologies, invested in both new and existing partnerships and continued to deploy additional consigned instrument and implant sets in furtherance of our strategy.
Health and Safety
From the earliest signs of the outbreak, we have taken proactive, aggressive action to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers. We enacted rigorous safety measures in all applicable locations, including implementing social distancing protocols, requiring working from home for those employees that do not need to be physically present on the warehouse floor, suspending travel, extensively and frequently disinfecting our workspaces and providing masks to those employees who must be physically present. We will continue to utilize some or all of these measures until we determine that the COVID-19 pandemic is adequately contained for purposes of our business. We may also take further actions as government authorities require or recommend or as we determine to be in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers.
Supply
We have not yet experienced any significant impacts or interruptions to our supply chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. To mitigate the risk of any potential supply interruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic, we chose to increase certain inventory levels during the year. We may decide to take similar actions going forward. Additionally, restrictions or disruptions of transportation, such as reduced availability of air transport, port closures and increased border controls or closures, have resulted in higher costs and delays.
Demand
The outbreak has significantly increased economic and demand uncertainty. We anticipate that the current outbreak or continued spread of COVID-19, and the actions taken by governmental authorities and other third parties to contain the virus, may cause a global economic slowdown, and it is possible that it could cause a global recession. In the event of a recession, demand for our products would decline and our business would be adversely effected. During 2021 and 2020, we experienced a reduction in revenue as a result of global delays in elective surgeries.
Liquidity
Although there is uncertainty related to the anticipated impact of the recent COVID-19 outbreak on our future results, we believe our business model, our current cash reserves and the recent steps we have taken to strengthen our balance sheet, including our June 2020 and December 2019 equity offerings, leave us well-positioned to manage our business through this crisis as it continues to unfold. We believe our existing balances of cash and our currently anticipated operating cash flows will be sufficient to meet our cash needs arising in the ordinary course of business for the next twelve months.
We continue to monitor the rapidly evolving situation and guidance from international and domestic authorities, including federal, state and local public health authorities and may take additional actions based on their recommendations. In these circumstances, there may be developments outside our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan. As such, given the dynamic nature of this situation, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of COVID-19 on our financial condition, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Other Trends and Uncertainties
From time to time we acquire, make investments in or license other technologies, products and business that may enhance our capabilities, complement our current products or expand the breadth of our markets or customer base. As a result of these transactions, we may record certain intangible assets, including goodwill and trademarks, which are subject to annual impairment testing. Impairment is based on our current assessment of the expected future cash flows based on recent results and other specific market factors. Although we have not recorded any impairment charges to date, the most recently prepared assessment indicates our passing rate has narrowed for certain intangible assets. We believe that the expected future cash flows represent management’s
best estimate; however, if actual results differ materially from these estimates, we could record an impairment charge which could be material to our consolidated financial statements and have an adverse impact on our results of operations.
Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue in the United States is generated primarily from the sale of our implants and, to a much lesser extent, from the sale of our instruments. Sales in the United States are primarily to hospital accounts through independent sales agencies. We recognize revenue when our performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied. This typically occurs when we transfer control of our products to the customer, generally upon implantation or when title passes upon shipment. The products are generally consigned to our independent sales agencies, and revenue is recognized when the products are used by or shipped to the hospital for surgeries on a case by case basis. On rare occasions, hospitals purchase products for their own inventory, and revenue is recognized when the hospital obtains control of the product, typically either upon shipment or delivery of the product dependent on the terms of the contract. Pricing for each customer is dictated by a unique price list and or a pricing agreement.
Outside of the United States, we sell our products directly to hospitals through independent sales agencies or to independent stocking distributors. Generally, the distributors are allowed to return products, and some are thinly capitalized. Based on a history of reliable collections, we have concluded that a contract exists and revenue should be recognized when we transfer control of our products to the customer, generally when title passes upon shipment. Additionally, based on our history of immaterial returns from international customers, we have historically estimated no reserve for returns.
In early 2017, we expanded operations and established legal entities in the United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand permitting us to sell under an agency model direct to local hospitals in these countries. We began selling direct to Canada in September 2018, Belgium and the Netherlands in January 2019, Italy in March 2020 and Germany, Switzerland and Austria in January 2021. Additionally, in March 2019, we established an operating company in the Netherlands in order to enhance our operations in Europe. The products are generally consigned to our independent sales agencies, and revenue is recognized when the products are used by or shipped to the hospital for surgeries on a case by case basis. On rare occasions, hospitals purchase products for their own inventory, and revenue is recognized when the hospital obtains control of the product, typically either upon shipment or delivery of the product dependent on the terms of the contract. Pricing for each customer is dictated by a unique price list and or a pricing agreement.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Our cost of revenue consists primarily of products purchased from third-party suppliers, inbound freight, excess and obsolete inventory adjustments and royalties. Our implants and instruments are manufactured to our specifications by third-party suppliers. The majority of our implants and instruments are produced in the United States. We recognize cost of revenue for consigned implants at the time the implant is used in surgery and the related revenue is recognized. Prior to their use in surgery, the cost of consigned implants is recorded as inventory in our balance sheet. The costs of instruments are typically capitalized and not included in cost of revenue unless sold as a set to our international stocking distributors or directly to hospitals. We expect our cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars due primarily to increased sales volume and changes in the geographic mix of our sales as our international operations tend to have a higher cost of revenue as a percentage of sales.
Our gross profit is calculated by subtracting our cost of revenue from revenue and is expected to increase in absolute dollars due primarily to increased sales volume and sales mix to customers based in the United States. Our gross profit as a percentage of total revenue, or gross margin, was similar across all periods presented. Our gross margin is impacted by the mix of revenue between the United States, where we earn a higher gross margin that is required to pay sales commissions, and international, where we earn a lower gross margin because the distributor is responsible for paying sales commissions.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Our sales and marketing expenses primarily consist of commissions to our domestic and international independent sales agencies, as well as compensation, commissions, benefits and other related personnel
costs. Commissions and bonuses are generally based on a percentage of sales. Our international independent stocking distributors purchase implant and instrument sets and replenishment stock for resale, and we do not pay commissions or any other sales-related costs for these international sales. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars with the commercialization of our current and pipeline products and continued investment in our global sales organization to reach new customers.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation, benefits and other related costs for personnel employed in our executive management, administration, finance, legal, quality and regulatory, product management, warehousing, information technology and human resources departments, including stock-based compensation for all personnel, as well as facility costs. We include insurance expenses in general and administrative expenses, as well as costs related to the maintenance and protection of our intellectual property portfolio. Our general and administrative expenses also include the depreciation of our capitalized instrument sets, which represented $5.6 million, $3.8 million and $3.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars as we hire additional personnel to support the growth of our business as well as increased set deployment. We expect the growth rate of our general and administrative expenses will be lower than the growth rate of our revenue.
Legal Settlement Expenses
The Company is involved in various legal proceedings. Liabilities for estimated losses are accrued if the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company accrued $6.3 million as a result of legal settlement negotiations ongoing at that time. During 2021, there were no material adjustments to the accrual and we paid the settlement amounts, resolving the related legal proceedings. See Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8 for additional details regarding current legal proceedings.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with engineering, product development, consulting services, outside prototyping services, outside research activities, materials and development of our intellectual property portfolio. We also include related personnel and consultants’ compensation expense. We expect research and development expenses to continue to increase both in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue as we continue to develop new products to expand our product offering, broaden our intellectual property portfolio and add research and development personnel.
Other Expenses
Our other expenses primarily consist of fair value adjustments of contingent consideration, accreted interest expense related to the acquisition installment payables and borrowing costs and expenses related to long-term debt.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
The following tables set forth our revenue by geography and product category for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net revenue increased $27.0 million, or 38%, from $71.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $98.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily driven by the recovery in both domestic and global markets as the COVID-19 pandemic, including any variants, continues to reach the world at varying times and to varying degrees. Additionally, we continue to see benefit of converting Germany, Austria, and Switzerland to a direct agency. In December 2020, the Company recorded a $2.7 million revenue reduction due to the repurchase of inventory from a stocking distributor in Germany, Austria and Switzerland that we converted to a sales agency.
Trauma and deformity sales increased $18.2 million, or 38%, primarily driven by increased sales in our PNP Femur, Cannulated Screws and Orthex systems. In December 2020, the Company recorded a $2.7 million revenue reduction due to the repurchase of inventory from a stocking distributor in Germany, Austria and Switzerland that we converted to a sales agency which negatively impacted trauma and deformity sales in the prior year. Scoliosis systems increased $7.3 million, or 35%, primarily driven by increased sales of our 4.5/5.0 and 5.5/6.0 RESPONSE systems, and a full year of sales under our ApiFix system. Sports medicine / other increased $1.5 million, or 57% due to the acquisition of Telos, which also experienced recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic. Nearly all the change in each category was due to a change in the unit volume sold and not a result of price changes.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue was $24.6 million and $16.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Gross margin was 75% for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 77% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cost of revenue was primarily driven by volume of units sold. The decrease in gross margin was the result of our sales mix to our international distributors which increased over the prior year due to the COVID-19 recovery. Gross margin was also unfavorably impacted by a $0.5 million penalty for purchase commitment minimums which were not achieved due to COVID-19. See note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8 for additional details of our purchase commitments.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $7.8 million, or 24.5%, from $31.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $39.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due primarily to increased sales commission expenses, driven by the converted sales agents in our international markets and an overall increase in volume of units sold.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $7.7 million, or 20%, from $38.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $46.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due primarily to the addition of personnel and resources to support the continued expansion of our business and increased general and administrative expenses associated with the acquisitions of ApiFix and Telos which were included in our consolidated results for the full year 2021. These increases were offset by the $6.3 million of legal settlement expenses which did not repeat in the current year. Depreciation and amortization expenses increased $2.7 million, or 34%, from $8.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $10.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to the amortization on intangible assets acquired through the Telos and ApiFix acquisitions, the purchase of the Band-Lok intellectual property and the purchases of licensing agreements, including the 7D Surgical FLASHTM Navigation platform, FIREFLY, and the license from Dr. Barry. See Note 16 - Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8 for further discussion of this license.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $0.3 million, or 5%, from $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily due to incremental product development including the addition of personnel and the support of future growth of our business.
Total Other Expenses (Income)
Total other expenses decreased $7.5 million, or 109%, from $6.9 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 to income of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The change is driven primarily by the decrease in fair value of the contingent consideration related to the ApiFix acquisition. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the change in fair value resulted in income of $1.8 million, compared to expense of $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Additionally, interest expense during 2021 was $0.1 million compared to $1.2 million as the Company repaid its outstanding principal amount under its debt agreement during the third quarter 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred operating losses since inception and negative cash flows from operating activities of $13.1 million, $18.5 million and $17.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $178.0 million. We anticipate that our losses will continue in the near term as we continue to expand our product portfolio and invest in additional consigned implant and instrument sets to support our expansion into existing and new markets. Since inception, we have funded our operations primarily with proceeds from the sales of our common and preferred stock, convertible securities and debt, as well as through sales of our products. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash of $9.0 million and short-term investments of $45.9 million.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, amounts available under the Loan Agreement, cash receipts from sales of our products and net proceeds from our December 2018, December 2019 and June 2020 follow-on offerings will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. Nonetheless, from time to time, we may seek additional financing sources to meet our working capital requirements, make continued research and development investments and make capital expenditures needed for us to maintain and grow our business. We may not be able to obtain additional financing on terms favorable to us, if at all. It is also possible that we may allocate significant amounts of capital toward products or technologies for which market demand is lower than anticipated and, as a result, abandon such efforts. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us when we require it, or if we expend capital on products or technologies that are unsuccessful, our ability to continue to support our business growth and to respond to business challenges could be significantly limited, or we may have to scale back our operations. If we raise additional funds through further issuances of equity or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders could suffer significant dilution, and any new equity securities we issue could have rights, preferences and privileges superior to those of holders of our common stock.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $13.1 million, $18.5 million and $17.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The primary use of this cash was to fund our operations related to the development and commercialization of our products in each of these years. Net cash used for working capital was $12.6 million, $5.0 million and $11.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During 2021, the primary uses of cash included the payment of $6.3 million to finalize our legal settlement, an increase of inventory by $5.1 million as we deployed additional inventory, and accounts receivable and accounts payable were uses of $0.5 million and $0.6 million in cash, respectively. These uses of cash were partially offset by cash inflows from other accrued expenses of $1.1 million. During 2020, we increased inventory by $12.1 million as we deployed additional inventory, including $1.6 million due to the repurchase of inventory from a stocking distributor in Germany, Austria and Switzerland that we converted to a sales agency, and accounts receivable increased by $0.5 million. These uses of cash for working capital were offset by our legal settlement accrual of $6.3 million and an increase in accounts payable of $3.1 million as we purchased inventory on account for deployment into the field. During 2019, we increased inventory by $9.8 million as we deployed additional inventory and accounts receivable increased by $5.8 million as our sales increased. We had a net loss of $16.3 million, $32.9 million and $13.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which also drove a difference in the use of operating cash between the periods.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $7.4 million, $69.7 million and $61.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash used in investing activities in 2021 consisted primarily of the purchases of licenses of $7.9 million and the purchases of property plant and equipment, primarily instrument sets which were consigned in the United States and select international markets, of $8.1 million. This was partially offset by the sale of short term investments which was a $9.3 million source of cash. Net cash used in investing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of the purchase of short-term investments of $55.0 million, the acquisition of Telos of $1.7 million, net of cash received, the acquisition of ApiFix of $1.7 million, net of cash received, the acquisition of the Band-Lok intellectual property of $0.8 million and the purchases of property plant and equipment, primarily instrument sets, of $10.5 million. Net cash used in investing activities in
2019 consisted primarily of the acquisition of Vilex and Orthex of $49.8 million, net of cash received, and the purchases of instrument sets of $11.8 million.
Cash Provided By Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $6 thousand, $46.7 million and $91.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2021 were immaterial to the results of our operations. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of the proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $70.2 million, net of issuance costs and $1.6 million from the exercise of stock options, offset by the payment of $25.0 million of the revolving credit facility and term loan with Squadron. Net cash provided by financing activities in 2019 consisted primarily of proceeds from the issuance of common stock, net of issuance costs, of $60.0 million and $1.1 million related to proceeds from the exercise of stock options. We also had $30.0 million of proceeds from Term Loan B in 2019.
Indebtedness
Loan Agreement
On December 31, 2017, we entered into a Fourth Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with Squadron Capital LLC, or Squadron, the Company's largest investor. Under the terms of the Loan Agreement, Squadron provided us a term loan in the principal amount of $20.0 million, represented by a Term Note A, and a revolving loan in an aggregate principal amount to not exceed $15.0 million, represented by a Revolving Note. Interest on the Term Note A and Revolving Note accrued at the greater of (a) three month LIBOR plus 8.61% and (b) 10.0%.
In order to finance a portion of the cash consideration for the acquisition of the Vilex Companies, the Company entered into a First Amendment, or the First Amendment, to the Loan Agreement (as so amended, the "First Amended Loan Agreement"), with Squadron. The First Amended Loan Agreement provided for a new $30.0 million term loan facility, represented by a Term Note B, in addition to the existing $20.0 million Term Note A and $15.0 million revolving credit facility. Similar to the other facilities under the First Amended Loan Agreement, the Term Note B was subject to interest only payments at an interest rate equal to the greater of (a) three month LIBOR plus 8.61%, and (b) 10.00%. The Term Note B, which would have matured no later than May 31, 2020, was paid in full on December 31, 2019 using $25.0 million received in exchange for the divestiture of the adult product offerings of Vilex and the related Orthex license agreement, and $5.0 million from the available Squadron revolving credit facility. On January 4, 2020, the Company repaid $5.0 million on the revolving credit facility with Squadron. On July 15, 2020, the Company repaid the $20.0 million principal amount outstanding under the Term Note A, together with all unpaid interest and other related amounts payable.
On August 4, 2020, the Company entered into a Second Amendment (the “Second Amendment”) to its First Amended Loan Agreement with Squadron (as so further amended, the “Second Amended Loan Agreement”). Pursuant to the Second Amendment, the First Amended Loan Agreement’s revolving credit commitment was increased from the previously established $15 million to $25 million and the maturity date was extended from January 31, 2023 to January 1, 2024. The Company also agreed to pay Squadron an unused commitment fee in an amount equal to the per annum rate of 0.50% (computed on the basis of a year of 360 days and the actual number of days elapsed) times the daily unused portion of the revolving credit commitment. The unused commitment fee is payable quarterly in arrears.
Effective December 31, 2021, the Company entered into a Third Amendment (the "Third Amendment") to its Second Amended Loan Agreement with Squadron (as so further amended, the "Third Amended Loan Agreement"). The Third Amendment addresses the transition of the interest rate calculation from LIBOR to a SOFR (Secured Overnight Financing Rate) based rate. The previous interest rate on the facilities was at the greater of (a) three month LIBOR plus 8.61% and (b) 10.0%. Following the Third Amendment, the interest rate on the revolving credit facility is the greater of (a) six month SOFR plus 8.69% and (b) 10.0%. Following repayment of the Term Note A and Term Note B, there are no outstanding term loan obligations under the Third Amended Loan Agreement.
Borrowings under the revolving credit facility will be made under a First Amended and Restated Revolving Note, dated August 4, 2020 (the “Amended Revolving Note”), payable, jointly and severally, by the Company and each of its subsidiaries party thereto. The Amended Revolving Note will mature at the earlier of: (i) the date on which
any person or persons acquire (x) capital stock of the Company possessing the voting power to elect a majority of the Company’s Board of Directors (whether by merger, consolidation, reorganization, combination, sale or transfer), or (y) all or substantially all of the Company’s assets, determined on a consolidated basis; and (ii) January 1, 2024.
Borrowings under the Third Amended Loan Agreement are secured by substantially all of the Company's assets and are unconditionally guaranteed by each of its subsidiaries with the exception of Vilex. There are no traditional financial covenants associated with the Third Amended Loan Agreement. However, there are negative covenants that prohibit us from, among other things, transferring any of our material assets, merging with or acquiring another entity, entering into a transaction that would result in a change of control, incurring additional indebtedness, creating any lien on our property, making investments in third parties and redeeming stock or paying dividends, in each case subject to certain exceptions as further detailed in the Third Amended Loan Agreement.
The Third Amended Loan Agreement includes events of default, the occurrence and continuation of any of which provides Squadron with the right to exercise remedies against us and the collateral securing the loans, including cash. These events of default include, among other things, the failure to pay amounts due under the credit facilities, insolvency, the occurrence of a material adverse event, which includes a material adverse change in our business, operations or properties (financial or otherwise) or a material impairment of the prospect of repayment of any portion of the obligations, the occurrence of any default under certain other indebtedness and a final judgment against us in an amount greater than $250 thousand. The occurrence of a material adverse change could result in the acceleration of payment of the debt.
Mortgage Note
In August 2013, pursuant to the purchase of our office and warehouse space, we entered into a mortgage note payable to Tawani Enterprises Inc., the owner of which is a member of Squadron’s management committee. Pursuant to the terms of the mortgage note, we pay Tawani Enterprises Inc. monthly principal and interest installments of $15,543, with interest compounded at 5% until maturity in August 2028, at which time a final payment of remaining principal and interest will become due. The mortgage is secured by the related real estate and building. The mortgage balance was $1.0 million and $1.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company's cash requirements within the next twelve months include accounts payable, accrued compensation and benefits, current maturities of long-term debt, current portion of acquisition installment payable and other current liabilities. The acquisition installment payable is related to the acquisition of ApiFix - See Note 3. Business Combinations in Item 8 for further detail of the acquisition and the acquisition installment payables.
Our long-term cash requirements under various contractual obligations and commitments include:
•Debt obligations and interest payments - See Note 9. Debt and Credit Arrangements in Item 8 for further detail regarding our debt and the timing of expected future principal and interest payments.
•Acquisition installment payables, net of current portion and contingent consideration - See Note 3. Business Combinations in Item 8 for further detail regarding our obligations and timing of expected future payments.
•Minimum purchase obligations - Purchase obligations include agreements for purchases of product in the normal course of business, including minimum quantities required pursuant to our license agreements. See Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8 for further detail regarding these requirements.
•Lease Obligations - See Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8 for further detail regarding our lease obligations.
•Royalties - See Note 16. Commitments and Contingencies in Item 8 for further detail regarding minimum royalty obligations.
Pediatric Orthopedic Business Seasonality
Our revenue is typically higher in the summer months and holiday periods, driven by higher sales of our trauma and deformity and scoliosis products, which is influenced by the higher incidence of pediatric surgeries during these periods due to recovery time provided by breaks in the school year. Additionally, our scoliosis patients tend to have additional health challenges that make scheduling their procedures variable in nature.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We monitor and analyze these items for changes in facts and circumstances, and material changes in these estimates could occur in the future. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Changes in estimates are reflected in reported results for the period in which they become known. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this annual report, we believe the following accounting policies are most critical to understanding and evaluating our reported financial results and require significant or complex judgment and estimates on the part of management.
Revenue Recognition
In the United States and in thirteen international markets, we primarily sell our implants, and to a much lesser extent our instruments, through third-party independent sales agencies to medical facilities and hospitals. For such sales, revenue and associated cost of revenue is recognized when a product is used in a procedure. In a few cases, hospitals purchase our products for their own inventory, and such revenue and associated cost of revenue is recognized when a product is shipped or delivered and the title and risk of loss passes to the customer.
Outside of the United States, we sell our products directly to hospitals through independent sales agencies or to independent stocking distributors. Generally, the distributors are allowed to return products, and some are thinly capitalized. Based on a history of reliable collections, we have concluded that a contract exists and revenue should be recognized when we transfer control of our products to the customer, generally when title passes upon shipment. Additionally, based on our history of immaterial returns from international customers, we have historically estimated no reserve for returns.
Inventory Valuation
Inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, with cost determined using the first-in-first-out method. Inventory, which consists of implants and instruments included in deployed sets in the field or held in our warehouse, is considered finished goods and is purchased from third parties.
We evaluate the carrying value of our inventory in relation to the estimated forecast of product demand, which takes into consideration the life cycle of the products. A significant decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory on hand, which could lead to additional charges for excess and obsolete inventory.
The need to maintain substantial levels of inventory impacts our estimates for excess and obsolete inventory. Each of our systems are designed to include implantable products that come in different sizes and shapes to accommodate the surgeon’s needs. Typically, a small number of the set components are used in each surgical procedure. Certain components within each set may become obsolete before other components based on the usage patterns. We adjust inventory values to reflect these usage patterns and life cycle.
In addition, we continue to introduce new products, which we believe will increase our revenue. As a result, we may be required to take additional charges for excess and obsolete inventory in the future.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Our goodwill represents the excess of the cost over the fair value of net assets acquired. The determination of the value of goodwill and intangible assets arising from acquisitions requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized and is assessed for impairment using fair value measurement techniques on an annual basis or more frequently if facts and circumstances warrant such a review. The goodwill is considered to be impaired if we determine that the carrying value of our one reporting unit exceeds its respective fair value.
We have indefinite lived trademark assets that are reviewed for impairment by performing a quantitative analysis, which occurs annually in the fourth quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount to future net discounted cash flows expected to be generated by the associated asset. Calculating net discounted cash flows requires us to make significant estimates and assumptions related to forecasts of future revenues and discount rates. Changes in these assumptions could have a significant impact on the fair value of of trademarks. If such assets are determined to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair market value of the assets. During 2021, the estimated fair values for certain intangible assets exceeded its carrying value by narrow margins. We believe that the expected future cash flows represent management's best estimate; however, if actual results differ materially from these estimates, we could record an impairment charge related to these intangible assets which could be material to our consolidated financial statements and have an adverse impact on our results of operations.
Net Operating Losses
As of December 31, 2021, we had federal, state and foreign tax net operating loss carryforwards, or NOLs, of approximately $114.0 million, $74.0 million and $22.7 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2028 unless utilized. The deferred tax assets, except for those recorded in Israel, were fully offset by a valuation allowance as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and no income tax benefit has been recognized in our consolidated statements of operations.
Pursuant to Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, annual use of our pre-change NOLs may be limited in the post-change period in the event that an ‘‘ownership change’’ occurs, which is generally defined as a cumulative change in equity ownership by ‘‘5% shareholders’’ that exceeds 50 percentage points over a rolling three-year period. We determined that an ownership change occurred on May 30, 2014, resulting in a limitation of approximately $1.1 million per year being imposed on the use of our pre-change NOLs of approximately $45.2 million. An additional Section 382 ownership change was deemed to have occurred following our follow-on offering in December 2018 resulting in a limitation of approximately $9.7 million per year.