Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding the significant factors affecting our consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity, and capital resources during the two-year period ended January 29, 2022 (our fiscal years 2021 and 2020). For a comparison of our results of operations for the 52-week period ended January 30, 2021, compared to the 52-week period ended February 1, 2020, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 26, 2021. This discussion should be read with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
A number of the matters and subject areas discussed in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”, “Business” and elsewhere in this Form 10-K are not limited to historical or current facts and deal with potential future circumstances and developments and are, accordingly, “forward-looking statements.” You are cautioned that such forward-looking statements, which may be identified by words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “expect,” “estimate,” “intend,” “plan” and similar expressions, are only predictions and that actual events or results may differ materially.
Overview
We are a specialty retailer of home furnishings in the United States. As of January 29, 2022, we operated a total of 361 stores in 35 states as well as an e-commerce website, www.kirklands.com, under the Kirkland’s Home brand. We provide our customers with an engaging shopping experience characterized by a curated, affordable selection of home furnishings along with inspirational design ideas. This combination of quality and stylish merchandise, value pricing and a stimulating online and store experience allows our customers to furnish their home at a great value.
Executive Summary
In fiscal 2021, we opened four new stores, closed 16 stores and relocated two stores. In fiscal 2020, we closed 59 stores and did not open any new stores or relocate any stores. E-commerce sales, including shipping revenue, was 26.8% and 26.7% of net sales in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Our net sales for fiscal 2021 increased by 2.7% to $558.2 million from $543.5 million in fiscal 2020. The net sales increase of $14.7 million in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a consolidated comparable sales increase of $29.4 million, mainly due to the temporary closure of our stores in the first half of fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which was partially offset by a decrease in sales of $14.7 million, due primarily to permanent store closures. Comparable sales, which includes e-commerce sales, increased 5.6% for fiscal 2021 compared to a decrease of 3.8% for fiscal 2020. For fiscal 2021, gross profit increased 9.0% to $188.4 million from $172.8 million for fiscal 2020. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased 200 basis points to 33.8% of net sales for fiscal 2021 from 31.8% in fiscal 2020, which included over 500 basis points or $30 million of increased inbound freight costs in fiscal 2021. Operating income increased $17.1 million in fiscal 2021 to $25.4 million compared to $8.3 million in the prior year period driven by the aforementioned prior year temporary store closures and corresponding 2021 sales leverage. For fiscal 2021, net income was $22.0 million, or $1.51 per diluted share, compared to $16.6 million, or $1.12 per diluted share, in fiscal 2020.
We ended fiscal 2021 with $25.0 million in cash and cash equivalents and no outstanding debt, after returning $37.3 million to our shareholders through share repurchases.
Key Financial Measures
Net sales and gross profit are the most significant drivers of our operating performance. Net sales consists of all merchandise sales to customers, net of returns, shipping revenue associated with e-commerce sales, gift card breakage revenue and excludes sales taxes. Gross profit is the difference between net sales and cost of sales. Cost of sales has various distinct components, including: landed product cost (including inbound freight), damages, inventory shrinkage, store occupancy costs (including rent and depreciation of leasehold improvements and other property and equipment), outbound freight costs to stores, e-commerce shipping expenses and central distribution costs (including operational costs and depreciation of leasehold improvements and other property and equipment). Product and outbound freight costs are variable, while occupancy and central distribution costs are largely fixed. Accordingly, gross profit expressed as a percentage of net sales can be influenced by many factors including overall sales performance.
We use comparable sales to measure sales increases and decreases from stores that have been open for at least 13 full fiscal months, including our online sales. We remove closed stores from our comparable sales calculation the day after the stores close. Relocated stores remain in our comparable sales calculation. E-commerce sales, including shipping revenue, are included in comparable sales. Increases in comparable sales are an important factor in maintaining or increasing our profitability.
Operating expenses, including the costs of operating our stores and corporate headquarters, are also an important component of our operating performance. Compensation and benefits comprise the majority of our operating expenses. Operating expenses contain fixed and variable costs, and managing the operating expense ratio (operating expenses expressed as a percentage of net sales) is an important focus of management as we seek to increase our overall profitability. Operating expenses include cash costs as well as non-cash costs, such as depreciation and amortization associated with omni-channel technology, corporate property and equipment, and impairment of long-lived assets. Because many operating expenses are fixed costs, and because operating costs tend to rise over time, increases in comparable sales typically are necessary to prevent meaningful increases in the operating expense ratio. Operating expenses can also include certain costs that are of a one-time or non-recurring nature. While these costs must be considered to fully understand our operating performance, we typically identify such costs separately where significant in the consolidated statements of operations so that we can evaluate comparable expense data across different periods.
Strategic Priorities and Financial Goals
Our key strategic initiatives include:
•
Accelerating product development to reinforce quality and relevancy as we continue our transformation into a specialty retailer where customers are able to furnish their entire home on a budget;
•
Bolstering our omni-channel via website enhancements, more focused marketing spend, an expanded online assortment and an improved in-store experience;
•
Improving the customer experience with our re-launched loyalty program, extended credit options and broadened delivery options; and
•
Utilizing our leaner infrastructure to be nimbler to changes in consumer preferences and buying behaviors.
Our financial targets include:
•
Comparable sales growth, driven by e-commerce, merchandise improvements and store productivity. We expect e-commerce to continue to grow as a percent of our total business to over 50% of sales. We also intend to focus on improving the contribution of our remaining store base, which is an integral part of our omni-channel strategy and supports improved profitability of our e-commerce sales.
•
Increasing gross margin by continuing with our current discipline of limited promotional offers, expanding direct sourcing, improving supply chain efficiency and reducing occupancy costs. With improved merchandise quality and to support a better customer experience, we will continue to move towards more targeted promotions. Direct sourcing is expected to increase from approximately 36% of purchases in fiscal 2021 to 70% by fiscal 2025. With these improvements, continued efficiencies in our supply chain and lower occupancy costs, our goal is to improve our annual gross profit margin to a mid-to-high 30% range over the next two-to-three years.
•
Improving profitability by leveraging the leaner infrastructure with comparable sales growth. We believe our ideal store count should be approximately 350 stores. With approximately $45 million in annualized operating expenses eliminated from the business in 2020, we expect annual EBITDA as a percentage of net sales to be in the low-to-mid double-digit range in the next two-to-three years and annual operating income as a percentage of net sales to be in the high-single-digit range in the next two-to-three years.
•
Maintaining adequate liquidity and generating free cash flow, while continuing to invest in key strategic initiatives, and returning excess cash to our shareholders.
Store Rationalization
Our store rationalization strategy includes refreshing mid and high-performing stores, exiting low-performing stores and potentially relocating some under-performing stores to better locations. We are prioritizing sustained improvement in overall profitability and developing a future state plan for infrastructure that complements our omni-channel concept and improves the customer experience. We anticipate additional store closures and limited store openings as we execute our store rationalization strategy over the next several years. We believe our ideal store count should be approximately 350 stores.
The following table summarizes store information for the periods indicated:
The following table summarizes store information as of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021:
Cash Flow
Our cash and cash equivalents decreased from $100.3 million at January 30, 2021 to $25.0 million at January 29, 2022 mainly reflecting our changes in working capital and share repurchases. Our objective is to finance all of our operating and investing activities for fiscal 2022 with cash provided by operations and borrowings available under our revolving credit facility, as necessary.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Results of operations. The table below sets forth selected results of our operations both in dollars (in thousands) and as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
Net sales. Net sales increased 2.7% to $558.2 million in fiscal 2021 compared to $543.5 million in fiscal 2020. The net sales increase of $14.7 million in fiscal 2021 was primarily due to a consolidated comparable sales increase of $29.4 million, mainly due to the temporary closure of our stores in the first half of fiscal 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic, which was partially offset by a decrease in sales of $14.7 million, due primarily to permanent store closures. Comparable store sales, including e-commerce sales, increased 5.6% for fiscal 2021 compared to a decrease of 3.8% for fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, e-commerce sales increased 3.3% compared to the prior year period and were 26.8% of our net sales. The increase in e-commerce sales was driven by an increase in average ticket partially offset by a decrease in website traffic.
Gross profit. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales increased approximately 200 basis points from 31.8% in fiscal 2020 to 33.8% in fiscal 2021. The increase in gross profit margin was due to favorable store occupancy and depreciation expense, favorable shrink results, favorable distribution center costs and favorable outbound freight expenses, partially offset by unfavorable landed product margin, e-commerce shipping costs, damages expense and other cost of sales adjustments. We experienced sales leverage across many of our expense categories in fiscal 2021 because of the temporary closure of our stores in the first half of fiscal 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Store occupancy and depreciation costs decreased approximately 185 basis points as a percentage of net sales due to closures of under-performing locations and negotiated rent reductions at existing stores. Shrink expense decreased 55 basis points as a percentage of net sales due to favorable physical inventory results. Central distribution costs decreased approximately 45 basis points as a percentage of net sales mainly due to a higher amount of capitalized warehouse costs on the consolidated balance sheet compared to the prior year period due to the increased inventory levels. Outbound store freight costs decreased approximately 15 basis points as a percentage of net sales, which was due to sales leverage. Landed product margin decreased 10 basis points as a percentage of net sales from 57.4% in fiscal 2020 to 57.3% in fiscal 2021, as increased savings from directly sourcing more product mostly offset the approximately $30 million increase in inbound freight costs. E-commerce shipping expenses increased approximately 50 basis points as a percentage of net sales due to the higher mix of ship-to-home e-commerce sales compared to the prior year period. Inventory damages increased 20 basis points as a percentage of net sales due to the increased inventory levels. Other cost of sales, which includes deferred revenue adjustments, increased 20 basis points as a percentage of net sales.
Compensation and benefits. Compensation and benefits as a percentage of net sales decreased approximately 50 basis points from 15.7% in fiscal 2020 to 15.2% in fiscal 2021, primarily due to sales leverage and lower corporate and store bonus expenses, partially offset by higher employee benefits expense.
Other operating expenses. Other operating expenses as a percentage of net sales increased approximately 100 basis points from 11.7% in fiscal 2020 to 12.7% in fiscal 2021. The increase as a percentage of net sales was primarily due to an increase in advertising expenses, due to intentional funding of incremental advertising in the current fiscal year compared to a reduction in advertising expenses in the prior fiscal year when natural demand was higher, along with higher professional fees, which was partially offset by favorable workers’ compensation and general liability insurance claims adjustments.
Asset impairment. During fiscal 2021, we recorded an impairment charge of approximately $0.8 million for property and equipment impairment charges at four stores where we elected close the store and exit the lease before the end of the lease term. During fiscal 2020, we recorded an impairment charge of approximately $9.4 million including $6.2 million for right-of-use asset impairment at 24 stores, $3.1 million for property and equipment impairment charges at 24 stores and excess store fixture impairment of $0.1 million.
Income tax expense (benefit). We recorded income tax expense of $3.3 million, or 13.2% of income before income taxes, during fiscal 2021 compared to an income tax benefit of $8.5 million, or 105.6% of income before income taxes, during the prior year period. The change in the tax rate for fiscal 2021 compared to the prior year period was primarily due to recording a $12.3 million income tax benefit related to the carryback of the 2019 net operating loss to prior periods pursuant to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (“CARES”) Act in fiscal 2020. See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Note 3 - Income Taxes” for further discussion.
Net income. As a result of the foregoing, we reported net income of $22.0 million, or $1.51 per diluted share, for fiscal 2021 compared to net income of $16.6 million, or $1.12 per diluted share, for fiscal 2020.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our audited consolidated financial statements presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”), we provide certain non-GAAP financial measures, including EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA, adjusted operating income, adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share. These measures are not in accordance with, and are not intended as alternatives to, GAAP financial measures. We use these non-GAAP
financial measures internally in analyzing our financial results and believe that they provide useful information to analysts and investors, as a supplement to GAAP financial measures, in evaluating our operational performance.
We define EBITDA as net income before interest, provision for income tax, and depreciation and amortization, adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA with non-GAAP adjustments and adjusted operating income as operating income with non-GAAP adjustments. We define adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share by adjusting net income and diluted earnings per share, the applicable GAAP financial measures, for non-GAAP adjustments.
Non-GAAP financial measures are intended to provide additional information only and do not have any standard meanings prescribed by GAAP. Use of these terms may differ from similar measures reported by other companies. Each non-GAAP financial measure has its limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider them in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the Company’s results as reported under GAAP.
The following table shows a reconciliation of operating income to EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA and adjusted operating income for the 52 weeks ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, and a reconciliation of net income
and diluted earnings per share to adjusted net income and adjusted diluted earnings per share for the 52 weeks ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021:
(1)
Costs associated with closed stores and lease termination costs, including gains on lease terminations, amounts paid to third-parties for rent reduction negotiations and lease termination fees paid to landlords for store closings.
(2)
Asset impairment charges include both right-of-use asset and property and equipment impairment charges.
(3)
Stock-based compensation expense includes amounts expensed related to equity incentive plans.
(4)
Severance charges include expenses related to severance agreements. This also includes permanent store closure compensation costs.
(5)
Other costs include executive transition costs and corporate lease negotiation fees associated with a reduction in our corporate rent.
(6)
To remove the impact of the change in our valuation allowance against deferred tax assets.
(7)
To remove the impact of the income tax benefit recorded in fiscal 2020 related to the carry back of fiscal 2019 federal net operating losses to prior periods as permitted under the CARES Act.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
For a comparison of our performance for the fiscal years ended January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020, see “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 30, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 26, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal capital requirements are for working capital and capital expenditures. Working capital consists mainly of merchandise inventories offset by accounts payable, which typically reach their peak in the early portion of the fourth quarter of each fiscal year. Capital expenditures primarily relate to technology and omni-channel projects, distribution center and supply chain enhancements, new or relocated stores and existing store refreshes, remodels and maintenance. Historically, we have funded our working capital and capital expenditure requirements with internally generated cash and borrowings under our revolving credit facility.
Cash flows from operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities was $30.8 million in fiscal 2021 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $78.6 million in fiscal 2020. Cash flows from operating activities depends heavily on operating performance, changes in working capital and the timing and amount of payments for income taxes. The decrease in the amount of cash flows from operations in fiscal 2021 compared to fiscal 2020 was primarily due to the increase in inventories, as we increased inventory levels that were negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and related supply chain delays.
Cash flows from investing activities. Net cash used in investing activities was approximately $7.1 million and $8.5 million for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The table below sets forth capital expenditures by category (in thousands) for the periods indicated:
The capital expenditures in fiscal 2021 related primarily to technology and omni-channel projects, distribution center and supply chain enhancements, existing store refreshes, remodels and maintenance and new and relocated stores. The capital expenditures in fiscal 2020 related primarily to distribution center and supply chain enhancements, technology and omni-channel projects and existing store refreshes, remodels and maintenance.
Cash flows from financing activities. Net cash used in financing activities was $37.5 million in fiscal 2021, and net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $0.1 million in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021 and 2020, we repurchased and retired approximately $37.3 million and $0.2 million shares of common stock, respectively. During fiscal 2020, we borrowed $40 million on our revolving credit facility to fund operations due to temporary store closures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequently repaid the full $40 million.
Senior credit facility. On December 6, 2019, we entered into a Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) with Bank of America, N.A. as administrative agent and collateral agent, and lender. The Credit Agreement contains a $75 million senior secured revolving credit facility, a swingline availability of $10 million, a $25 million incremental accordion feature and a maturity date to December 2024. Advances under the Credit Agreement bear interest at an annual rate equal to LIBOR plus a margin ranging from 125 to 175 basis points with no LIBOR floor, and the fee paid to the lender on the unused portion of the credit facility is 25 basis points per annum.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement are subject to certain conditions and contain customary events of default, including, without limitation, failure to make payments, a cross-default to certain other debt, breaches of
covenants, breaches of representations and warranties, a change in control, certain monetary judgments and bankruptcy and ERISA events. Upon any such event of default, the principal amount of any unpaid loans and all other obligations under the Credit Agreement may be declared immediately due and payable. The maximum availability under the Credit Agreement is limited by a borrowing base formula, which consists of a percentage of eligible inventory and eligible credit card receivables, less reserves.
We are subject to a Second Amended and Restated Security Agreement (“Security Agreement”) with our lender. Pursuant to the Security Agreement, we pledged and granted to the administrative agent, for the benefit of itself and the secured parties specified therein, a lien on and security interest in all of the rights, title and interest in substantially all of our assets to secure the payment and performance of the obligations under the Credit Agreement.
As of January 29, 2022, we were in compliance with the covenants in the Credit Agreement. As of January 29, 2022, there were no outstanding borrowings and no letters of credit outstanding, with approximately $74.7 million available for borrowing as of January 29, 2022. Subsequent to January 29, 2022, we borrowed $20 million under the Credit Agreement.
As of January 29, 2022, our balance of cash and cash equivalents was approximately $25.0 million. We believe that the combination of our cash balances, cash flow from operations and availability under our Credit Agreement will be sufficient to fund our planned capital expenditures and working capital requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Share repurchase plans. On September 24, 2018, December 3, 2020, September 2, 2021 and January 6, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized share repurchase plans providing for the purchase in the aggregate of up to $10 million, $20 million, $20 million and $30 million, respectively, of our outstanding common stock. Repurchases of shares are made in accordance with applicable securities laws and may be made from time to time in the open market or by negotiated transactions. The amount and timing of repurchases are based on a variety of factors, including stock price, regulatory limitations and other market and economic factors. The share repurchase plans do not require us to repurchase any specific number of shares, and we may terminate the repurchase plans at any time. As of January 29, 2022, we had approximately $32.6 million remaining under share repurchase plans.
The table below sets forth selected share repurchase plan information (in thousands, except share amounts) for the periods indicated:
COVID-19 Pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant public health concerns as well as economic disruption, uncertainty and volatility, which materially affected our business operations in fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2021. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the impact of emerging variant strains of the COVID-19 virus, on all facets of our business, which includes the impact on our employees, customers, suppliers, vendors, business partners and supply chain networks. While the duration and extent of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on the global economy remains uncertain, we expect that our business operations and results of operations, including our net sales, earnings and cash flows will continue to be materially impacted.
The health and safety of our employees and customers are the primary concerns of our management team. We have taken and continue to take numerous actions to promote health and safety, including providing personal protective equipment to our employees, requiring mask protocols in our facilities, offering contactless shopping experiences, administering cleaning and sanitation procedures and promoting social distancing. All of our stores and distribution centers are currently open with enhanced safety measures.
There are numerous uncertainties surrounding the pandemic and its impact on the economy and our business, as further described in “Item 1A. Risk Factors” under the sub-caption “Risks Related to COVID-19,” which makes it difficult to predict the impact on our business, financial position, or results of operations in fiscal 2022 and beyond.
Seasonality and Quarterly Results
We have historically experienced, and expect to continue to experience, substantial seasonal fluctuations in our net sales and operating results. We believe this is the general pattern typical of our segment of the retail industry and expect that this pattern will continue in the future. Our quarterly results of operations may also fluctuate significantly as a result of a variety of other factors, including the timing of store closings and openings, customer traffic changes, shifts in the timing of certain holidays and competition. Consequently, comparisons between quarters are not necessarily meaningful, and the results for any quarter are not necessarily indicative of future results.
Our strongest sales period is the fourth quarter of our fiscal year when we generally realize a disproportionate amount of our net sales and a substantial majority of our operating and net income. In anticipation of the increased sales activity during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year, we purchase large amounts of inventory and hire temporary employees for our stores. Our operating performance could suffer if net sales were below seasonal norms during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and the results of our operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts contained in the financial statements and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions, which are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Our critical accounting policies are discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. Certain judgments and estimates utilized in implementing these accounting policies are likewise discussed in the notes to our consolidated financial statements. The following discussion aggregates the various critical accounting policies addressed throughout the financial statements, the judgments and uncertainties affecting the application of these policies and the likelihood that materially different amounts would be reported under varying conditions and assumptions.
Inventory valuation - Our inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value, net of reserves and allowances, with cost determined using the average cost method, with average cost approximating current cost. Inventory cost consists of the direct cost of merchandise including freight. The carrying value of our inventory is affected by reserves for shrinkage, damages and obsolescence.
We estimate as a percentage of sales the amount of inventory shrinkage that has occurred between the most recently completed store physical count and the end of the financial reporting period based upon historical physical inventory count results. Management adjusts these estimates based on changes, if any, in the trends yielded by our physical inventory counts, which occur throughout the fiscal year. Historically, the variation between our recorded estimates and observed results has been insignificant, and although possible, significant future variation is not expected. If our estimated shrinkage reserve varied by 10% from the amount recorded, the carrying value of inventory would have changed approximately $142,000 as of January 29, 2022.
We also evaluate the cost of our inventory by category and class of merchandise in relation to the estimated sales price. This evaluation is performed to ensure that we do not carry inventory at a value in excess of the amount we expect to realize upon the sale of the merchandise. Our reserves for excess and obsolete inventory reduce merchandise inventory to the lower of cost or net realizable value based upon our historical experience of selling goods below cost. Historically, the variation between our estimates to account for excess and obsolete inventory and actual results has been insignificant. As of January 29, 2022, our reserve for excess and obsolete inventory was approximately $332,000.
Impairment of long-lived assets - We evaluate the recoverability of the carrying amounts of long-lived assets, including lease right-of-use assets, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying values may not be recoverable. This review includes the evaluation of individual under-performing retail stores and assessing the recoverability of the carrying value of the assets related to the stores. Future cash flows are projected for the remaining lease life. If the estimated future cash flows are less than the carrying value of the assets, we record an impairment charge equal to the difference between the assets’ fair value and carrying value. The fair value is estimated using a discounted cash flow approach considering such factors as future sales levels, gross margins, changes in rent and other
expenses as well as the overall operating environment specific to that store. The amount of the impairment charge is allocated proportionately to all assets in the asset group with no asset written down below its individual fair value. We estimate the fair value of long-lived fixed assets based on orderly liquidation value.
Our asset impairment charges were $0.8 million and $9.4 million for fiscal 2021 and 2020, respectively. If our estimates and assumptions used in estimating future cash flows and asset fair values change or our operating results deteriorate, we may be exposed to additional losses that could be material.
Insurance reserves - Workers’ compensation and general liability insurance programs are predominately self-insured. It is our policy to record a self-insurance liability using estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported or paid, based on historical claims experience and actuarial methods. The assumptions made by management in estimating our self-insurance reserves include consideration of historical cost experience and judgments about the present and expected levels of cost per claim. As we obtain additional information and refine our methods regarding the assumptions and estimates we use to recognize liabilities incurred, we will adjust our reserves accordingly. As of January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, our self-insurance reserve estimates, net of estimated stop-loss insurance receivables, related to workers’ compensation and general liability insurance programs were $4.1 million and $5.3 million, respectively.
Actuarial methods are used to develop estimates of the future ultimate claim costs based on the claims incurred as of the balance sheet dates. Management believes that the various assumptions developed and actuarial methods used to determine our self-insurance reserves are reasonable and provide meaningful data and information that management uses to make its best estimate of our exposure to these risks. Arriving at these estimates, however, requires a significant amount of subjective judgment by management; and, as a result, these estimates are uncertain and our actual exposure may be different from our estimates. For example, changes in our assumptions about health care costs, the severity of accidents, the average size of claims and other factors could cause actual claim costs to vary materially from our assumptions and estimates, causing our reserves to be understated or overstated. For instance, a 10% change in our self-insurance liabilities would have affected pre-tax income by approximately $405,000 for fiscal 2021.
Income taxes - Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the differences between the financial statement and the tax law treatment of certain items. Realization of certain components of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the occurrence of future events. We record valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount we believe is more likely than not to be realized. These valuation allowances can be impacted by changes in tax laws, changes to statutory tax rates, and future taxable income levels and are based on our judgment, estimates and assumptions regarding those future events. In the event we were to determine that we would not be able to realize all or a portion of the net deferred tax assets in the future, we would increase the valuation allowance through a charge to income tax expense in the period that such determination is made. Conversely, if we were to determine that we would be able to realize our deferred tax assets in the future, in excess of the net carrying amounts, then we would decrease the recorded valuation allowance through a decrease to income tax expense in the period that such determination is made. Due to changes in facts and circumstances and the estimates and judgments that are involved in determining the proper valuation allowance, differences between actual events and prior estimates and judgments could result in adjustments to this valuation allowance. We established a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in fiscal 2019, as we had, and continue to have, a three-year cumulative loss before income taxes. As of January 29, 2022, we had a $3.6 million deferred tax valuation allowance.
We normally use an estimate of our annual effective tax rate at each interim period based on the facts and circumstances available at that time, while the actual effective tax rate is calculated at year-end. In fiscal 2021, we used the estimated annual effective tax rate for all interim quarters. In fiscal 2020, we used the actual tax rate for the period for the first and third fiscal quarters and used the estimated annual rate for the second fiscal quarter.
Our income tax returns are subject to audit by local, state and federal tax authorities, which include questions regarding our tax filing positions including the timing and amount of deductions and the allocation of income among various tax jurisdictions. In evaluating the tax exposures associated with our filing positions, we record reserves for probable exposures. We adjust our tax contingencies reserve and income tax provision in the period in which actual results of a settlement with tax authorities differ from our established reserve, the statute of limitations expires for the relevant tax authority to examine the tax position or when more information becomes available. Our tax contingencies
reserve contains uncertainties because management is required to make assumptions and to apply judgment to estimate the exposures associated with our various filing positions and whether or not the minimum requirements for recognition of tax benefits have been met. We do not believe that there is a reasonable likelihood that there will be a material change in the reserves established for tax benefits not recognized. Although we believe our judgments and estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ, and we may be exposed to losses or gains that could be material. We have no unrecognized tax benefit reserve as of January 29, 2022.