ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the related notes included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors,
including but not limited to those discussed in Item 1A “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements”). Discussions and analysis of fiscal year 2021 as compared against fiscal year 2020 have been omitted and can be found in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, filed with the SEC.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
We are a leading supplier of process control and yield management solutions and services for the semiconductor and related electronics industries. Our broad portfolio of inspection and metrology products, and related service, software and other offerings, support R&D and manufacturing of ICs, wafers and reticles. Our products, services and expertise are used by our customers to measure, detect, analyze and resolve critical and nanometric level product defects, helping them to manage manufacturing process challenges and to obtain higher finish product yields at lower cost. We also offer advanced technology solutions to address various manufacturing needs of PCBs, FPDs, Specialty Semiconductor Devices and other electronic components, including advanced packaging, LED, power devices, compound semiconductor, and data storage industries, as well as general materials research.
Our semiconductor customers generally operate in one or both of the major semiconductor device manufacturing markets: memory and foundry/logic. The pervasive and increasing needs for semiconductors in many consumer and industrial products, the rapid proliferation of new applications for more advanced semiconductor devices, and the increasing complexity associated with leading edge semiconductor manufacturing drives demand for our process control and yield management solutions. Other demand trends include the growth of end-market drivers such as AI, the deployment of 5G telecommunications technology and associated high-end mobile devices, the electrification and digitalization of the automotive industry, the revival of personal computer (“PC”) demand and associated innovations to support remote work, virtual collaboration, remote learning and entertainment, and the growth of the IoT. The favorable end market dynamics are driving our customers to make increased investments in our process control and yield management solutions as part of their overall capital investment plans. These trends also drive demand for our other products such as those used in the PCB, FPD and Specialty Semiconductor manufacturing, where the increase in technology complexity is expected to continue and further accelerate as more devices become interconnected and dependent on other electronic devices. As a result of these factors, we saw a general strengthening of demand for our products throughout fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2022. While demand for our products remains strong, the recent macro-economic uncertainty and resulting impact on consumer demand is a development we are monitoring closely. Some of our customers, particularly in the PC and mobile device end markets, are experiencing market softening in the past few months, and we have seen memory pricing in those markets weaken as well. While our concerns are elevated, we continue to see strong demand from our customers. Any push out or cancellation of deliveries by our customers could cause earnings volatility, due to increases in risk of inventory related charges as well as the timing of revenue recognition.
We are organized into four reportable segments:
•Semiconductor Process Control: A comprehensive portfolio of inspection, metrology and data analytics products as well as related service offerings that help IC manufacturers achieve target yields throughout the semiconductor fabrication process, from R&D to final volume production.
•Specialty Semiconductor Process: Advanced vacuum deposition and etching process tools used by a broad range of specialty semiconductor customers.
•PCB, Display and Component Inspection: a range of inspection, testing and measurement, and direct imaging for patterning products used by manufacturers of PCBs, FPDs, advanced packaging, MEMS, and other electronic components.
•Other: products that do not fall into the three segments above.
A majority of our revenues are derived from outside the U.S., and include geographic regions such as China, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, Europe and Israel, and Rest of Asia. China is emerging as a major region for manufacturing of logic and memory chips, adding to its role as the world’s largest consumer of ICs. Additionally, a significant portion of global FPD and PCB manufacturing has migrated to China. Government initiatives are propelling China to expand its domestic manufacturing capacity and attracting investment from semiconductor manufacturers from Taiwan, Korea, Japan and the U.S. Although China is currently seen as an important long-term growth region for the semiconductor and electronics capital equipment sector, Commerce has added certain China-based entities to the U.S. Entity List, restricting our ability to provide products and services to such entities without a license. In addition, Commerce has imposed new export licensing requirements on China-based customers engaged in military end uses, as well as requiring our customers to obtain an export license when they use certain semiconductor capital equipment based on U.S. technology to manufacture products connected to Huawei or its affiliates. While these new rules have not significantly impacted our operations to date, such actions by the U.S. government or another country could impact our ability to provide our products and services to existing and potential customers and adversely affect our business.
The following table sets forth some of our key consolidated financial information for each of our last three fiscal years:
__________________
(1)Our net income attributable to KLA for the year ended June 30, 2020 includes a pre-tax goodwill impairment charge of $256.6 million and a pre-tax charge of $22.5 million as a result of the extinguishment of debt. For additional details, refer to Note 7 “Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets” and Note 8 “Debt” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Impact of COVID-19
Events surrounding the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic had resulted in a reduction in economic activity across the globe in calendar year 2020 and early 2021. Vaccinations and pandemic containment measures have now created an environment that is driving economic growth, even as the pace of economic recovery remains uneven in various geographies. On one hand, the semiconductor and capital equipment industry has experienced multiple growth drivers, including acceleration of the pace of virtual engagement and digitization driven by COVID-19 related travel restrictions and quarantines. On the other hand, the resumption of growth has caused us to experience new constraints in our supply chain. Supply chain lead times are extended and shortages have sometimes required us to plan further ahead and increase our purchase commitments to secure critical components on a timely basis. We continue to monitor our supply chain and work with our suppliers to identify and mitigate potential gaps to ensure continuity of supply.
While all of our global manufacturing sites are currently operational, any local pandemic outbreaks or advent of new variants have required and could in the future require us to temporarily curtail production levels or temporarily cease operations based on government mandates or due to outbreaks affecting our manufacturing employees. We remain committed to the health and safety of our employees, contractors, suppliers, customers and communities, and are following government policies and recommendations designed to slow the spread of COVID-19.
We are working with government authorities in the jurisdictions where we operate, and continue to monitor our operations in an effort to ensure we follow government requirements, relevant regulations, industry standards, and best practices to help safeguard our team members, while safely continuing operations to the extent possible at our sites across the globe.
We may take further actions or alter our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions in applying our accounting policies that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates and assumptions on historical experience and evaluate them on an ongoing basis to ensure that they remain reasonable under current conditions. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We discuss the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors on a quarterly basis, and the Audit Committee has reviewed our related disclosure in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The accounting policies that reflect our more significant estimates, judgments and assumptions and which we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition. We primarily derive revenue from the sale of process control and process-enabling solutions for the semiconductor and related electronics industries, maintenance and support of all these products, installation and training services, and the sale of spare parts. Our portfolio includes yield enhancement and production solutions for manufacturing wafers and reticles, ICs, packaging, PCBs and FPDs, as well as comprehensive support and services across our installed base. Our solutions are generally not sold with a right of return, nor have we experienced significant returns from or refunds to our customers.
We account for a contract with a customer when there is approval and commitment from both parties, the rights of the parties are identified, payment terms are identified, the contract has commercial substance and collectability of consideration is probable. Our revenues are measured based on consideration stipulated in the arrangement with each customer, net of any sales incentives and amounts collected on behalf of third parties, such as sales taxes. The revenues are recognized as separate performance obligations that are satisfied by transferring control of the product or service to the customer. Our arrangements with our customers include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. A product or service is considered distinct if it is separately identifiable from other deliverables in the arrangement and if a customer can benefit from it on its own or with other resources that are readily available to the customer. The transaction consideration, including any sales incentives, is allocated between separate performance obligations of an arrangement based on the stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) for each distinct product or service. Management considers a variety of factors to determine the SSP, such as historical stand-alone sales of products and services, discounting strategies and other observable data. From time to time, our contracts are modified to account for additional, or to change existing, performance obligations. Our contract modifications are generally accounted for prospectively.
Product Revenue
We recognize revenue from product sales at a point in time when we have satisfied our performance obligation by transferring control of the product to the customer. We use judgment to evaluate whether control has transferred by considering several indicators, including whether:
•We have a present right to payment;
•The customer has legal title;
•The customer has physical possession;
•The customer has significant risk and rewards of ownership; and
•The customer has accepted the product, or whether customer acceptance is considered a formality based on history of acceptance of similar products (for example, when the customer has previously accepted the same tool, with the same specifications, and when we can objectively demonstrate that the tool meets all of the required acceptance criteria, and when the installation of the system is deemed perfunctory).
Not all of the indicators need to be met for us to conclude that control has transferred to the customer. In circumstances in which revenue is recognized prior to the product acceptance, the fair value of revenue associated with our performance obligations to install the product is deferred and recognized as revenue at a point in time, once installation is complete.
We enter into volume purchase agreements with some of our customers. We adjust the transaction consideration for estimated credits earned by our customers for such incentives. These credits are estimated based upon the forecasted and actual product sales for any given period and agreed-upon incentive rate. The estimate is updated at each reporting period.
We offer perpetual and term licenses for software products. The primary difference between perpetual and term licenses is the duration over which the customer can benefit from the use of the software, while the functionality and the features of the software are the same. Software is generally bundled with post-contract customer support (“PCS”), which includes unspecified software updates that are made available throughout the entire term of the arrangement. Revenue from software licenses is recognized at a point in time, when the software is made available to the customer. Revenue from PCS is deferred at contract inception and recognized ratably over the service period, or as services are performed.
Services Revenue
The majority of product sales include a standard six to 12-month warranty that is not separately paid for by the customers. The customers may also purchase extended warranties for periods beyond the initial year as part of the initial product sale. We have concluded that the standard 12-month warranty as well as any extended warranty periods included in the initial product sales are separate performance obligations for most of our products. The estimated fair value of warranty services is deferred and recognized ratably as revenue over the warranty period, as the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of warranty services provided by us.
Additionally, we offer product maintenance and support services, which the customer may purchase separately from the standard and extended warranty offered as part of the initial product sale. Revenue from separately negotiated maintenance and support service contracts is also recognized over time based on the terms of the applicable service period. Revenue from services performed in the absence of a maintenance contract, including training revenue, is recognized when the related services are performed. We also sell spare parts, revenue from which is recognized when control over the spare parts is transferred to the customer.
Significant Judgments
Our contracts with our customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services. Each product and service is generally capable of being distinct within the context of the contract and represents a separate performance obligation. Determining the SSP for each distinct performance obligation and allocation of consideration from an arrangement to the individual performance obligations and the appropriate timing of revenue recognition are significant judgments with respect to these arrangements. We typically estimate the SSP of products and services based on observable transactions when the products and services are sold on a stand-alone basis and those prices fall within a reasonable range. We typically have more than one SSP for individual products and services due to the stratification of these products by customers and circumstances. In these instances, we use information such as the size of the customer, geographic region, as well as customization of the products in determining the SSP. In instances where the SSP is not directly observable, we determine the SSP using information that includes market conditions, entity-specific factors, including discounting strategies, information about the customer or class of customer that is reasonably available and other observable inputs. While changes in the allocation of SSP between performance obligations will not affect the amount of total revenue recognized for a particular contract, any material changes could impact the timing of revenue recognition, which could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
Although the products are generally not sold with a right of return, we may provide other credits or sales incentives, which are accounted for either as variable consideration or material right, depending on the specific terms and conditions of the arrangement. These credits and incentives are estimated at contract inception and updated at the end of each reporting period if and when additional information becomes available.
As outlined above, we use judgments to evaluate whether or not the customer has obtained control of the product and consider several indicators in evaluating whether or not control has transferred to the customer. Not all of the indicators need to be met for us to conclude that control has transferred to the customer.
Contract Assets/Liabilities
The timing of revenue recognition, billings and cash collections may result in accounts receivable, contract assets, and contract liabilities (deferred revenue) on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. A receivable is recorded in the period we deliver products or provide services when we have an unconditional right to payment. Contract assets primarily relate to the value of products and services transferred to the customer for which the right to payment is not just dependent on the passage of time. Contract assets are transferred to accounts receivable when rights to payment become unconditional.
A contract liability is recognized when we receive payment or have an unconditional right to payment in advance of the satisfaction of performance. The contract liabilities represent (1) deferred product revenue related to the value of products that have been shipped and billed to customers and for which control has not been transferred to the customers, and (2) deferred service revenue, which is recorded when we receive consideration, or such consideration is unconditionally due, from a customer prior to transferring services to the customer under the terms of a contract. Deferred service revenue typically results from warranty services, and maintenance and other service contracts.
Contract assets and liabilities related to rights and obligations in a contract are recorded net in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Business Combinations. Accounting for business combinations requires management to make significant estimates and assumptions to determine the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition date. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made in the past have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based, in part, on historical experience and information obtained from management of the acquired companies, and are inherently uncertain. Critical estimates in valuing certain acquired intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows including revenue growth rate assumptions from product sales, customer contracts and acquired technologies, expected costs to develop IPR&D into commercially viable products, estimated cash flows from the projects when completed, including assumptions associated with the technology migration curve, estimated royalty rates used in valuing technology related intangible assets, and discount rates. The discount rates used to discount expected future cash flows to present value are typically derived from a weighted-average cost of capital (“WACC”) analysis and adjusted to reflect inherent risks. Unanticipated events and circumstances may occur that could affect either the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
We allocate the fair value of the purchase price of our acquisitions to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired, including IPR&D, based on their estimated fair values at acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of the purchase price over the fair values of these net tangible and intangible assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but our estimates and assumptions are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. As a result, during the measurement period, which will not exceed one year from the acquisition date, we record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed with the corresponding offset to goodwill. After the conclusion of the measurement period or final determination of the fair value of the purchase price of our acquisitions, whichever comes first, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
The fair value of IPR&D is initially capitalized as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the IPR&D assets may not be recoverable. Impairment of IPR&D is recorded to R&D expenses. When an IPR&D project is completed, the IPR&D is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and amortized to costs of revenues over the asset’s estimated useful life.
Acquisition-related expenses are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred.
Inventories. Inventories are stated at the lower of cost (on a first-in, first-out basis) or net realizable value. Net realizable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal and transportation. Demonstration units are stated at their manufacturing cost and written down to their net realizable value. We review and set standard costs semi-annually at current manufacturing costs in order to approximate actual costs. Our manufacturing overhead standards for product costs are calculated assuming full absorption of forecasted spending over projected volumes, adjusted for excess capacity. Abnormal inventory costs such as costs of idle facilities, excess freight and handling costs, and spoilage are recognized as current period charges. We write down product inventory based on forecasted demand and technological obsolescence and service spare parts inventory based on forecasted usage. These factors are impacted by market and economic conditions, technology changes, new product introductions and changes in strategic direction and require estimates that may include uncertain elements. Actual demand may differ from forecasted demand, and such differences may have a material effect on recorded inventory values.
Allowance for Credit Losses. A majority of our accounts receivable are derived from sales to large multinational semiconductor and electronics manufacturers throughout the world. We maintain an allowance for credit losses for expected uncollectible accounts receivable and assess collectability by reviewing accounts receivable on a collective basis where similar risk characteristics exist and on an individual basis when we identify specific customers with known disputes or collectability issues. The estimate of expected credit losses considers historical credit loss information that is adjusted for current conditions and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The allowance for credit losses is reviewed on a quarterly basis to assess the adequacy of the allowance. However, volatility in market conditions and evolving credit trends are difficult to predict and may cause variability that may have a material impact on our allowance for credit losses in future periods.
Accounting for Stock-Based Compensation Plans. Compensation expense for RSUs with performance metrics is calculated based upon expected achievement of the metrics specified in the grant, or when a grant contains a market condition, the grant date fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation. The Monte Carlo simulation fair value model requires the use of highly subjective and complex assumptions, including the award’s expected life, the price volatility of the underlying stock, as well as the potential outcomes of the market condition on the grant date of each award.
Contingencies and Litigation. We are subject to the possibility of losses from various contingencies. Considerable judgment is necessary to estimate the probability and amount of any loss from such contingencies. An accrual is made when it is probable that a liability has been incurred or an asset has been impaired and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We accrue a liability and recognize as expense the estimated costs incurred to defend or settle asserted and unasserted claims existing as of the balance sheet date. See Note 16 “Commitments and Contingencies” and Note 15 “Litigation and Other Legal Matters” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional details.
Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets - Impairment Assessments. We review goodwill for impairment annually during our third fiscal quarter or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be fully recoverable. Pursuant to the authoritative guidance, we make certain judgments and assumptions to determine our reporting units and allocate shared assets and liabilities to those reporting units, which determines the carrying values for each reporting unit. When assessing goodwill for impairment, an initial assessment of qualitative factors determines whether the existence of events and circumstances indicates it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Judgments related to qualitative factors include macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, cost factors, overall financial performance, relevant entity-specific events, a sustained decrease in share price and other events affecting the reporting units. If we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value, a
quantitative test is then performed by estimating the fair value of the reporting unit and comparing it to its carrying value including goodwill. If the former is lower, goodwill is written down by the excess amount, limited to the amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. See Note 7 “Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
We determine the fair value of a reporting unit using the market approach when deemed appropriate and the necessary information is available, or the income approach which uses discounted cash flow (“DCF”) analysis, or a combination of both. If multiple valuation methodologies are used, the results are weighted. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgment, including judgments about appropriate discount rates, revenue growth rates and the amount and timing of expected future cash flows. Discount rates are based on a WACC, which represents the average rate a business must pay its providers of debt and equity, plus a risk premium. The WACC used to test goodwill is derived from a group of comparable companies. The cash flows employed in the DCF analysis are derived from internal forecasts and external market forecasts. The market approach estimates the fair value of the reporting unit by utilizing the market comparable method which is based on revenue and earnings multiples from comparable companies.
We review purchased finite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable or that the useful lives of the assets are shorter than initially expected. We determine whether finite-lived intangible assets are recoverable based on the forecasted undiscounted future cash flows that are expected to be generated by the lowest-level associated asset grouping. Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our intangible assets are complex and subjective. If the undiscounted cash flows used in the recoverability test are less than the long-lived assets’ carrying value, we recognize an impairment loss for the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value.
We review indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the assets may not be fully recoverable. The authoritative accounting guidance allows a qualitative approach for testing indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment, similar to the impairment testing guidance for goodwill. It allows the option to first assess qualitative factors (events and circumstances) that could have affected the significant inputs used in determining the fair value of the indefinite-lived intangible asset. The qualitative factors assist in determining whether it is more-likely-than-not that the indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired. An organization may choose to bypass the qualitative assessment for any indefinite-lived intangible asset in any period and proceed directly to calculating its fair value. Our indefinite-lived intangible assets are IPR&D intangible assets.
Any impairment charges could have a material adverse effect on our operating results and net asset value in the quarter in which we recognize the impairment charge. See Note 7 “Goodwill and Purchased Intangible Assets” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Income Taxes. We account for income taxes in accordance with the authoritative guidance, which requires income tax effects for changes in tax laws to be recognized in the period in which the law is enacted.
Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized using enacted tax rates for the effect of temporary differences between the book and tax bases of recorded assets and liabilities. The guidance also requires that deferred tax assets be reduced by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that a portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. We have determined that a valuation allowance is necessary against a portion of the deferred tax assets, but we anticipate that our future taxable income will be sufficient to recover the remainder of our deferred tax assets. However, should there be a change in our ability to recover our deferred tax assets that are not subject to a valuation allowance, we could be required to record an additional valuation allowance against such deferred tax assets. This would result in an increase to our tax provision in the period in which we determine that the recovery is not probable.
On a quarterly basis, we provide for income taxes based upon an estimated annual effective income tax rate. The effective tax rate is highly dependent upon the geographic composition of worldwide earnings, tax regulations governing each region, availability of tax credits and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies. We carefully monitor the changes in many factors and adjust our effective income tax rate on a timely basis. If actual results differ from these estimates, this could have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
The calculation of our tax liabilities involves dealing with uncertainties in the application of complex tax regulations. In accordance with the authoritative guidance on accounting for uncertainty in income taxes, we recognize liabilities for uncertain tax positions based on the two-step process. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained in audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. We reevaluate these uncertain tax positions on a quarterly basis. This evaluation is based on factors including, but not limited to, changes in facts or circumstances, changes in
tax law, effectively settled issues under audit and new audit activities. Any change in these factors could result in the recognition of a tax benefit or an additional charge to the tax provision.
We record income taxes on the undistributed earnings of foreign subsidiaries unless the subsidiaries’ earnings are considered indefinitely reinvested outside the U.S. Our effective tax rate would be adversely affected if we change our intent or if such undistributed earnings are needed for U.S. operations because we would be required to provide or pay income taxes on some or all of these undistributed earnings.
Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income. The Tax Act includes provisions for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (“GILTI”) wherein U.S. taxes on foreign income are imposed in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations. This income is effectively taxed at a 10.5% tax rate in general. We elect to account for GILTI as a component of current period tax expense and not recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the basis differences expected to reverse as a result of GILTI provisions.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including those recently adopted and the expected dates of adoption as well as estimated effects, if any, on our Consolidated Financial Statements of those not yet adopted, see Note 1 “Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenues and Gross Margin
Product revenues
Our business is affected by the concentration of our customer base and our customers’ capital equipment procurement schedules as a result of their investment plans. Our product revenues in any particular period are significantly impacted by the amount of new orders that we receive during that period and, depending upon the duration of manufacturing and installation cycles, in the preceding period. Revenue is also impacted by average customer pricing, customer revenue deferrals associated with volume purchase agreements and the effect of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
The increase in product revenues by 39% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the prior fiscal year is primarily attributable to strong demand for many of our products, especially our inspection, metrology and specialty semiconductor process portfolios as customers prioritize technology development investments and also expand their capacity to meet resilient semiconductor end customer demand.
Service revenues
Service revenues are generated from product maintenance and support services, as well as billable time and material service calls made to our customers. The amount of our service revenues is typically a function of the number of systems installed at our customers’ sites and the utilization of those systems, but it is also impacted by other factors, such as our rate of service contract renewals, the types of systems being serviced and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
The increase in service revenues by 14% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the prior year is primarily attributable to an increase in our installed base.
Revenues by segment(1)
__________
(1)Segment revenues exclude corporate allocations and the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates. For additional details, refer to Note 19 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue from our Semiconductor Process Control segment increased by 38% in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the prior year primarily due to a strong demand for many of our products, especially from our inspection and metrology portfolios. The increase in revenues from our Specialty Semiconductor Process segment, which comprises etching and deposition solutions for advanced packaging and specialty semiconductor markets, is primarily driven by advances in the IC packaging technology roadmap and growth in demand for automotive power, RF filters and MEMS devices. The revenue from our PCB, Display and Component Inspection segment was relatively flat in fiscal 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021.
Revenues - Top Customers
The following customers each accounted for more than 10% of our total revenues primarily in our Semiconductor Process Control segment for the indicated periods:
Revenues by region
Revenues by region for the periods indicated were as follows:
A significant portion of our revenues continues to be generated in Asia, where a substantial portion of the world’s semiconductor manufacturing capacity is located, and we expect that trend to continue.
Gross margin
Our gross margin fluctuates with revenue levels and product mix and is affected by variations in costs related to manufacturing and servicing our products, including our ability to scale our operations efficiently and effectively in response to prevailing business conditions.
The following table summarizes the major factors that contributed to the changes in gross margin:
Changes in gross margin, which are driven by the revenue volume of products and services, reflect our ability to leverage existing infrastructure to generate higher revenues. Changes in gross margin from the mix of products and services sold reflect the impact of changes within the composition of product and service offerings, and amortization of inventory fair value adjustments from business combinations. Changes in gross margin from manufacturing labor, overhead and efficiencies reflect our ability to manage costs and drive productivity as we scale our manufacturing activity to respond to customer requirements, and amortization of intangible assets. Changes in gross margin from other service and manufacturing costs include the impact of customer support costs, including the efficiencies with which we deliver services to our customers, and the effectiveness with which we manage our production plans and inventory risk.
The increase in our gross margin from 59.9% to 61.0% during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 is primarily attributable to a higher revenue volume of products and services sold and a more profitable mix of products and services sold, partially offset by an increase in service and manufacturing costs.
Segment gross profit(1)
_________________
(1) Segment gross profit is calculated as segment revenues less segment costs of revenues and excludes corporate allocations, the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, amortization of intangible assets, inventory fair value adjustments, and acquisition-related costs. For additional details, refer to Note 19 “Segment Reporting and Geographic Information” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The primary factors impacting the performance of our segment gross profits for fiscal year 2022 compared to fiscal year 2021 are summarized as follows:
•Semiconductor Process Control segment gross profit increased due to a more profitable mix of products and services sold, partially offset by an increase in service and manufacturing costs.
•The segment gross profits of the Specialty Semiconductor Process segment increased primarily due to a more favorable mix of products and services sold as well as a higher revenue volume.
•The segment gross profits of the PCB, Display and Component Inspection and Other segments decreased primarily due to a less favorable mix of products and services sold as well as an increase in other service and manufacturing costs.
Research and Development
R&D expenses may fluctuate with product development phases and project timing as well as our R&D efforts. As technological innovation is essential to our success, we may incur significant costs associated with R&D projects, including compensation for engineering talent, engineering material costs and other expenses.
R&D expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 increased compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, primarily due to an increase in employee-related expenses of $149.4 million as a result of additional engineering headcount, higher employee benefit costs and higher variable compensation, higher consulting costs of $9.5 million and an IPR&D write-off of $6.0 million.
Our future operating results will depend significantly on our ability to produce products and provide services that have a competitive advantage in our marketplace. To do this, we believe that we must continue to make substantial and focused investments in our R&D. We remain committed to product development in new and emerging technologies.
Selling, General and Administrative
SG&A expenses during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 increased compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, primarily due to increases in the following: employee-related expenses of $55.7 million as the result of additional headcount, higher employee benefit costs and variable compensation; depreciation expense of $24.2 million; consulting costs of $15.7 million; facility and office expenses of $11.2 million; travel expenses of $6.4 million; and external sales commissions and trade shows of $6.1 million.
Goodwill Impairment
We performed our annual impairment assessment of goodwill as of February 28, 2022 and concluded that goodwill was not impaired.
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, as a result of our annual goodwill impairment testing for all reporting units, we recorded $144.2 million and $112.5 million in impairment charges in the Specialty Semiconductor Process and PCB and Display reporting units, respectively, in the three months ended March 31, 2020.
Restructuring Charges
Over the last few years, management approved plans to streamline our organization and business processes, which included reductions of workforce.
Restructuring charges were $1.0 million for the year ended June 30, 2022. Restructuring charges were $12.4 million for the year ended June 30, 2021 and included $3.9 million of non-cash charges for accelerated depreciation related to certain right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and fixed assets to be abandoned. Restructuring charges were $7.7 million for the year ended June 30, 2020.
For additional information refer to Note 20 “Restructuring Charges” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Expense and Other Expense (Income), Net
The increase in interest expense during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to higher interest expense on our Revolving Credit Facility, which is described further in the “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section below.
Other expense (income), net is comprised primarily of fair value adjustments and realized gains or losses on sales of marketable and non-marketable securities, gains or losses from revaluations of certain foreign currency denominated assets and liabilities as well as foreign currency contracts, interest-related accruals (such as interest and penalty accruals related to our tax obligations) and interest income earned on our invested cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
The increase in other expense (income), net during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to a fair value loss of $18.9 million from an equity security in the current fiscal year following initial fair value gains of $26.7 million when it became marketable in the prior fiscal year, as well as a $4.4 million gain recorded in the prior fiscal year due to the sale of our interest in PixCell Medical Technologies Ltd. These were partially offset by a gain from the sale of an investment of $27.7 million in fiscal year 2022.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
For the fiscal year ended June 30, 2020, loss on extinguishment of debt reflected a pre-tax net loss of $22.5 million associated with the redemption of our $500.0 million of Senior Notes due 2021, including associated redemption premiums, accrued interest and other fees and expenses.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table provides details of income taxes:
Tax expense was lower as a percentage of income before taxes during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 primarily due to the impact of the following items:
•Tax expense decreased by $392.7 million relating to a non-recurring tax benefit resulting from the intra-entity transfers of certain intellectual property rights during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022;
•Tax expense decreased by $29.3 million relating to the impact of an increase in the proportion of KLA's earnings generated in jurisdictions with tax rates lower than the U.S. statutory rate during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022; partially offset by
•Tax expense increased by $93.4 million relating to an increase in our unrecognized tax benefit during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022; and
•Tax expense increased by $21.2 million relating to a non-deductible decrease in the assets held within our Executive Deferred Savings Plan (“EDSP”) during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022.
Our future effective income tax rate depends on various factors, such as tax legislation, the geographic composition of our pre-tax income, the amount of our pre-tax income as business activities fluctuate, non-deductible expenses incurred in connection with acquisitions, R&D credits as a percentage of aggregate pre-tax income, non-taxable or non-deductible increases
or decreases in the assets held within our EDSP, the tax effects of employee stock activity and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies.
For discussions on tax examinations, assessments and certain related proceedings, see Note 14 “Income Taxes” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, Cash Equivalents and Marketable Securities:
As of June 30, 2022, our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaled $2.71 billion, which represents an increase of $213.5 million from June 30, 2021. The increase is mainly due to net cash provided by operating activities of $3.31 billion and net proceeds from issuance of debt, including net draws on our Prior Revolving Credit Facility and our Revolving Credit Facility, of $3.22 billion, partially offset by stock repurchases of $3.97 billion, cash paid for purchase of forward contract for accelerated share repurchases of $900.0 million, cash used for payments of dividends and dividend equivalents of $638.5 million, cash paid for business acquisitions of $479.1 million, capital expenditures of $307.3 million and net cash usage of $118.5 million related to the purchases, sales and maturities of available-for-sale and trading securities.
As of June 30, 2022, $1.29 billion of our $2.71 billion of cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities were held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices. We currently intend to indefinitely reinvest $77.1 million of the cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities held by our foreign subsidiaries for which we assert that earnings are permanently reinvested. If, however, a portion of these funds were to be repatriated to the U.S., we would be required to accrue and pay state and foreign taxes of approximately 1%-22% of the funds repatriated. The amount of taxes due will depend on the amount and manner of the repatriation, as well as the location from which the funds are repatriated. We have accrued state and foreign tax on the remaining cash of $1.21 billion of the $1.29 billion held by our foreign subsidiaries and branch offices. As such, these funds can be returned to the U.S. without accruing any additional U.S. tax expense.
Cash Dividends:
The total amounts of regular quarterly cash dividends and dividends equivalents paid during the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $638.5 million, $559.4 million and $522.4 million, respectively. The increase in the amount of regular quarterly cash dividends and dividends equivalents paid during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 as compared to fiscal 2021 reflected the increase in the level of our regular quarterly cash dividend from $0.90 to $1.05 per share that was instituted during the three months ended September 30, 2021. The amounts of accrued dividend equivalents payable for regular quarterly cash dividends on unvested RSUs with dividend equivalent rights were $11.2 million and $10.3 million as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The settlement of the accrued dividend equivalents will occur upon vesting of the underlying unvested RSUs as described in Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
On August 4, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors had declared a quarterly cash dividend of $1.30 per share. Refer to Note 21 “Subsequent Events” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the declaration of our quarterly cash dividend announced subsequent to June 30, 2022.
Stock Repurchases:
The shares repurchased under our stock repurchase program have reduced our basic and diluted weighted-average shares outstanding for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021. Our stock repurchase program is intended, in part, to mitigate the potential dilutive impact related to our equity incentive plans and shares issued in connection with our ESPP as well as to return excess cash to our stockholders. As of March 31, 2022 an aggregate of $0.70 billion was available for repurchase under our stock repurchase program. In June 2022, the Board of Directors authorized an additional $6.00 billion for share repurchases. On June 23, 2022, the Company executed ASR Agreements with two financial institutions to repurchase shares of our common stock in exchange for an upfront payment of $3.00 billion. The Company received initial deliveries totaling approximately 6.5 million shares on June 24, 2022, which represented 70% of the prepayment amount at the then prevailing market price of the Company's shares of stock. The initial shares delivered were retired immediately upon settlement and treated as repurchases of the Company's common stock for purposes of earnings per share calculations. The value of the shares yet to be delivered to the Company for the remainder of the upfront payment of approximately $0.90 billion was recorded as an unsettled forward contract, classified within stockholders’ equity. The delivery of any remaining shares would occur at the final settlement of the transactions under the ASR Agreements, which is scheduled for the second quarter of fiscal 2023, subject to earlier termination under certain limited circumstances, as set forth in the ASR Agreements. The total number of shares received under the ASR Agreements will be based on the volume-weighted average prices of the Company's stock during the term of the ASR Agreements, less an agreed-upon discount and subject to adjustments pursuant to the terms and conditions of the ASR Agreements.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities:
We have historically financed our liquidity requirements through cash generated from operations. Net cash provided by operating activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 increased by $1.13 billion compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021, from $2.19 billion to $3.31 billion, primarily as a result of the following factors:
•An increase in collections of approximately $2.6 billion mainly driven by higher shipments during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021; and
•An increase in gains from currency and interest rate derivatives used for risk management purposes of approximately $99 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021; partially offset by the following items:
•An increase in accounts payable payments of approximately $1.1 billion during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021;
•An increase in employee-related payments of approximately $292 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021; and
•An increase in income tax payments of approximately $128 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 compared to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was $876.5 million compared to $500.4 million during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. This increase in cash used was mainly due to an increase in cash paid for business acquisitions of $479.1 million and an increase in cash paid to purchase fixed assets of $75.7 million, partially offset by a decrease in net purchases of available for sale and trading securities of $169.6 million.
Cash Flows Used in Financing Activities:
Net cash used in financing activities during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was $2.26 billion compared to $1.50 billion during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. This increase was mainly due to an increase in cash used for stock repurchases of $3.03 billion, cash paid for purchase of forward contract for accelerated share repurchases of $900.0 million and an increase cash paid for dividends and dividend equivalents of $79.2 million, partially offset by an increase in net debt proceeds of $3.25 billion.
Senior Notes:
In June 2022, we issued $3.00 billion (“2022 Senior Notes”) aggregate principal amount of senior unsecured notes as follows: $1.00 billion of 4.650% senior, unsecured notes due July 15, 2032; $1.20 billion of 4.950% senior, unsecured notes due July 15, 2052; and $800.0 million of 5.250% senior, unsecured notes due July 15, 2062. A portion of the net proceeds of the 2022 Senior Notes are intended to be used to purchase up to a maximum aggregate principal amount of $500.0 million of our 2014 Senior Notes due 2024; refer to Note 21 “Subsequent Events” to our Consolidated Financial Statements for more
information on the purchase of a portion of our Senior Notes due 2024. The remainder of the net proceeds were used for share repurchases and for general corporate purposes.
In February 2020, March 2019 and November 2014, we issued $750.0 million, $1.20 billion and $2.50 billion, respectively (the “2020 Senior Notes,” “2019 Senior Notes” and “2014 Senior Notes,” respectively, and collectively with the 2022 Senior Notes, the “Senior Notes”), aggregate principal amount of senior, unsecured notes. In February 2020, October 2019 and November 2017, we repaid $500.0 million, $250.0 million and $250.0 million of the Senior Notes, respectively.
In February 2020, S&P upgraded its credit rating of the Company to “BBB+” and revised its outlook to stable, which permanently eliminated interest rate adjustments and the interest rate on the 2014 Senior Notes became fixed. The interest rates for each series of the 2020 Senior Notes and 2019 Senior Notes are not subject to credit-rating-based rate adjustments.
Since fiscal 2015, we have entered into four sets of forward contracts to lock the benchmark interest rate on portions of our Senior Notes prior to issuance (“Rate Lock Agreements”). Upon issuance of the associated debt, the Rate Lock Agreements were settled and their fair values were recorded within accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). The resulting gains and losses from these transactions are amortized to interest expense over the lives of the associated debt. For additional details on the forward contracts, refer to Note 17 “Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
The original discounts on the 2022 Senior Notes, the 2020 Senior Notes, the 2019 Senior Notes and the 2014 Senior Notes amounted to $12.8 million, $0.3 million, $6.7 million and $4.0 million, respectively, and are being amortized over the life of the debt. Interest is payable as follows: semi-annually on January 15 and July 15 of each year for the 2022 Senior Notes; semi-annually on March 1 and September 1 of each year for the 2020 Senior Notes; semi-annually on March 15 and September 15 of each year for the 2019 Senior Notes; and semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year for the 2014 Senior Notes. The relevant indentures for the Senior Notes (collectively, the “Indenture”) include covenants that limit our ability to grant liens on our facilities and enter into sale and leaseback transactions.
In certain circumstances involving a change of control followed by a downgrade of the rating of a series of Senior Notes by at least two of Moody’s, S&P and Fitch, unless we have exercised our rights to redeem the Senior Notes of such series, we will be required to make an offer to repurchase all or, at the holder’s option, any part, of each holder’s Senior Notes of that series pursuant to the Change of Control Offer. In the Change of Control Offer, we will be required to offer payment in cash equal to 101% of the aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes repurchased plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, on the Senior Notes repurchased, up to, but not including, the date of repurchase.
As of June 30, 2022, we were in compliance with all of our covenants under the Indenture associated with the Senior Notes.
Revolving Credit Facility:
As of March 31, 2022, we had in place the Prior Credit Agreement providing for a $1.00 billion five-year unsecured Prior Revolving Credit Facility with a maturity date of November 30, 2023. In the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we replaced the Prior Credit Agreement and Prior Revolving Credit Facility with the Credit Agreement and the Revolving Credit Facility having a maturity of June 8, 2027 that allows us to borrow up to $1.50 billion. Subject to the terms of the Credit Agreement, the Revolving Credit Facility may be increased by an amount up to $250.0 million in the aggregate. As of June 30, 2021, we had no aggregate principal amount of borrowings under the Prior Revolving Credit Facility. During the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, we borrowed $600.0 million from the Prior Revolving Credit Facility and made principal payments of $600.0 million. As of June 30, 2022, we had an aggregate principal amount of $275.0 million outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility, which was borrowed in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022.
We may borrow, repay and reborrow funds under the Revolving Credit Facility until the maturity date, at which time we may exercise two one-year extension options with the consent of the lenders. We may prepay outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility at any time without a prepayment penalty.
Borrowings under the Revolving Credit Facility can be made as Term Secured Overnight Financing (“SOFR”) Loans or Alternate Base Rate (“ABR”) Loans, at the Company's option. In the event that Term SOFR is unavailable, any Term SOFR elections will be converted to Daily Simple SOFR, as long as it is available. Each Term SOFR Loan will bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the applicable Adjusted Term SOFR rate, which is equal to the applicable Term SOFR rate plus 10 bps that shall not be less than zero, plus a spread ranging from 75 bps to 125 bps, as determined by the Company’s credit ratings at the time. Each ABR Loan will bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the ABR plus a spread ranging from 0 bps to 25 bps, as determined by the Company’s credit ratings at the time. We are also obligated to pay an annual commitment fee on the daily undrawn balance of the Revolving Credit Facility, which ranges from 4.5 bps to 12.5 bps, subject to an adjustment in conjunction with changes to our credit rating. The applicable interest rates and commitment fees are also subject to adjustment based on the Company’s performance against certain environmental sustainability KPI related to GHG emissions and renewable electricity usage. As of June 30, 2022, the all-in interest rate of the $275.0 million outstanding Term SOFR loans reflected the applicable adjusted Term SOFR plus a spread of 100 bps and the applicable commitment fee on the daily undrawn balance of the Revolving Credit Facility was 9 bps.
The Prior Revolving Credit Facility required us to maintain an interest expense coverage ratio as described in the Prior Credit Agreement, on a quarterly basis, covering the trailing four consecutive fiscal quarters of no less than 3.50 to 1.00. The Revolving Credit Facility removed that requirement. The maximum leverage ratio as described in the Credit Agreement, on a quarterly basis, is 3.50 to 1.00, covering the trailing four consecutive fiscal quarters for each fiscal quarter, which can be increased to 4.00 to 1.00 for a period of time in connection with a material acquisition or a series of material acquisitions. As of June 30, 2022, our maximum allowed leverage ratio was 3.50 to 1.00.
We were in compliance with all covenants under the Credit Agreement as of June 30, 2022 (the leverage ratio was 1.61 to 1.00). Considering our current liquidity position, short-term financial forecasts and ability to prepay the Revolving Credit Facility, if necessary, we expect to continue to be in compliance with our financial covenants at the end of our fiscal year ending June 30, 2023.
Factoring Arrangements
We have agreements with financial institutions to sell certain of our trade receivables and promissory notes from customers without recourse. In addition, we periodically sell certain letters of credit (“LC”), without recourse, received from customers as payment for goods and services.
The following table shows total receivables sold under factoring agreements and proceeds from sales of LC for the indicated periods:
Factoring and LC fees for the sale of certain trade receivables were recorded in other expense (income), net and were not material for the periods presented.
We maintain guarantee arrangements available through various financial institutions for up to $92.1 million, of which $59.6 million had been issued as of June 30, 2022, primarily to fund guarantees to customs authorities for value-added tax and other operating requirements of our subsidiaries in Europe, Israel, and Asia.
Material Cash Requirements
The following is a schedule summarizing our future material cash requirements as of June 30, 2022:
______________
(1)Represents $6.45 billion aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes due from fiscal year 2025 to fiscal year 2063.
(2)The interest payments associated with the Senior Notes payable included in the table above are based on the principal amount multiplied by the applicable interest rate for each series of Senior Notes. As of June 30, 2022, the interest payment under the Revolving Credit Facility for the undrawn balance is payable at 9 bps as a commitment fee based on the daily undrawn balance, and we utilized the existing rate for the projected interest payments included in the table above. Our future interest payments for the Revolving Credit Facility are subject to change due to any upgrades or downgrades to our then effective credit rating as well as the Company’s performance against certain environmental sustainability KPIs related to GHG emissions and renewable electricity usage.
(3)Represents an estimate of significant commitments to purchase inventory from our suppliers as well as an estimate of significant purchase commitments associated with goods, services and other assets in the ordinary course of business. Our obligation under these purchase commitments is generally restricted to a forecasted time-horizon as mutually agreed upon between the parties. This forecasted time-horizon can vary among different suppliers. Actual expenditures will vary based upon the volume of the transactions and length of contractual service provided. In addition, the amounts paid under these arrangements may be less in the event the arrangements are renegotiated or canceled. Certain agreements provide for potential cancellation penalties.
(4)Represents the estimated income tax payable obligation related to uncertain tax positions as well as related accrued interest. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years due to uncertainties in the timing of tax audit outcomes.
(5)Operating lease obligations represent the undiscounted lease payments under non-cancelable leases, but exclude non-lease components.
(6)As part of our employee compensation program, we issue cash-based long-term incentive (“Cash LTI”) awards to many of our employees. Cash LTI awards issued to employees under the Cash Long-Term Incentive Plan (“Cash LTI Plan”) generally vest in three or four equal installments. The amounts in the table above are those committed under the Cash LTI Plan; the expected total payment after estimated forfeitures is approximately $166 million. For additional details, refer to Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
(7)Represents an estimate of expected benefit payments up to fiscal year 2032 that was actuarially determined and excludes the minimum cash required to contribute to our defined benefit pension plans. As of June 30, 2022, our defined benefit pension plans do not have material required minimum cash contribution obligations.
(8)Represents the amount committed under our non-qualified executive deferred compensation plan. We are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years due to the uncertainties in the timing around participant’s separation and any potential changes that participants may decide to make to the previous distribution elections.
(9)Represents the transition tax liability associated with our deemed repatriation of accumulated foreign earnings resulting from the enactment of the Tax Act into law on December 22, 2017.
(10)Represents severance payments due upon dismissal of an employee or upon termination of employment in certain other circumstances as required under Israeli law.
(11)Represents amounts committed for accrued dividends payable for quarterly cash dividends for unvested RSUs granted with dividend equivalent rights. For additional details, refer to Note 10 “Equity, Long-term Incentive Compensation Plans and Non-Controlling Interest” to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Working Capital:
Working capital was $4.30 billion as of June 30, 2022, which represents an increase of $704.8 million compared to our working capital as of June 30, 2021. As of June 30, 2022, our principal sources of liquidity consisted of $2.71 billion of cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities. Our liquidity may be affected by many factors, some of which are based on the normal ongoing operations of the business, spending for business acquisitions, and other factors such as uncertainty in the global and regional economies and the semiconductor, semiconductor-related and electronic device industries. Although cash requirements will fluctuate based on the timing and extent of these factors, we believe that cash generated from operations, together with the liquidity provided by existing cash and cash equivalents balances and our $1.50 billion Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements associated with working capital needs, capital expenditures, cash dividends, stock repurchases and other contractual obligations, including repayment of outstanding debt, for at least the next 12 months.
Our credit ratings as of June 30, 2022 are summarized below:
In June 2022, S&P upgraded our senior unsecured credit rating from BBB+ to A-. In March 2022, Fitch upgraded our senior unsecured credit rating from BBB+ to A-. In June 2021, Moody's upgraded our senior unsecured credit rating from Baa1 to A2. Factors that can affect our credit ratings include changes in our operating performance, the economic environment, conditions in the semiconductor and semiconductor capital equipment industries, our financial position, material acquisitions and changes in our business strategy.