Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Overview
We were incorporated in Delaware on August 26, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more.
On January 12, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 28,750,000 units, including 3,750,000 units purchased by the underwriters pursuant to the over-allotment option granted by the Company, generating gross proceeds to the company of $287,500,000.Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 5,166,667 warrants to our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of approximately $7,750,000.
A total of $287,500,000, comprised of $281,750,000 of the proceeds from the initial public offering and $5,750,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the private placement warrants was placed in the trust account maintained by Continental, acting as trustee.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering and identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence in connection with our search for targets for our initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $10 million, which included a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $11.4 million and interest income on marketable securities held in trust account of $0.07 million, offset by a loss from operations of $0.83 million and warrant issuance cost of $0.7 million.
For the period from August 26, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of approximately $0.07 million, which comprised the loss from operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the trust account of $549,993 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash held in the trust account is generally unavailable for our use, except interests earned on the funds held in the trust account and released to pay our taxes, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem public shares. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount in the trust account was available to be withdrawn, except interests earned on the funds held in the trust account and released to pay our taxes.
We anticipate that the cash outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to allow us to operate prior to January 12, 2023. Until consummation of our business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional working capital loans (as defined in Note 4 to our financial statements) from the initial stockholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates (which is described in Note 4 to our financial statements), for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
If our estimates of the costs of undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating business combination is less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to the business combination. Moreover, we will need to raise additional capital through loans from our sponsor, officers, directors, or third parties. None of our sponsor, our officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, us. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of our business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
We have until January 12, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance of the financial statements. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after January 12, 2023.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480 and ASC 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
We issued an aggregate of 14,750,000 warrants in connection with our initial public offering and private placement, which, are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrants as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. Our warrant liability for the private placement warrants is based on a Black-Scholes-Merton model. In March 2021, the public warrants began trading on the Nasdaq Capital Market. As such, the price for the public warrants is based on an unadjusted market price.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the period reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820 “Fair Value Measurement,” with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within us are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. As of December 31, 2021, 28,750,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
We have two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. The 14,750,000 shares of Class A common stock underlying the outstanding warrants were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable, and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net income per share of common stock is the same as basic net income per share of common stock.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) ASU No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception and it also simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023. Management is currently evaluating the new guidance, but does not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a) (4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.