Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
OVERVIEW
In 2005, Chris Weiler, our Chief Executive Officer, co-founded KLDiscovery with the goal of disrupting the legal technology market by providing world-class technology solutions to manage increasingly complex data processes. Since then, we have made a number of acquisitions, including the transformative acquisition in 2016 of Kroll Ontrack, a storied technology and services company with a history dating back more than 36 years. We have also expanded our operations on a global scale to encompass 19 countries, and broadened our offerings to include Nebula, an internally developed, proprietary end-to-end ecosystem of solutions to address cases of virtually any type and complexity within eDiscovery, information governance, and data recovery. We were first recognized as one of the fastest growing companies in 2012 by both Deloitte, in the Deloitte “Fast 500”, and Inc. Magazine, in the “Inc. 5000”, and have been recognized on their respective lists for 9 consecutive years since then.
We offer differentiated solutions to our clients via a flexible and scalable usage-based business model, where the amount of revenue generated is based on the amount of data a client processes, ingests and / or hosts on our platforms. On a case-by-case basis, we also offer subscription-based arrangements, where clients pay a pre-negotiated monthly fee in exchange for an agreed upon usage capacity over a pre-defined term (typically one to three years). These arrangements typically come at a lower price per unit compared to the usage-based rates. Starting in 2022, we began building our partner channel by offering service providers multi-year subscription agreements for Nebula based on usage tiers. With usage of existing alternative software solutions in the market constrained by any combination of expensive and complex pricing models, limited features, and a lack of delivery options, we believe there is a significant population of underserved clients that can immediately benefit from Nebula our end-to-end ecosystem of solutions. We will support our partner channel with wholly dedicated business development resources, which not only reduces and/or eliminates any competitive concerns a potential partner may have, but also help us maximize the opportunity by maintaining a steady focus on this growth initiative. Our data recovery engagements are fixed fee arrangements where we generate revenue in exchange for completion of the project.
We have served a highly diverse base of over 5,400 Legal Technology clients since January 1, 2020. Our Legal Technology clients include both law firms and corporations serving many industry sectors including finance and banking, pharmaceutical and biotechnology, technology, insurance and real estate. Our data recovery clients include corporations and individuals that need to recover and access data. Our client base is robust, with many blue-chip companies, including 97% of the AM Law 100 and 61% of Fortune 500 companies, as of December 31, 2021. We have longstanding relationships with many of our clients. For example, the average length of our relationships with our top 25 clients based on revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 is approximately 13 years. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, no single client accounted for more than 5% of our revenue. See “-Key Business Metrics-Clients” below.
Our differentiated capabilities coupled with our strong culture and client loyalty drive positive results, enabling us to achieve economies of scale and operating leverage as we have grown our business and generated positive results. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 we generated:
(1) Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure. See “-Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures.”
Key factors affecting our performance
We believe that our future growth and performance will depend on many factors, including:
Maintaining our history of product innovation
We have significantly invested in developing proprietary technology and broadening our product functionality, which we believe differentiates our offerings, drives improved user experiences, and fuels strong client retention. We plan to continue our strong history of innovation by enhancing and scaling our Nebula platform and other offerings to capture a larger percentage of the eDiscovery, data recovery, and information governance markets. Our continued growth will depend in part on our ability to develop new products and features and drive adoption of our technology among our client base. As such, we intend to increase our investment in R&D and product development to support our growth.
Increased adoption of Nebula
Our long-term strategy includes pursuing widespread adoption of Nebula on a global scale. We expect the increased adoption of Nebula will enhance our business as we benefit from greater product affinity and stronger network effects. Nebula revenues also generally have higher margins than our traditional Legal Technology offerings because Nebula utilizes our own proprietary technologies. As we continue to innovate and invest in Nebula, we believe we will benefit from organic growth in client adoption and engagement. Nebula’s success will depend on the continued effectiveness of our solution, the strength of our marketing and client support efforts, and competitive pricing.
Maintain and grow client base while driving greater penetration
Retaining and expanding revenues generated from existing clients, while continuing to grow the number of net new clients, are among the key drivers of our revenue growth. We believe our position as the differentiated legal technology provider with proprietary, state of the art, EDRM software combined with our white-glove services will help drive retention and support client growth. With the proliferation of enterprise data and increasing technological transformation within the legal industry, we believe there is a sizeable and growing potential untapped market seeking to harness technology-based solutions like ours. By expanding our product offerings beyond eDiscovery to capture more of the information governance market and other parts of the EDRM, specifically data hosting and data processing, we believe we can drive increased product spending on our platform from existing clients. We believe that our competitive advantages enable us to effectively retain and further grow revenues derived from our existing clients as well as acquire new clients, as demonstrated by the consistent growth in our number of clients. As of December 31, 2021, we had 5,482 Legal Technology clients, an increase from 5,216 as of December 31, 2020. Our product pricing, marketing efforts, and the strategies of our competitors are all factors that will influence our client retention and growth.
Growth in the number of matters, particularly large matters
We continually pursue opportunities to grow the number of matters we cover, which will be an important aspect of our future growth. As the legal landscape continues to grow and evolve in complexity, we believe our proprietary technology and unique combination of technology-enabled solutions and services best position us to address the largest and most complex matters. Our ability to provide solutions that address the needs of large enterprises and the diverse and nuanced use cases they face will be an important factor in our future success.
Establishment of partner channel
In 2022, we began to build our partner channel by selling multi-year subscriptions for Nebula and leveraging and broadening our relationships with other eDiscovery providers, law firms, corporations, consulting firms and other organizations. Establishing and growing the partner channel can accelerate our growth through increased industry awareness of our offerings and improve sales efficiency. We also expect partner channel revenues to generally have higher margins than our traditional Legal Technology offerings because it is a software-only revenue stream. The
extent of the success of our partner channel strategy will depend on our ability to continue to build and maintain relationships with key industry stakeholders.
Key business metrics
The following are among the key operational and financial metrics we use to measure and evaluate our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions.
Clients
We have a strong track record of growing our client base, and we believe that our ability to increase the number of clients utilizing our Legal Technology solutions, including Nebula, is an important indicator of our market penetration, our business growth, and our future opportunities.
We define Legal Technology clients as each primary law firm and corporation to which we provided services in a litigation matter that we billed during the past two years. We define Nebula clients, each of which is included in the number of Legal Technology clients, as the total number of primary law firm, corporation, insurance company and service provider clients to which we provided legal technology solutions for a matter that we billed for use of our Nebula solution during the two years prior to the applicable date.
The following table sets forth the number of Legal Technology clients and Nebula clients as of the dates shown:
In 2021, we refined our internal data to capture the total number of clients involved in the litigation matter and revised our client counts for all periods accordingly, which impacted prior period numbers.
Number and size of matters
We believe our ability to continuously grow the number of matters on our platform over time is an important measure of scale for our business and is indicative of our future growth prospects.
We define Legal Technology matters as the total number of matters on which our Legal Technology solutions were used in the twelve months preceding the applicable date. Matters refer to a range of activities that include collecting, tracking, analyzing, and exchanging relevant data. Legal Technology solutions currently drive the majority of our revenue, and provide the foundation for additional adoption of our proprietary technology solutions and other offerings. We define Nebula matters, which are included in the number of Legal Technology matters, as the total number of matters on which our Nebula solution was used in the twelve months preceding the applicable date. Nebula is our ecosystem of proprietary technology solutions that enables clients to collect, process, store, analyze, and govern their data on a single platform. Nebula comprises a steadily growing component of our revenue and we expect Nebula adoption to increase and the number of Nebula matters to grow in the long term as we continue to introduce new product capabilities and cross-sell Nebula to our existing clients.
The following table sets forth the number of Legal Technology matters and Nebula matters as of the dates shown:
Our comprehensive product offerings, technology-enabled service offerings and reputation as a trusted partner to our clients enable us to capture matters of large size and complexity. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, 47%, and 40% of Legal Technology revenue was produced by matters that generated revenues of greater than $500,000, and 77% and 74% of our Legal Technology revenues were generated by matters of greater than $100,000 during the relevant period.
Legal Technology net revenue retention
We calculate our Legal Technology net revenue retention rate by dividing (1) total Legal Technology revenue in the twelve month period from accounts that generated Legal Technology revenue during the corresponding immediately preceding twelve month period by (2) total Legal Technology revenue in the immediately preceding twelve month period generated from those same accounts. Our Legal Technology net revenue retention rate includes revenue from use of Nebula.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our Legal Technology revenue was $276.3 million and $247.3 million, respectively, and our data recovery revenue was $44.1 million and $42.3 million, respectively.
Our Legal Technology net revenue retention rate is impacted by our usage-based pricing model, and revenue could fluctuate in any given period due to frequency of matters, client upsell, cross-sell, and churn. During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our Legal Technology net revenue retention rate, as it impacted the rest of our business, as certain accounts experienced a slowdown in the number and frequency of matters. In the long-term, we plan to increase our net revenue retention rate by increasing the number of solutions that we sell on a subscription-basis, as well as broadening the scope of our Nebula offerings, to promote strong product adoption. As we expand our products beyond eDiscovery to other information governance solutions such as big data hosting and processing, including through Nebula, we expect clients to leverage our technology earlier in the data lifecycle, providing further opportunity for us to increase our product and service penetration and client retention. Furthermore, we plan to establish and broaden our channel partnerships over time and leverage these strong relationships to further our awareness of our products and overall usage within the industry.
KEY COMPONENTS OF OUR RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Revenue
The Company primarily generates revenue from selling solutions that fall into the following categories:
(1) Legal Technology, including Nebula and our expansive suite of technology solutions, such as our end-to-end eDiscovery technology solutions, managed review solutions, collections, processing, analytics, hosting, production, and professional services; and
(2) Data recovery solutions, which provides data restoration, data erasure and data management services.
The Company generates the majority of its revenues by providing Legal Technology solutions to our clients. Most of the Company’s eDiscovery contracts are time and materials types of arrangements, while others are subscription-based, fixed-fee arrangements.
Time and materials arrangements are based on units of data stored or processed. Unit-based revenues are recognized as services are provided, based on either the amount of data stored or processed, the number of concurrent users accessing the information or the number of pages or images processed for a client, at agreed upon per unit rates. The Company recognizes revenues for these arrangements utilizing a right-to-invoice practical expedient because it has a contractual right to consideration for services completed to date.
Certain of the Company’s eDiscovery contracts are subscription-based, fixed fee arrangements, which have tiered pricing based on the quantity of data hosted. For a fixed monthly fee, the Company’s clients receive a variety of optional eDiscovery solutions, which are included in addition to the data hosting. The Company recognizes revenues for these arrangements based on predetermined monthly fees as determined in its contractual agreements, utilizing a right-to-invoice practical expedient because the Company has a contractual right to consideration for services completed to date.
Other eDiscovery agreements are time and material arrangements that require the client to pay us based on the number of hours worked at contractually agreed-upon rates. The Company recognizes revenues for these arrangements based on hours incurred and contracted rates utilizing a right-to-invoice practical expedient because it has a contractual right to consideration for services completed to date.
Data recovery engagements are mainly fixed fee arrangements requiring the client to pay a pre-established fee in exchange for the successful completion of such engagement on a predetermined device. For the recovery performed by the Company’s technicians, the revenue is recognized at a point in time, when the recovered data is sent to the customer.
Data erasure engagements are also fixed fee arrangements for which revenue is recognized at a point in time when the certificate of erasure is sent to the customer.
The Company offers term license subscriptions to Ontrack PowerControls software to customers with on-premises installations of the software pursuant to contracts that are historically one to four years in length. The term license subscriptions include maintenance and support, as well as access to future software upgrades and patches. The license and the additional support services are deemed to be one performance obligation, and thus revenue for these arrangements is recognized ratably over the term of the agreement.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our Legal Technology revenue was $276.3 million and $247.3 million, respectively, and our data recovery revenue was $44.1 million and $42.3 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, Legal Technology revenue from our technology solutions other than Nebula was $250.4 million and $228.5 million, respectively, and revenue from Nebula was $25.9 million and $18.8 million, respectively.
We currently expect non-Nebula Legal Technology revenues to remain relatively consistent over time and that Nebula revenue will continue to accelerate, with Nebula growing as a larger percentage of the mix of total revenue over time.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenue consists primarily of technology infrastructure costs, personnel costs and amortization of capitalized developed technology costs. Infrastructure costs include hardware, software, occupancy and cloud costs to support our legal technology and data recovery solutions. Personnel costs include salaries, benefits, bonuses, and stock-based compensation as well as costs associated with document reviewers which are variable based on managed review revenue. We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our infrastructure to expand the capability of solutions and enable our customers to realize the full benefit of our solutions. The level, timing and relative investment in our cloud infrastructure could affect our cost of revenue in the future. Additionally, cost of revenue in future periods could be impacted by fluctuations in document reviewer costs associated with managed review revenue.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative and amortization and depreciation expenses. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, share-based compensation and sales commissions. Operating expenses also include occupancy, software expense and professional services. We intend to continue to increase our investment in research and development to further develop our proprietary technology and support further penetration and adoption of our offering, including our end-to-end Nebula platform, including through hiring additional personnel. We expect these investments to cause research and development expense to nearly double in the next year, and thereafter anticipate research and development expense normalizing as a percentage of revenues. We also intend to significantly increase our investment in sales and marketing, particularly in the next year in connection with an expected increase in headcount by as much as 20%, with the anticipated long-term benefits from these investments expected to increase revenues also resulting in slightly decreasing sales and marketing expense as a percentage of revenue over time due to this expected increase in revenue. We also expect general and administrative expense to decrease slightly as a percentage of revenue over time due to our ability to scale as revenues increase and as a result of historical cost-cutting measures.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists primarily of interest payments and accruals relating to outstanding borrowings. We expect interest expense to vary each reporting period depending on the amount of outstanding borrowings and prevailing interest rates.
Income Tax (Benefit) Provision
Income tax (benefit) provision is primarily related to foreign tax activity and U.S. deferred taxes for tax deductible goodwill and other indefinite-lived liabilities. We maintain a valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be utilized.
Non-U.S. GAAP Financial Measures
We prepare financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We also disclose and discuss other non-U.S. GAAP financial measures such as EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA. Our management believes that these measures are relevant and provide useful supplemental information to investors by providing a baseline for evaluating and comparing our operating performance against that of other companies in our industry.
Our management believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA reflect our ongoing operating performance because the
isolation of non-cash charges, such as amortization and depreciation, and other items, such as interest, income taxes, equity compensation, acquisition and transaction costs, restructuring costs, systems establishment and costs associated with strategic initiatives which are incurred outside the ordinary course of our business, provides information about our cost structure and helps us to track our operating progress. We encourage investors and potential investors to carefully review our U.S. GAAP financial measures and compare them with our EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA. The non-U.S. GAAP financial measures that we use may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies and in the future, we may disclose different non-U.S. GAAP financial measures in order to help our investors meaningfully evaluate and compare our results of operations to our previously reported results of operations or to those of other companies in our industry.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) plus interest (income) expense, income tax expense (benefit), extinguishment of debt, impairment losses, and depreciation and amortization. We view adjusted EBITDA as an operating performance measure and as such, we believe that the most directly comparable U.S. GAAP financial measure is net loss. In calculating adjusted EBITDA, we exclude from net loss certain items that we believe are not reflective of our ongoing business as the exclusion of these items allows us to provide additional analysis of the financial components of the day-to-day operation of our business. We have outlined below the type and scope of these exclusions:
•
Acquisition, financing and transaction costs generally represent earn-out payments, rating agency fees and letter of credit and revolving facility fees, as well as professional service fees and direct expenses related to acquisitions. Because we do not acquire businesses on a predictable cycle, we do not consider the amount of acquisition- and integration-related costs to be a representative component of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
•
Strategic initiatives expenses relate to costs resulting from pursuing strategic business opportunities. We do not consider the amounts to be representative of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
•
Stock compensation and other primarily represent portions of compensation paid to our employees and executives through stock-based instruments. Determining the fair value of the stock-based instruments involves a high degree of judgment and estimation and the expenses recorded may not align with the actual value realized upon the future exercise or termination of the related stock-based awards. Additionally, stock compensation is a non-cash expense. Therefore, we believe it is useful to exclude stock-based compensation to better understand the long-term performance of our core business.
•
Change in fair value of Private Warrants relates to changes in the fair market value of the Private Warrants issued in conjunction with the Business Combination. We do not consider the amount to be representative of a component of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
•
Restructuring costs generally represent non-ordinary course costs incurred in connection with a change in a contract or a change in the makeup of our personnel often related to an acquisition, such as severance payments, recruiting fees and retention charges. We do not consider the amount of restructuring costs to be a representative component of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
•
Systems establishment costs relate to non-ordinary course expenses incurred to develop our IT infrastructure, including system automation and enterprise resource planning system implementation. We do not consider the amount to be representative of a component of the day-to-day operating performance of our business.
Our presentation of adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by any of these adjustments, or that our projections and estimates will be realized in their entirety or at all. In addition, because of these limitations, adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as a measure of liquidity or discretionary cash available to us to fund our cash needs, including investing in the growth of our business and meeting our obligations.
The use of EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA instead of U.S. GAAP measures has limitations as an analytical tool, and adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results of operations and operating cash flows as reported under U.S. GAAP. For example, EBITDA and adjusted EBITDA do not reflect:
•
our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures;
•
changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•
interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, on our indebtedness;
•
any cash income taxes that we may be required to pay;
•
any cash requirements for replacements of assets that are depreciated or amortized over their estimated useful lives and may have to be replaced in the future; or
•
all non-cash income or expense items that are reflected in our statements of cash flows.
See “-Results of Operations” below for reconciliations of adjusted EBITDA to net loss.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s Business
In 2020, following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company experienced a decline in demand for its services as many clients delayed the start of new matters and court systems were closed in response to the pandemic. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the global economy and cause significant macroeconomic uncertainty. The future impacts of the pandemic on the Company’s business are currently not estimable or determinable. As new variants of the virus emerge, infection rates vary across the countries in which we operate, and governmental authorities have continued to implement numerous and evolving measures to try to contain the spread of the virus, including travel bans and restrictions, masking recommendations and mandates, vaccine recommendations and mandates, limits on gatherings, quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and business shutdowns. We have taken proactive measures to protect the health and safety of our employees, customers, partners and suppliers, consistent with governmental guidelines.
The Company modified employee travel and work locations, and cancelled certain events, among other actions taken in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. During 2020, the Company implemented a salary exchange program pursuant to which certain employees took a temporary reduction in salary through December 31, 2020 ranging from 2% to 20% in exchange for grants of an aggregate of 417,673 stock options and 211,207 RSUs. In December 2020, the Company extended the salary exchange program for the Company’s named executive officers and for the position of Vice-President and higher but did not issue any additional stock options or restricted stock units, or RSUs, in connection with the salary exchange program. As of June 2021, the Company ended the salary exchange program. The Company will continue to actively monitor the situation and may reinstate certain of the measures described above or take further actions that alter its business operations, including actions as required by federal, state or local authorities or that it determines are in the best interests of its employees, customers, partners, suppliers and stockholders. Due to the evolving situation and the uncertainties as to the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, our business may be impacted in ways that we cannot predict.
On March 27, 2020, the President signed into U.S. federal law the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or the CARES Act, to provide emergency assistance and health care for individuals, families, and businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and generally support the U.S. economy. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to refundable payroll tax credits, deferment of employer-side social security payments, NOL carryback periods, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, modifications to the net interest deduction limitations and technical corrections to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. In particular, under the CARES Act, (i) for taxable years beginning before 2021, NOL carryforwards and carrybacks may offset 100% of taxable income, (ii) NOLs arising in the 2018, 2019, and 2020 taxable years may be carried back to each of the preceding five years to generate a refund and (iii) for taxable years beginning in 2019 and 2020, the base for interest deductibility was increased from 30% to 50% of taxable income. As permitted under the CARES Act, the Company deferred $4.0 million of payroll taxes due in 2020, of which $2.0 million was paid in December 2021 and $2.0 is expected to be paid in December 2022.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020
The results for the periods shown below should be reviewed in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements included in “Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
Revenues
Revenues increased by $31.0 million, or 10.7%, to $320.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $289.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is due to an increase in Legal Technology revenue of $29.0 million, including an increase of $21.9 million from our technology solutions exclusive of Nebula, an increase of $7.1 million from Nebula, and an increase in data recovery revenue of $2.0 million. The increase in Legal Technology revenue is due to the higher volume of matters, while the increase in data recovery revenue is due to an increase in average revenue per job.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by $16.3 million, or 11.0%, to $164.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $147.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is primarily due to increased wages of $18.2 million for document reviewers and $0.8 million for outsourced document reviewers due to increased managed review revenue and increased bonuses of $1.7 million as well as increased payroll benefits of $1.4 million and increased payroll taxes of $1.4 million, both driven by the increased wages. These increases were partially offset by expense reduction measures implemented by management, which decreased occupancy expense by $3.8 million. Additionally, severance expense decreased $0.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020 due to severance expense incurred as part of a restructuring in 2020. Amortization expense decreased by $2.6 million, as the amount of assets that reached full amortization in 2020 was more than the amount of new assets placed into service in 2021. As a percentage of revenue, our cost of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 slightly increased to 51.2% as compared to 51.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to the factors noted above.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased by $14.7 million, or 10.4%, to $156.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $141.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross profit increased primarily due to the factors noted above. As a percentage of revenue, our gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased slightly to 48.8% as compared to 49.0% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased by $21.8 million, or 15.6%, to $161.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $140.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is due to the $22.5 million impairment charge recorded in 2021 associated with our intangible assets, increased commissions of $3.1 million, due to increased revenues, increased wages due to the restoration of salaries following the end of the salary exchange program in June 2021 of $3.6 million, and increased development headcount of $1.4 million, increased consulting fees of $1.0 million, increased payroll benefits of $0.8 million, increased payroll taxes of $0.5 million, increased equity compensation of $0.5 million and increased software implementation expense of $0.9 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in depreciation and amortization expense of $8.1 million, decreased lease termination costs of $2.7 million, a decrease in professional services fees of $0.9 million, a decrease in travel and entertainment expenses of $0.3 million and a decrease in marketing expenses of $1.0 million. As a percentage of revenue, our operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to 50.5% as compared to 48.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the factors noted above.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased by $0.3 million, or 0.6%, to $50.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $50.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily due to lower interest rates on the refinanced first lien facility, partially offset by the increase in outstanding debt balance.
Loss on Debt Extinguishment
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $7.3 million in connection with the retirement of the credit agreement originally entered into in 2016 and the related revolving credit facility.
Income Tax (Benefit) Provision
A valuation allowance has been established against our net U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets, including net operating loss carryforwards. As a result, our income tax provision is primarily related to foreign taxes and U.S. deferred taxes for tax deductible goodwill and other indefinite-lived liabilities.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $(0.5) million and a provision of $0.9 million, respectively, resulting in an effective tax rate of 0.8% and (1.8)%, respectively. These effective tax rates differ from the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to the effects of foreign tax rate differences, U.S. state and local income taxes and the valuation allowance against our domestic deferred tax assets. The effective rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased from the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the impairment charge recorded in 2021 associated with our intangible assets due to the termination of our license to use the Kroll Ontrack and KrolLDiscovery tradenames, which caused a change in the allocation of our pre-tax earnings and losses among countries with differing statutory tax rates.
We reported pre-tax loss of $(61.0) million during the year ended December 31, 2021 with an effective tax rate of 0.8%, resulting in a $(0.5) million income tax benefit. The effective tax rate was primarily impacted by our valuation allowance, which caused a decrease in the tax benefit of $11.0 million. Without this item, our effective tax rate would have been approximately 18.8%, which is lower than the statutory tax rate of 21.0%, primarily due to the effects of foreign tax rate differences, U.S. state taxes and certain permanent items.
We reported pre-tax loss of $(49.0) million during the year ended December 31, 2020 with an effective tax rate of (1.8) %, resulting in a $0.9 million income tax provision. The effective tax rate was primarily impacted by our valuation allowance, which caused a decrease in the tax benefit of $9.6 million. Without this item, our effective tax rate would have been approximately 17.8%, which is lower than the statutory tax rate of 21.0%, primarily due to the effects of foreign tax rate differences, U.S. state taxes and certain permanent items.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $(60.5) million compared to $(49.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net loss increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the factors noted above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary cash needs have been to meet debt service requirements and to fund working capital and capital expenditures. We fund these requirements from cash generated by our operations, as well as funds available under our revolving credit facility discussed below. We may also seek to access the capital markets opportunistically from time-to-time depending on, among other things, financial market conditions. Although our eDiscovery solutions and information archiving services are billed on a monthly basis in arrears with amounts typically due within 30 to 45 days, the eDiscovery industry tends towards longer collectability trends. As a result, we have typically collected the majority of our eDiscovery accounts receivable within 90 to 120 days, which is consistent within the industry. With respect to our data recovery services, they are billed as the services are provided, with payments due within 30 days of billing. We typically collect our data recovery services accounts receivables within 30 to 45 days. Lastly, the majority of our data recovery software is billed monthly in advance with amounts typically due within 30 to 45 days; however, depending on the client contract, billing can occur annually, quarterly or monthly. Long outstanding receivables are not uncommon due to the nature of our Legal Technology services as litigation cases can continue for years, and in certain instances, our collections are delayed until the customer has received payment for their services in connection with a legal matter or the case has been settled. These long-outstanding invoices are a function of the industry in which we operate, rather than indicative of an inability to collect. We have experienced no material seasonality trends as it relates to collection of our accounts receivable. As of December 31, 2021, we had $46.5 million in cash compared to $51.2 million as of December 31, 2020. We expect to finance our operations over the next 12 months primarily through existing cash balances and cash flow from operating activities.
2021 Credit Agreement
On February 8, 2021, certain subsidiaries of the Company, or the Loan Parties, entered into a new secured credit agreement, or the 2021 Credit Agreement. Proceeds were used to pay in full all outstanding loans and terminate all lending commitments under the 2016 credit agreement discussed below.
The 2021 Credit Agreement provides for (i) initial term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $300 million, or the Initial Term Loans, (ii) delayed draw term loans in an aggregate principal amount of $50 million, or the Delayed Draw Term Loans, and (iii) revolving credit loans in an aggregate principal amount of $40 million, with a letter of credit sublimit of $10 million, or the Revolving Credit Loans. The Delayed Draw Term Loans are available to the Loan Parties at any time prior to February 8, 2023, subject to certain conditions.
The Initial Term Loans and Delayed Draw Term Loans bear interest, at the Loan Parties’ option, at the rate of (x) with respect to Eurocurrency Rate Loans (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), the Adjusted Eurocurrency Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) with a 1.0% floor, plus 6.50% per annum, or (y) with respect to Base Rate Loans (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), the Base Rate (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) plus 5.50% per annum. The Revolving Credit Loans bear interest, at our option, at the rate of (x) with respect to Eurocurrency Rate Loans, the Adjusted Eurocurrency Rate plus 4.00% per annum, or (y) with respect to Base Rate Loans, the Base Rate plus 3.00% per annum. The Initial Term Loans and Delayed Draw Term Loans amortize at a rate of 1.00% of the aggregate principal amount of Initial Term Loans and Delayed Draw Term Loans outstanding, payable in consecutive quarterly installments of $0.8 million, beginning on June 30, 2021.
The Initial Term Loans, Delayed Draw Term Loans and Revolving Credit Loans are each scheduled to mature on the earlier of February 8, 2026 or six months prior to maturity of our Debentures due in December 2024. The Initial Term Loans and Delayed Draw Term Loans may be voluntarily repaid at any time, but may be subject to a prepayment premium. The Initial Term Loans and Delayed Draw Term Loans are required to be repaid under certain circumstances, including with Excess Cash Flow (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement), the proceeds of an Asset Sale or Casualty Event (each as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) and the proceeds of certain refinancing indebtedness.
The obligations under the 2021 Credit Agreement are secured by substantially all of the Loan Parties’ assets. The 2021 Credit Agreement contains customary affirmative and negative covenants as well as a financial maintenance covenant that requires the Loan Parties to maintain a First Lien Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the 2021 Credit Agreement) of less than or equal to 7.00 to 1.00, tested at the end of each fiscal quarter. The Company was in compliance with all Credit Agreement covenants as of December 31, 2021.
Revolving Credit Loans
The 2021 Credit Agreement also provides for the Revolving Credit Loans, an unfunded revolver commitment for borrowing up to $40.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, there was $39.4 million available capacity for borrowing under the revolving loan commitment due to the $0.6 million of letters of credit outstanding. See Note 15- Commitments and contingencies to our audited consolidated financial statements.
2016 Credit Agreement and Revolving Credit Facility
On December 9, 2016, certain subsidiaries of the Company entered into a credit agreement, or the 2016 Credit Agreement, with a group of lenders to establish term loan facilities and a revolving line of credit for borrowings by LD Intermediate, Inc. and LD Lower Holdings, Inc. The initial term loan borrowings of $340.0 million under the first lien facility and $125.0 million under the second lien facility were to mature on December 9, 2022 and December 9, 2023, respectively. The 2016 Credit Agreement also provided for an unfunded revolver commitment for borrowing up to $30.0 million, maturing on June 9, 2022. The first lien facility and the revolving credit facility were repaid and retired on February 8, 2021 and the second lien facility was repaid on December 19, 2019. The Company incurred a loss on debt extinguishment of $7.2 million in connection with the retirement of the 2016 Credit Agreement and the related revolving credit facility.
Convertible Debentures
On December 19, 2019, the Company issued the Debentures, which mature in 2024, in an aggregate principal amount of $200 million. At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the balance due under the Convertible Debentures was $229.4 million and $214.5 million, respectively.
The Debentures mature on December 19, 2024 unless earlier converted, redeemed or repurchased, and bear interest at an annual rate of 4.00% in cash, payable quarterly, and 4.00% in kind, accrued quarterly, on the last business day of March, June, September and December. In addition, on each anniversary of December 19, 2019 (the “Closing Date”), the Company will increase the principal amount of the Debentures by an amount equal to 3.00% of the original aggregate principal amount of the Debentures outstanding (subject to reduction for any principal amount repaid). The additional payment will accrue from the last payment date for the additional payment (or the Closing Date if no prior payment has been made), and will also be payable at maturity, upon conversion and upon an optional redemption.
At any time, upon notice as set forth in the Debentures, the Debentures are redeemable at the Company’s option, in whole or in part, at a price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Debentures redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest thereon.
Subject to approval of our stockholders to allow for the full conversion of the Debentures into common stock, the Debentures are convertible into shares of the common stock at the option of the Debenture holders at any time and from time to time at a price of $18 per share, subject to certain adjustments. We intend to seek stockholder approval of the conversion of the Debentures into common stock at the earlier of our 2022 Annual Meeting of Stockholders (to be held no later than June 30, 2022) or the first meeting of our stockholders called and held after the common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq Stock Market. However, in the event the Company elects to redeem any Debentures, the holders have a right to purchase common stock from the Company in an amount equal to the amount redeemed at the conversion price.
The Debentures contain covenants that limit the Company’s ability to, among other things: (i) incur additional debt; (ii) create liens on assets; (iii) engage in certain transactions with affiliates; or (iv) designate the Company’s subsidiaries as unrestricted subsidiaries. The Debentures provide for customary events of default, including non-payment, failure to comply with covenants or other agreements in the Debentures and certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency. If an event of default occurs and continues, the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Debentures may declare the entire principal amount of all the Debentures to be due and payable immediately. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with all Debenture covenants.
Cash Flows
Our net cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Cash Flows Provided By Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $10.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $39.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in net cash provided is due to a $10.6 million increase in net loss and a $34.4 million decrease in working capital, offset by
a $15.3 million increase in non-cash expenses. The period over period increase in non-cash expenses is primarily due to a $22.5 million increase in impairment charges, and a $7.2 million increase in loss on debt extinguishment, partially offset by a $9.7 million decrease in depreciation and amortization, a $2.0 million decrease in the change in fair value of Private Warrants and a $1.6 million decrease in deferred tax benefit. The decrease in working capital for the period is primarily due to a $21.4 million decrease in changes to accounts receivable, a $9.2 million decrease in changes to accounts payable and accrued expenses, and a $5.6 million decrease in changes to prepaid expense and other current assets, partially offset by a $1.9 million increase in changes to deferred revenue. Accounts Receivable and Accounts payable fluctuate from period-to-period depending on the timing of purchases and payments.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $12.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net cash used in investing activities of $14.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in cash used in investing activities is due to increased purchases of property and equipment of $1.6 million, which was more than offset by decreased cash payments related to acquisitions in 2020 of $3.1 million.
Cash Flows Used In Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities of $1.8 million related to the payments of long-term debt of $2.3 million and capital lease obligations of $2.5 million, offset by cash generated from refinancing of the first lien debt of $2.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities of $18.6 million related to payments of long-term debt of $17.0 million and capital lease obligations of $1.6 million.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1-Organization, business and summary of significant accounting policies to our audited consolidated financial statements for a summary of accounting standards not yet adopted. There were no changes during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. In applying accounting principles, it is often required to use estimates. These estimates consider the facts, circumstances and information available, and may be based on subjective inputs, assumptions and information known and unknown to us. Material changes in certain of the estimates that we use could potentially affect, by a material amount, our consolidated financial position and results of operations. Although results may vary, we believe our estimates are reasonable and appropriate. See Note 1-Organization, business and summary of significant accounting policies to our audited consolidated financial statements for a summary of our significant accounting policies. There were no material changes during the year ended December 31, 2021. The following describes certain of our significant accounting policies that involve more subjective and complex judgments where the effect on our consolidated financial position and operating performance could be material.
Business combinations
We recognize all of the assets acquired, liabilities assumed, contractual contingencies and contingent consideration at their fair value on the acquisition date. Acquisition-related costs are recognized separately from the acquisition and expensed as incurred. Restructuring costs incurred in periods subsequent to the acquisition date are expensed when incurred. Subsequent changes to the purchase price, such as working capital adjustments, or other fair value adjustments determined during the measurement period are recorded as an adjustment to goodwill, with the exception of contingent consideration, which is recognized in the statement of operations in the period it is modified. All subsequent changes to a valuation allowance or uncertain tax position that relate to the acquired company and existed at the acquisition date that occur both within the measurement period and as a result of facts and circumstances that existed at the acquisition date are recognized as an adjustment to goodwill. All other changes in
valuation allowances are recognized as a reduction or increase to income tax expense or as a direct adjustment to additional paid-in capital as required.
Intangible assets and other long-lived assets
We evaluate the recoverability of our long-lived assets, including finite-lived intangible assets, for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of any asset to future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured as the difference between the fair value of the asset compared to its carrying amount.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the total consideration paid over our identified intangible and tangible assets and our acquisitions. We test our goodwill for impairment at the reporting unit level on an annual basis and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. These events or circumstances could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit. As of the testing date (October 1), we have determined there is one reporting unit.
We test goodwill resulting from acquisitions for impairment annually on October 1, or more frequently, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may be impaired.
Goodwill impairment exists when the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If impairment exists, the carrying value of the goodwill is reduced by the excess through an impairment charge recorded in our statements of operations. The process of evaluating the potential impairment of goodwill is subjective and requires significant judgment at many points during the analysis.
The fair value of each reporting unit is estimated using a combination of a discounted cash flow, or DCF, analysis and market-based valuation methodologies such as comparable public company trading values and values observed in recent business combinations. Determining fair value requires the exercise of significant judgments, including the amount and timing of expected future cash flows, long-term growth rates, discount rates and relevant comparable public company earnings multiples and relevant transaction multiples. The cash flows employed in the DCF analyses are based on our best estimate of future sales, earnings and cash flows after considering factors such as general market conditions, changes in working capital, long term business plans and recent operating performance.
Accordingly, we have not identified any indicators of impairment, nor have any impairment charges been recorded related to goodwill as a result of the annual impairment test.
Income Taxes
Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates, and tax planning opportunities available in the various jurisdictions in which we operate. Significant judgment is required in determining our annual tax expense and in evaluating our tax positions.
Tax law requires certain items to be included in our tax returns at different times than when the items are reflected in the financial statements. The annual tax expense reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Loss is different than that reported in our tax returns. Some of these differences are permanent (for example, expenses recorded for accounting purposes that are not deductible in the returns such as certain entertainment expenses) and some differences are temporary and reverse over time, such as depreciation expense. Temporary differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in the financial statements for which payment has been deferred, or expense for which a deduction has been taken already in the tax return, but the expense has not yet been recognized in the financial statements. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in tax returns in future years for which a benefit has
already been recorded in the financial statements, as well as tax losses that can be carried over and used in future years. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred income tax assets to the amounts we believe are more likely than not to be recovered. In evaluating the amount of any such valuation allowance, we consider the existence of cumulative income or losses in recent years, the reversal of existing temporary differences, the existence of taxable income in prior carry back years, available tax planning strategies and estimates of future taxable income for each of our taxable jurisdictions. The latter two factors involve the exercise of significant judgment. As of December 31, 2021, deferred tax asset valuation allowances totaled $81.5 million, primarily related to federal and state net operating losses available to carry forward to future years and, interest expense disallowance carryovers. Although realization is not assured, we believe it is more likely than not that all other deferred tax assets for which no valuation allowances have been established will be realized. This conclusion is based on our expectation that the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences will provide a source of taxable income to realize these deferred tax assets.
We determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination by the appropriate taxing authorities before any part of the benefit is recorded in our financial statements. A tax position is measured as the portion of the tax benefit that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon settlement with a taxing authority (that has full knowledge of all relevant information). We may be required to change our provision for income taxes when the ultimate treatment of certain items is challenged or agreed to by taxing authorities, when estimates used in determining valuation allowances on deferred tax assets significantly change, or when receipt of new information indicates the need for adjustment in valuation allowances. Future events, such as changes in tax laws, tax regulations, or interpretations of such laws or regulations, could have an impact on the provision for income tax and the effective tax rate. Any such changes could significantly affect the amounts reported in the consolidated financial statements in the year these changes occur. As of December 31, 2021, unrecognized tax benefits totaled $1.0 million, related to U.S. federal and state net operating losses available to carry forward to future years. However, due to the Company’s determination that the U.S. federal and state net operating losses for the unrecognized tax benefit would likely be realized, a valuation allowance offset was recorded against the unrecognized tax benefit, resulting in no effective tax rate impact.