ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
This MD&A is intended to provide investors with an understanding of our recent performance, financial condition and prospects. This discussion and analysis compares 2021 results to 2020. For a discussion that compares our 2020 results to 2019, see Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in Part II, Item 7 of our 2020 Annual Report on Form 10-K. The reference to "N.M." indicates that the calculation is not meaningful. In addition, we provide commentary regarding organic sales growth, which describes the impact of changes in volume, product mix and net selling prices on net sales. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates, acquisitions and exited businesses also impact the year-over-year change in net sales. Dollar amounts are reported in millions, except per share dollar amounts, unless otherwise noted.
The following will be discussed and analyzed:
•Overview of Business
•Overview of 2021 Results
•Business Environment and Trends
•Results of Operations and Related Information
•Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
•New Accounting Standards
•Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
Throughout this MD&A, we refer to financial measures that have not been calculated in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., or GAAP, and are therefore referred to as non-GAAP financial measures. These measures include adjusted gross and operating profit, adjusted net income, adjusted earnings per share, adjusted other (income) and expense, net, and adjusted effective tax rate. We believe these measures provide our investors with additional information about our underlying results and trends, as well as insight to some of the financial measures used to evaluate management.
Non-GAAP financial measures are not meant to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the comparable GAAP measures, and they should be read only in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are limitations to these non-GAAP financial measures because they are not prepared in accordance with GAAP and may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies due to potential differences in methods of calculation and items being excluded. We compensate for these limitations by using these non-GAAP financial measures as a supplement to the GAAP measures and by providing reconciliations of the non-GAAP and comparable GAAP financial measures.
The non-GAAP financial measures exclude the following items for the relevant time periods as indicated in the reconciliations included later in this MD&A:
•2018 Global Restructuring Program - In 2018, we initiated a restructuring program to reduce our structural cost base by streamlining and simplifying our manufacturing supply chain and overhead organization. The restructuring actions were completed in 2021. See Item 8, Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
•Softex Indonesia Acquisition-Related Costs - Transaction and integration costs associated with the acquisition of Softex Indonesia. See Item 8, Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
•Brazil Business Tax Credits - In the fourth quarter of 2020, we received a favorable legal ruling that resolved certain matters related to prior years' business taxes in Brazil. See Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
Overview of Business
We are a global company focused on delivering products and solutions that provide better care for a better world, with manufacturing facilities in 33 countries, including our equity affiliates, and products sold in more than 175 countries and territories. Our products are sold under well-known brands such as Kleenex, Scott, Huggies, Pull-Ups, Kotex and Depend. We have three reportable business segments: Personal Care, Consumer Tissue and K-C Professional. These business segments are described in greater detail in Item 8, Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements.
In operating our business, we seek to:
•grow our portfolio of brands through innovation, category development and commercial execution,
•leverage our cost and financial discipline to fund growth and improve margins, and
•allocate capital in value-creating ways.
We describe our business outside North America in two groups - Developing and Emerging Markets ("D&E") and Developed Markets. D&E Markets comprise Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Latin America and Asia-Pacific, excluding Australia and South Korea. Developed Markets consist of Western and Central Europe, Australia and South Korea.
On October 1, 2020, we acquired Softex Indonesia, a leader in the fast-growing Indonesian personal care market, in an all-cash transaction for approximately $1.2 billion. This transaction significantly expanded our presence in an important developing and emerging market and is a strong strategic fit with our core business. See Item 8, Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
In 2018, we initiated our 2018 Global Restructuring Program to reduce our structural cost base by streamlining and simplifying our manufacturing supply chain and overhead organization. The restructuring impacted all of our business segments and our organizations in all major geographies. The restructuring actions were completed in 2021. Savings from this initiative were $140 in 2021, bringing cumulative annual savings to $560 versus the 2017 baseline.
Overview of 2021 Results
•Net sales of $19.4 billion increased 2 percent. Organic sales decreased 1 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased sales by 1 percent, and the net impact of the Softex Indonesia acquisition and business exits in conjunction with the 2018 Global Restructuring Program increased sales approximately 1 percent.
•In North America, organic sales decreased 5 percent in consumer products and increased 1 percent in K-C Professional.
•Outside North America, organic sales increased 5 percent in D&E Markets and decreased 3 percent in Developed Markets.
•Operating Profit and Net Income Attributable to Kimberly-Clark were $2,561 and $1,814 in 2021, respectively.
•Diluted earnings per share were $5.35 in 2021 compared to $6.87 in 2020. Results in 2021 and 2020 include net charges of $0.83 and $0.94, respectively, related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program. Results in 2020 also include acquisition-related costs of $0.08 associated with the acquisition of Softex Indonesia and a benefit of $0.15 related to the resolution of certain business tax matters in Brazil.
•We continue to focus on generating cash flow and allocating capital to shareholders. Cash provided by operations was $2.7 billion in 2021. We raised our dividend in 2021 by 6.5 percent, the 49th consecutive annual increase in our dividend. Altogether, share repurchases and dividends in 2021 amounted to $1.9 billion.
In 2022, we plan to continue to execute our strategies for long-term success which include delivering balanced, sustainable growth by growing our brands in-line with or ahead of category growth, leveraging our cost and financial discipline to fund growth and improve margins, and allocating capital in value-creating ways. Our growth strategy is built on two pillars. Elevate our core business is our first pillar and is driven by delivering value-added innovations and driving category opportunities. Expanding our markets is our second pillar and emphasizes Personal Care with Latin America, Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Africa as our priority markets. Both strategies are enabled by our focus on accelerating and investing in our
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
commercial capabilities through digital marketing, revenue growth management, consumer-inspired innovation and strong in-market execution.
Our strong legacy of financial discipline supports our growth strategy by driving ongoing supply chain productivity through our FORCE (Focused On Reducing Costs Everywhere) program, controlling discretionary spending, driving down working capital and maintaining the top-tier return on invested capital. Our capital allocation strategy is consistent with our historical approach of disciplined capital spending, payment of a top tier dividend, evaluation of acquisition opportunities and allocation of excess cash flow to share repurchases.
We are subject to risks and uncertainties, which can affect our business operations and financial results. See Item 1A, "Risk Factors" in this Form 10-K for additional information.
Business Environment and Trends
Our results of operations have been, and we expect them to continue to be, affected by the following factors and key trends, which may cause our future results of operations to differ from our historical results discussed under “Results of Operations and Related Information.”
COVID-19 - The macro business environment experienced unprecedented volatility in 2021 related to the continuing effect the global COVID-19 pandemic has had on supply and demand dynamics.
We participate in fixed consumption categories where demand is generally very stable. Over the last two years, our sales have fluctuated, especially in Consumer Tissue and K-C Professional, because of COVID-19-related demand spikes, inventory destocking, and consumer usage pattern disruption. Additionally, consumer incomes have been negatively impacted by the pandemic leading to lower usage, trade-down on price tiers and slower entry into some of our categories. COVID-19 outbreaks and patterns are difficult to predict and therefore volatility of demand for our products may continue in the near term.
The pandemic has significantly disrupted supply chains across the globe. A steep drop in aggregate demand at the beginning of the pandemic caused aggregate supply to sharply contract. When demand for goods resumed at the end of 2020, supply shortages led to record levels of inflation in commodities and other costs. In addition to inflation, logistics and distribution networks, especially in the U.S., have been severely impacted by container and truck shortages and significant labor supply issues. These effects have caused challenges getting input materials into our production facilities, production delays, and delays and meaningfully higher costs to get products from our production facilities to our customers. The net effect of the global supply chain disruption led to an unprecedented increase in costs in 2021. The underlying causes of the disruption and higher costs will take time to be resolved.
Birth Rate Trends - Sales of our baby and child care products are highly correlated with birth rate trends. In recent years, birth rate declines in key countries, including China, South Korea, Russia, and the U.S., have pressured category volume growth rates. To help mitigate the effects of birth rate declines, we aim to drive sales growth at or ahead of category growth rates through innovation, premiumization, strong brand building plans and digital marketing investment as part of our Elevate and Expand growth strategy.
Competition - Our products are sold in a highly competitive global marketplace. Our competitors include global, regional and local manufacturers, including private label manufacturers which offer products that are typically sold at lower prices. In particular, private label market share has been increasing in the tissue category. Increased purchases of private label products could reduce net sales of our higher-margin products which would negatively impact our profitability. While the global marketplace in which we operate has always been highly competitive, we continue to experience increased concentration and the growing presence of large-format retailers, discounters and e-tailers. This market environment has resulted in increased pressure on pricing and other competitive factors, and we expect these pressures to continue in the coming year.
Pricing - Our net sales growth and profitability may be affected as we adjust prices to address market conditions. We adjust our product prices based on a number of variables including demand, the competitive environment, technological improvements and changes in our raw material, distribution, energy and other input costs. We increased our prices in 2021 in response to record inflation related to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2022, we anticipate changing market conditions to continue to impact pricing. Price changes may affect net sales, earnings and market share in the near term as the market adjusts to new pricing and other market conditions.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
Operating Costs - Our operating costs include raw materials, labor, selling, general and administrative expenses, taxes, currency impacts and financing costs. We manage these costs through cost saving and productivity initiatives, sourcing and hedging programs, and pricing actions. To remain competitive on our operating structure, we continue to work on programs to expand our profitability, such as our FORCE program. In 2021, our results were impacted by an unprecedented increase in our costs, particularly for pulp, resin, distribution and energy, primarily related to COVID-19 pandemic driven effects. We expect the higher cost environment will continue in 2022.
Evolving Consumer Product and Shopping Preferences - The retail landscape in many of our markets continues to evolve due to the rapid growth of eCommerce retailers, changing consumer preferences (as consumers increasingly shop online) and the increased presence of alternative retail channels, such as subscription services and direct-to-consumer businesses. Changing consumer preferences also include increased concerns in regard to post-consumer waste and packaging materials and their impact on environmental sustainability. If we experience lower sales due to changes in consumer demand for our products, our earnings could decrease. We believe our strategic growth focus, sustainability initiatives and continued investment in eCommerce capabilities has us well positioned relative to these changing dynamics.
Volatility of Global Markets - Our growth strategy depends in part on our ability to expand our operations, including in D&E markets. Some D&E markets have greater political, economic and currency volatility and greater vulnerability to infrastructure and labor disruptions. Volatility in these markets affects our production costs and the demand for our products. Volatility in global consumer, commodity and foreign currency exchange rates increased significantly during 2021 and is expected to continue in the near term.
Climate Change - We operate in many regions around the world where our businesses could be disrupted by climate change. Our climate change risk categories include risks related to the transition to a lower-carbon economy (“Transition Risks”) and risks related to the physical impacts of climate change (“Physical Risks”). Transition Risks include increased costs of raw materials, increased cost of capital, shifts in customer/consumer values and other legal, regulatory and technological risks. Physical Risks include the risk of direct damage to assets or supply chain disruption caused by severe weather events such as floods, storms, wildfires and droughts. We continue to progress toward our 2030 Sustainability Goals which include elements that aim for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, use of natural forest fibers, use of plastics and use of water in water-stressed regions.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
Results of Operations and Related Information
This section presents a discussion and analysis of net sales, operating profit and other information relevant to an understanding of 2021 results of operations.
Consolidated
(a) Corporate & Other and Other (income) and expense, net includes income and expenses not associated with the business segments, including adjustments as indicated in the Non-GAAP Reconciliations.
GAAP to Non-GAAP Reconciliations of Selected Financial Results
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
(a) "As Adjusted Non-GAAP" may not equal "As Reported" plus "Adjustments" as a result of rounding.
Analysis of Consolidated Results
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other, acquisition/exited businesses and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
(e) Combined impact of the acquisition of Softex Indonesia and exited businesses in conjunction with the 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
Net sales of $19.4 billion increased 2 percent compared to the year ago period. Operating profit was $2,561 in 2021 and $3,244 in 2020. Adjusted operating profit was $2,836 in 2021, down 21 percent compared to $3,582 in 2020. Results were impacted by lower sales volumes, $1,490 of higher input costs, driven by pulp and polymer-based materials, distribution and energy costs, and elevated other manufacturing costs. Results benefited from higher net selling prices, $410 of FORCE savings, $140 of cost savings from the 2018 Global Restructuring Program and lower marketing, research and general expenses.
Other (income) and expense, net was $28 of expense in 2021. Other (income) and expense, net was $54 of income in 2020 which primarily reflected tax credits recognized related to a favorable legal ruling that resolved certain matters related to prior years' business taxes in Brazil. Adjusted other (income) and expense, net was $18 and $32 of expense in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The effective tax rate of 21.5 percent in 2021 decreased compared to the effective tax rate of 23.1 percent in 2020. The adjusted effective tax rate was 21.5 percent in 2021 compared to 22.7 percent in 2020.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
Our share of net income of equity companies was $98 in 2021 and $142 in 2020. Results were negatively impacted by input cost inflation and 2018 Global Restructuring Program charges.
Diluted earnings per share were $5.35 in 2021 and $6.87 in 2020. Adjusted earnings per share of $6.18 in 2021 decreased 20 percent compared to $7.74 in 2020. The decrease was driven by lower adjusted operating profit and lower net income from equity companies, partially offset by a lower share count and a lower adjusted effective tax rate.
Business Segments
Personal Care
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other, acquisition/exited businesses and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
(e) Combined impact of the acquisition of Softex Indonesia and exited businesses in conjunction with the 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
Net sales in North America increased 5 percent. Changes in net selling prices and product mix increased sales by 3 percent and 1 percent, respectively. Volumes increased 1 percent, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates also increased sales 1 percent. Exited businesses decreased sales by 1 percent.
Net sales in D&E Markets increased 17 percent. The Softex Indonesia acquisition increased sales by 10 percent. Volumes increased 3 percent led by growth in China and Eastern Europe. Changes in product mix and net selling prices increased sales by 3 percent and 2 percent, respectively. The improvements in product mix were primarily in China. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates decreased sales by 1 percent.
Net sales in Developed Markets outside North America increased 11 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased sales by 6 percent, and volumes increased 4 percent led by growth in Australia. Changes in net selling prices and product mix each increased sales by approximately 1 percent.
Operating profit of $1,856 decreased 4 percent. The comparison was negatively impacted by higher input costs, partially offset by organic sales growth, cost savings, and lower marketing, research and general expenses.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
Consumer Tissue
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
Net sales in North America decreased 16 percent. Volumes decreased 15 percent, and changes in product mix decreased sales by 1 percent. The volume comparison reflects elevated shipments in North America in the year-ago period to support higher consumer and customer demand related to COVID-19.
Net sales in D&E Markets increased 1 percent. The Softex Indonesia acquisition increased sales by 3 percent. Changes in product mix and net selling prices each increased sales by 1 percent. Volumes decreased 4 percent, primarily driven by Latin America.
Net sales in Developed Markets outside North America decreased 6 percent. Volumes decreased 7 percent, primarily driven by Western and Central Europe and South Korea. Exited businesses associated with the 2018 Global Restructuring Program decreased sales by 3 percent, and changes in net selling prices decreased sales by 1 percent. Changes in foreign currency exchange rates increased sales by 5 percent.
Operating profit of $888 decreased 39 percent. The comparison was negatively impacted by higher input costs, a decline in organic sales, and higher other manufacturing costs, partially offset by cost savings and lower marketing, research and general expenses.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
K-C Professional
(a) Total may not equal the sum of volume, net price, mix/other and currency due to rounding.
(b) Combined impact of changes in volume, net price and mix/other.
(c) Combined benefits of the FORCE program and 2018 Global Restructuring Program.
(d) Includes impact of changes in product mix, marketing, research and general expenses, foreign currency transaction effects and other manufacturing costs.
Net sales in North America increased 2 percent. Changes in net selling prices and product mix increased sales by 6 percent and 1 percent, respectively, and changes in foreign currency exchange rates was slightly favorable. Volumes decreased 6 percent, reflecting continuing lower away from home demand and challenging business conditions following the outbreak of COVID-19.
Net sales in D&E Markets increased 5 percent. Changes in net selling prices increased sales by 3 percent, and volumes increased 2 percent led by Latin America.
Net sales in Developed Markets outside North America were even with the prior year. Volumes decreased 11 percent, reflecting continuing lower away from home demand and challenging business conditions following the outbreak of COVID-19, primarily in Western and Central Europe. Changes in net selling prices and foreign currency exchange rates increased sales by 6 percent and 5 percent, respectively, also in Western and Central Europe, while changes in product mix increased sales slightly.
Operating profit of $404 decreased 23 percent. The comparison was negatively impacted by higher input costs and volume declines, partially offset by increases in net selling prices, cost savings, and lower marketing, research and general expenses and other manufacturing costs.
2018 Global Restructuring Program
In 2018, we initiated our 2018 Global Restructuring Program to reduce our structural cost base by streamlining and simplifying our manufacturing supply chain and overhead organization. The restructuring actions were completed in 2021. We closed or sold 11 manufacturing facilities and expanded production capacity at several others. We exited or divested some lower-margin businesses that generated approximately 1 percent of our net sales. Workforce reductions were approximately 6,000. The restructuring impacted all of our business segments and our organizations in all major geographies. Savings from this initiative were $140 in 2021, bringing cumulative annual savings to $560 versus the 2017 baseline. See Item 8, Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Provided by Operations
Cash provided by operations was $2.7 billion in 2021 compared to $3.7 billion in 2020. The decrease was driven by lower earnings and less cash provided by working capital.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
Obligations
The following table presents our total contractual obligations for which cash flows are fixed or determinable.
•The unconditional purchase obligations are for the purchase of raw materials, primarily superabsorbent materials, pulp and utilities. Although we are primarily liable for payments on the above operating leases and unconditional purchase obligations, based on historic operating performance and forecasted future cash flows, we believe exposure to losses, if any, under these arrangements is not material.
•The open purchase orders displayed in the table represent amounts for goods and services we have negotiated for delivery.
The table does not include amounts where payments are discretionary or the timing is uncertain. The following payments are not included in the table:
•We will fund our defined benefit pension plans to meet or exceed statutory requirements and currently expect to contribute approximately $25 to these plans in 2022.
•Other postretirement benefit payments are estimated using actuarial assumptions, including expected future service, to project the future obligations. Based upon those projections, we anticipate making annual payments for these obligations of approximately $55 through 2031.
•Accrued income tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions, deferred taxes and noncontrolling interests.
Investing
Our capital spending was $1.0 billion in 2021 and $1.2 billion in 2020, including incremental spending related to the 2018 Global Restructuring Program. Acquisition, net of cash acquired of $1.1 billion in 2020 reflected the purchase of Softex Indonesia. We expect capital spending to be approximately $1.0 billion to $1.1 billion in 2022.
Financing
We issue long-term debt in the public market periodically. Proceeds from the offerings are used for general corporate purposes, including repayment of maturing debt or outstanding commercial paper indebtedness. See Item 8, Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
Our short-term debt, which consists of U.S. commercial paper with original maturities up to 90 days and/or other similar short-term debt issued by non-U.S. subsidiaries, was $118 as of December 31, 2021 (included in debt payable within one year on the consolidated balance sheet). The average month-end balance of short-term debt for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 was $1.0 billion. These short-term borrowings provide supplemental funding to support our operations. The level of short-term debt generally fluctuates depending upon the amount of operating cash flows and the timing of customer receipts and payments for items such as pension contributions, dividends and income taxes.
At December 31, 2021, total debt was $8.6 billion compared to $8.4 billion at December 31, 2020.
We maintain a $2.0 billion revolving credit facility which expires in June 2026 and a $750 revolving credit facility which expires in June 2022. These facilities, currently unused, support our commercial paper program, and would provide liquidity in the event our access to the commercial paper markets is unavailable for any reason.
The United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority, which regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”), is in the process of phasing out LIBOR with completion of the phase out expected by June 30, 2023. We have evaluated the potential
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
effect of the elimination of LIBOR and do not expect the effect to be material. Accounting guidance has been issued to ease the transition to alternative reference rates from a financial reporting perspective. See Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for details.
We paid $1.5 billion in dividends in 2021. The Board of Directors approved a dividend increase of 1.8 percent for 2022. We repurchase shares of Kimberly-Clark common stock from time to time pursuant to publicly announced share repurchase programs. During 2021, we repurchased 3.0 million shares of our common stock at a cost of $400 through a broker in the open market. We are targeting full-year 2022 share repurchases of approximately $100, subject to market conditions.
We believe that our ability to generate cash from operations and our capacity to issue short-term and long-term debt are adequate to fund working capital, capital spending, pension contributions, dividends and other needs for the foreseeable future. Further, we do not expect restrictions or taxes on repatriation of cash held outside of the U.S. to have a material effect on our overall business, liquidity, financial condition or results of operations for the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses during the reporting period. The critical accounting policies we used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements are those that are important both to the presentation of our financial condition and results of operations and require significant judgments by management with regard to estimates used. The critical judgments by management relate to accruals for sales incentives and trade promotion allowances, pension and other postretirement benefits, deferred income taxes and potential income tax assessments, and goodwill and other intangible assets. These critical accounting policies have been reviewed with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
Sales Incentives and Trade Promotion Allowances
Trade promotion programs include introductory marketing funds such as slotting fees, cooperative marketing programs, temporary price reductions and other activities conducted by our customers to promote our products. Rebate and promotion accruals are based on estimates of the quantity of customer sales. Promotion accruals also consider estimates of the number of consumer coupons that will be redeemed and timing and costs of activities within the promotional programs. Generally, the estimated redemption value of consumer coupons and related expense are based on historical patterns of coupon redemption, influenced by judgments about current market conditions such as competitive activity in specific product categories, and the cost is recorded when the related revenue from customers is realized. Our related accounting policies are discussed in Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements.
Employee Postretirement Benefits
Substantially all regular employees in the U.S. and the United Kingdom are covered by defined contribution retirement plans and certain U.S. and United Kingdom employees previously earned benefits covered by defined benefit pension plans that currently provide no future service benefit (the "Principal Plans"). Certain other subsidiaries have defined benefit pension plans or, in certain countries, termination pay plans covering substantially all regular employees. Our related accounting policies and account balances are discussed in Item 8, Note 8 to the consolidated financial statements.
Changes in certain assumptions could affect pension expense and the benefit obligations, particularly the estimated long-term rate of return on plan assets and the discount rate used to calculate the obligations:
•Long-term rate of return on plan assets. The expected long-term rate of return is evaluated on an annual basis. In setting these assumptions, we consider a number of factors including projected future returns by asset class relative to the target asset allocation. Actual asset allocations are regularly reviewed and they are periodically rebalanced to the targeted allocations when considered appropriate.
As of December 31, 2021, the Principal Plans had cumulative unrecognized investment and actuarial losses of approximately $1.0 billion. These unrecognized net losses may increase future pension expense if not offset by (i) actual investment returns that exceed the assumed investment returns, (ii) other factors, including reduced pension liabilities arising from higher discount rates used to calculate pension obligations, or (iii) other actuarial gains, and whether such accumulated actuarial losses at each measurement date exceed the "corridor" as required. If the expected
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
long-term rate of return on assets for the Principal Plans were lowered by 0.25 percent, the impact on annual pension expense would not be material in 2022.
•Discount rate. The discount (or settlement) rate used to determine the present value of our future U.S. pension obligation at December 31, 2021 was based on a portfolio of high quality corporate debt securities with cash flows that largely match the expected benefit payments of the plan. For the United Kingdom plan, the discount rate was determined based on yield curves constructed from a portfolio of high quality corporate debt securities. Each year's expected future benefit payments were discounted to their present value at the appropriate yield curve rate to determine the pension obligations. If the discount rate assumptions for these same plans were reduced by 0.25 percent, the increase in annual pension expense would not be material in 2022, and the December 31, 2021 pension liability would increase by about $111.
•Other assumptions. There are a number of other assumptions involved in the calculation of pension expense and benefit obligations, primarily related to participant demographics and benefit elections.
Pension expense for defined benefit pension plans is estimated to approximate $50 in 2022. Pension expense beyond 2022 will depend on future investment performance, our contributions to the pension trusts, changes in discount rates and various other factors related to the covered participants in the plans.
Substantially all U.S. retirees and employees have access to our unfunded health care and life insurance benefit plans. Changes in significant assumptions could affect the consolidated expense and benefit obligations, particularly the discount rate used to calculate the obligations and the health care cost trend rate:
•Discount rate. The determination of the discount rates used to calculate the benefit obligations of the plans is discussed in the pension benefit section above, and the methodology for each country is the same as the methodology used to determine the discount rate for that country's pension obligation. If the discount rate assumptions for these plans were reduced by 0.25 percent, the impact to 2022 other postretirement benefit expense and the increase in the December 31, 2021 benefit liability would not be material.
•Health care cost trend rate. The health care cost trend rate is based on a combination of inputs including our recent claims history and insights from external advisers regarding recent developments in the health care marketplace, as well as projections of future trends in the marketplace.
Deferred Income Taxes and Potential Assessments
As a global organization, we are subject to income tax requirements in various jurisdictions in the U.S. and internationally. Changes in certain assumptions related to income taxes could significantly affect consolidated results, particularly with regard to valuation allowances on deferred tax assets, undistributed earnings of subsidiaries outside the U.S. and uncertain tax positions. Our income tax related accounting policies, account balances and matters affecting income taxes are discussed in Item 8, Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements.
•Deferred tax assets and related valuation allowances. We have recorded deferred tax assets related to, among other matters, income tax loss carryforwards, income tax credit carryforwards and capital loss carryforwards and have established valuation allowances against these deferred tax assets. These carryforwards are primarily in non-U.S. taxing jurisdictions and in certain states in the U.S. Foreign tax credits earned in the U.S. in current and prior years, which cannot be used currently, also give rise to net deferred tax assets. In determining the valuation allowances to establish against these deferred tax assets, many factors are considered, including the specific taxing jurisdiction, the carryforward period, income tax strategies and forecasted earnings for the entities in each jurisdiction. A valuation allowance is recognized if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax asset will not be realized.
•Undistributed earnings. As of December 31, 2021, we have accumulated undistributed earnings generated by our foreign subsidiaries of approximately $7.8 billion. Earnings of $4.4 billion were previously subject to tax, primarily due to the one-time transition tax on foreign earnings required by the 2017 U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. Any additional taxes due with respect to such previously-taxed earnings, if repatriated, would generally be limited to foreign and U.S. state income taxes. Deferred taxes have been recorded on $0.8 billion of earnings, most of which were previously taxed for U.S. federal income tax purposes, of foreign consolidated subsidiaries expected to be repatriated. We do not intend to distribute the remaining $3.6 billion of previously taxed foreign earnings and
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
therefore have not recorded deferred taxes for foreign and U.S. state income taxes on such earnings. We consider any excess to be indefinitely reinvested. The determination of deferred tax liabilities on the amount of financial reporting over tax basis or the $3.6 billion of previously taxed foreign earnings is not practicable.
•Uncertain tax positions. We record our global tax provision based on the respective tax rules and regulations for the jurisdictions in which we operate. Where we believe that a tax position is supportable for income tax purposes, the item is included in our income tax returns. Where treatment of a position is uncertain, a liability is recorded based upon the expected most likely outcome taking into consideration the technical merits of the position based on specific tax regulations and facts of each matter. These liabilities may be affected by changing interpretations of laws, rulings by tax authorities or the expiration of the statute of limitations.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill and other indefinite-lived intangible assets are not subject to amortization and are tested for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that impairment may have occurred. Intangible assets that are deemed to have finite lives are amortized over their useful lives, generally ranging from 10 to 20 years. We typically obtain the assistance of third-party valuation specialists to measure the acquisition date fair values of goodwill and other intangible assets acquired.
Events and conditions that could result in impairment include a sustained drop in the market price of our common shares, increased competition or loss of market share, obsolescence, product claims that result in a significant loss of sales or profitability over the product life, deterioration in macroeconomic conditions, or declining financial performance in comparison to projected results.
Our related accounting policies, acquisition of Softex Indonesia, and goodwill and other intangible assets account balances are discussed in Item 8, Notes 1, 3 and 4, respectively, to the consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
In our evaluation of goodwill impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors such as macroeconomic, industry and competitive conditions, legal and regulatory environments, historical and projected financial performance, significant changes in the reporting unit and the magnitude of excess fair value over carrying amount from the previous quantitative impairment testing. If the result of a qualitative test indicates a potential for impairment, a quantitative test is performed. When a quantitative test is considered necessary, estimates of fair value for goodwill impairment testing are determined based on a discounted cash flow model and a market-based approach. We use inputs from our long-range planning process to determine growth rates for sales and earnings. The other key estimates and factors used in the discounted cash flow include, but are not limited to, discount rates, actual business trends experienced, commodity prices, foreign exchange rates, inflation and terminal growth rates.
For 2021, we completed the required annual assessment of goodwill for impairment for all of our reporting units using a qualitative assessment as of the first day of the third quarter, and we determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill significantly exceeds the carrying amount for each of our reporting units.
Other Intangible Assets
We evaluate the useful lives of our other intangible assets, primarily brands, to determine if they are finite or indefinite-lived. Reaching a determination on useful life requires significant judgments and assumptions regarding the future effects of obsolescence, demand, competition, other economic factors (such as the stability of the industry, known technological advances and expected changes in distribution channels), the level of required maintenance expenditures, and the expected lives of other related groups of assets.
Our estimate of the fair value of our brand assets is based on a discounted cash flow model and a market-based approach using inputs which include projected revenues from our long-range plan, assumed royalty rates that could be payable if we did not own the brands, and a discount rate. The cash flows used in the discounted cash flow model are consistent with those we use in our internal planning, which gives consideration to actual business trends experienced and the long-term business strategy.
We performed our 2021 impairment assessment of our intangible assets as of the first day of the third quarter, and based upon a qualitative assessment, no impairment indicators were found to be present.
KIMBERLY-CLARK CORPORATION - 2021 Annual Report
New Accounting Standards
See Item 8, Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting standards and their anticipated effects on our consolidated financial statements.
Information Concerning Forward-Looking Statements
Certain matters contained in this report concerning the business outlook, including raw material, energy and other input costs, the anticipated cost savings from our FORCE program, cash flow and uses of cash, growth initiatives, innovations, marketing and other spending, net sales, anticipated currency rates and exchange risks, including the impact in Argentina, effective tax rate, contingencies and anticipated transactions of Kimberly-Clark, including dividends, share repurchases and pension contributions, constitute "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 and are based upon management's expectations and beliefs concerning future events impacting Kimberly-Clark. There can be no assurance that these future events will occur as anticipated or that our results will be as estimated. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they were made, and we undertake no obligation to publicly update them.
The assumptions used as a basis for the forward-looking statements include many estimates that, among other things, depend on the achievement of future cost savings and projected volume increases. In addition, many factors outside our control, including pandemics (including the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak and the related responses of governments, consumers, customers, suppliers and employees), epidemics, fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, the prices and availability of our raw materials, supply chain disruptions due to COVID-19, changes in customer preferences, severe weather conditions and government trade or similar regulatory actions, potential competitive pressures on selling prices for our products, energy costs, general economic and political conditions globally and in the markets in which we do business, as well as our ability to maintain key customer relationships and to realize the expected benefits and synergies of the Softex Indonesia acquisition, could affect the realization of these estimates.
The factors described under Item 1A, "Risk Factors" in this Form 10-K, or in our other SEC filings, among others, could cause our future results to differ from those expressed in any forward-looking statements made by us or on our behalf. Other factors not presently known to us or that we presently consider immaterial could also affect our business operations and financial results.