Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
KnowBe4 has developed the leading security awareness platform enabling organizations to assess, monitor and minimize the ongoing cybersecurity threat of social engineering attacks. We are pioneering an integrated approach to security awareness that incorporates cloud-based software, machine learning, artificial intelligence, advanced analytics and insights with engaging content. Our platform is designed to drive awareness, change human behavior and enable a security-minded culture that results in a reduction of social engineering risks.
KnowBe4 was founded in 2010 by cybersecurity veterans based on the observation that social engineering tactics targeted at the human level often allowed attackers to bypass and evade security infrastructure defenses. Attackers often use low-cost, high-volume social engineering methods to gain access to systems during the initial phase of broader, multi-stage cyberattacks that can result in devastating security breaches. Social engineering
represents a universal cybersecurity risk, as it specifically targets the employees rather than the infrastructure of an organization. As such, social engineering affects organizations of all sizes and across all industries, regardless of their level of security infrastructure spend.
We began selling our initial product, which was the precursor to our Kevin Mitnick Security Awareness Training product, or KMSAT, in 2011 and began experiencing more significant market adoption in 2014, which coincides with the emergence of ransomware attacks spread via social engineering tactics. Our initial product provided the foundation for our future offerings, as it focused on enabling organizations to assess their social engineering risks and provided security awareness training to mitigate these risks. Over time, we have developed additional functionality to enhance management and risk assessment capabilities of our platform, as well as additional content to improve the efficacy of our security awareness modules. We later released KnowBe4 Compliance Manager, or KCM, a product enabling organizations to manage compliance and audit cycles. In December 2018, we released PhishER, our security orchestration and automation product, that enables security operations teams to prioritize and automate security workstreams in order to respond to and remediate social engineering attacks. Compliance Plus, our most recent product, was launched in June 2021 and expands our platform to include compliance training, with relevant and engaging content and training modules addressing compliance topics ranging from data privacy to diversity, equity and inclusion. We generate substantially all of our revenue from the sale of subscriptions to access our cloud-based platform. Our platform is priced individually by product then based on the subscription tier and number of subscribed users.
Our platform is designed to be powerful, yet highly scalable, intuitive and easy to deploy, in order to reduce the administrative burden of managing social engineering risk on security and IT professionals. Customers typically deploy our platform quickly across their entire organization to monitor and reduce the cybersecurity risk associated with their employees’ behavior. Because our products are designed to change human behavior within the entire organization, rollout of our products is performed organization-wide at the onset of a contract rather than focused on certain departments or portions of an organization. We utilize our team of customer success managers to ensure successful adoption and use of our products, while dedicated pricing specialists are tasked with negotiating customer renewals, along with upselling and cross-selling.
We sell our products to customers of all sizes both directly through our dedicated inside sales teams for enterprise and small and medium businesses (“SMBs”), and indirectly through channel partners and managed service providers, or MSPs. Our deeply integrated ecosystem of channel partners significantly expands our market reach and ability to expand our sales efforts. Our inside sales representatives work alongside our network of channel partners to engage in joint marketing activities. As a result of our ongoing MSP and channel development efforts, our partners have increasingly driven net new business, particularly in our international markets.
We have established a significant market presence, with more than 47,000 customers as of December 31, 2021, across virtually all industries and multiple geographies. No single direct customer represented more than 10% of our annual revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our business has experienced significant growth with total revenue of $246.3 million, $174.9 million and $120.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of the ends of the same periods, we had annual recurring revenue, or ARR, of $285.4 million, $198.4 million and $145.4 million, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, we had net losses of $11.8 million, $2.4 million, and $124.3 million, respectively, which included $29.3 million, $5.2 million and $118.1 million of stock compensation expense, respectively. See the sections titled “-Key Business Metrics-Annual Recurring Revenue” for additional information regarding ARR.
We have built our business with a focus on cash flow generation. Our net cash provided by operating activities was $76.8 million, $44.9 million and $29.7 million and our free cash flow was $71.2 million, $36.7 million and $18.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. See the sections titled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Free Cash Flow” for additional information regarding free cash flow and for a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
Market Adoption and Technology Leadership
Our future success depends in large part on the growth in the market for security awareness which encompasses all products designed to address the risks of social engineering. Many organizations have yet to deploy technology to address the risks associated with the human layer; as such, we view this market as a largely greenfield opportunity.
Maintaining our market-leading position in the emerging market for security awareness is a key to our future success. Our position is, in large part, attributable to the combination of software, content and data analytics on our platform, thoughtful design of our products, prioritization of content development and a focus on customer service. To maintain our position as a market leader, we intend to continue to innovate our existing product features and develop new products that complement our existing offerings and further address the ongoing risks of social engineering. Additionally, we plan to generate training content that is responsive in near real-time to the current threat environment and is localized to the geographies where we plan to expand.
Investment in Customer Acquisition and Retention
Our results of operations depend significantly on our ability to acquire new customers, which we plan to do by continuing to make significant investments in sales and marketing and brand awareness. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including our success in recruiting, training and retaining talented salespeople while scaling our sales and marketing organization and competitive dynamics in our target markets. We intend to expand both our direct inside sales force and our channel partnerships, with a focus on increasing sales to enterprise customers, which we define as customers with greater than 1,000 employees. We expect new customer acquisition, which is measured through number of customers and ARR, to drive significant growth in the near term.
Our potential for growth further depends on our ability to retain existing customers. Our dollar-based net retention rate as of December 31, 2021 was 108.4% representing an increase over our dollar-based net retention rates as of December 31, 2020 of 102.8%. We do not believe our dollar-based net retention rate as of December 31, 2019 provides a meaningful comparison to more current rates based on the evolution of our product offerings and customer adoption of our products since that time. We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate as ARR at the end of the current reporting period for customers who were also active at the end of the same reporting period in the prior year divided by ARR for the same reporting period in the prior year. Our dollar-based net retention rate measures our ability to increase revenue across our existing customer base through expanded use of our platform, offset by customers whose subscriptions with us are not renewed or are renewed at a lower amount. We believe the momentum in dollar-based net retention over prior periods reflects the investments we have made across our platform and within our customer success teams. Our management believes dollar-based net retention is an indicator of our ability to cross sell our products and has become increasingly important as we have expanded our platform through the introduction of new products.
We employ a business model centered around offering products that are easy to adopt and have a very short time to value. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, approximately 22.1%, 13.7% and 7.7%, respectively, of our customers were using more than one product. We believe these metrics indicate strong momentum in the uptake of our newer products.
Expansion of International Operations
A substantial portion of our revenue from international customers has been generated through the establishment of our international sales operations and MSPs and channel partnerships. Additionally, our recent acquisitions have resulted in further international revenue growth. We believe that there is significant opportunity to continue to grow our international business through these sales operations and further development of our international channel partnerships. We believe that global demand for our platform and products will continue to increase as international market awareness grows. We have invested, and plan to continue to invest, ahead of this potential demand, in sales, marketing and support personnel.
Key Business Metrics
We regularly monitor a number of financial and operating metrics, including the following key metrics, in order to measure our current performance and estimate our future performance, as follows:
Number of Customers
We believe that our ability to increase and retain the number of customers on our platform is an indicator of our market penetration, the growth of our business and potential future business opportunities. Increasing awareness of our platform and products, combined with further overall awareness of the need to address the human risk within cybersecurity, has continued to expand our customer base to include organizations of all sizes across all industries. We define a customer as a separate and distinct buying entity, such as a company, an educational or government institution or a distinct business unit of a large company that has an active contract with us to access our platform. We do not consider our channel partners as separate customers as our contracts are executed with the end user, and we treat MSPs, who may purchase our products on behalf of multiple companies, as a single customer. Our number of customers increased on an absolute basis, but there has been a decrease in growth rate since December 31, 2019 as a result of an increased focus on enterprise customers and MSPs, which are subject to longer sales cycles. Additionally, as our customer base grows and as our market penetration increases, we do not expect to continue to grow at the same year-over-year rate.
Annual Recurring Revenue
We believe that ARR is a key metric to measure our business performance because it is driven by our ability to acquire new customers and to maintain and expand our relationship with existing customers. We define ARR as the annualized value of all contractual subscription agreements as of the end of the period. We perform this calculation on an individual contract basis by dividing the total dollar amount of a contract by the total contract term stated in months and multiplying this amount by twelve to annualize. Calculated ARR for each individual contract is then aggregated to arrive at total ARR. ARR does not have a standardized meaning and therefore may not be comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue, deferred revenue and remaining performance obligations and is not intended to be combined with or to replace any of those items. Specifically, ARR, as calculated under the definition herein, does not adjust for the timing impact of revenue recognition for specific performance obligations identified within a contract. ARR is not a forecast and the active contracts at the date used in calculating ARR may or may not be extended by our customers. We expect ARR in total dollars to continue to grow as we execute on our growth strategies and increase our market penetration, but we do not expect to continue to grow at the same year-over-year rate as we become a larger, more mature business.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance. However, non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of our non-GAAP financial measures as tools for comparison. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial
measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
Non-GAAP Gross Profit
We define non-GAAP gross profit as GAAP gross profit excluding stock compensation expense, amortization of acquired technology and intangible assets and acquisition and integration related costs. Costs associated with acquisitions and integration include legal, accounting and other professional fees, changes in the fair value of contingent consideration obligations and other costs related to the transition of the acquired business. We believe non-GAAP gross profit provides our management and investors consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of our results of operations, as this metric generally eliminates the effects of certain variables unrelated to our overall operating performance.
Non-GAAP Operating Income (Loss)
We define non-GAAP operating income (loss) as GAAP operating loss excluding stock compensation expense, amortization of acquired technology and intangible assets and acquisition and integration related costs. Costs associated with acquisitions and integration include legal, accounting and other professional fees, as well as changes in the fair value of contingent consideration obligations and other costs related to the transition of the acquired business. We believe non-GAAP operating income (loss) provides our management and investors consistency and comparability with our past financial performance and facilitates period-to-period comparisons of operations, as this metric generally eliminates the effects of certain variables unrelated to our overall operating performance.
Free Cash Flow
We define free cash flow as net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, less purchases of property and equipment, amounts capitalized for internal-use software and principal payments on finance leases. We believe that free cash flow is a meaningful indicator of liquidity to management and investors about the amount of cash generated from our operations that,
after the investments in property, equipment and capitalized internal-use software, can be used for strategic initiatives.
Components of Our Operating Results
Revenue
We derive substantially all of our revenue from subscription services fees paid by customers for access to our cloud-based platform, which includes support services and feature upgrades throughout the duration of the customer’s contract. While contracts with our customers do not provide the customer with the right to take possession of software operating on our global cloud-based platform, certain arrangements allow our customers the ability to download and use our content within their own learning management systems. Our content is only available to customers throughout the duration of their subscription and is accessed through our cloud-based platform. Subscription services fees and access to content for download are considered separate performance obligations. Invoiced amounts are allocated between subscription services fees and access to content and are recorded as deferred revenue and revenue, respectively. Deferred revenue primarily consists of amounts invoiced to customers for our subscription services and is generally recognized ratably over the subscription period while revenue related to content downloads is recognized at contract inception.
Subscription terms typically range from one year to three years and generally begin on the date access to our platform is made available to the customer. Our subscriptions are generally invoiced upfront for the duration of the contract term or in annual installments. Our arrangements are primarily noncancellable and nonrefundable. We collect our receivables in advance of the subscription service period and often issue renewal invoices in advance of the renewal service period.
Because we recognize revenue ratably over the terms of our subscription contracts, a substantial portion of the revenue that we report in each period is attributable to the recognition of deferred revenue relating to agreements that we entered into during previous periods. Consequently, increases or decreases in new sales or renewals in any one period may not be immediately reflected as revenue for that period. Accordingly, the effect of downturns in sales and market acceptance of our platform, and potential changes in our rate of renewals, may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues consists of costs associated with delivering our platform and providing support. These costs include employee-related costs such as salaries and bonuses, stock compensation expense and benefits costs associated with our operations and support personnel, costs associated with third-party hosting services, amortization of acquired technology, amortization of capitalized internal-use software and content and allocated overhead. We expect cost of revenues to increase in absolute dollars and as a percentage of revenue, relative to the extent of the growth of our business and reflective of the impacts of wage inflation seen in the market as a whole.
Gross margin is gross profit expressed as a percentage of total revenue. Our gross margin has been and will continue to be affected by various factors, including the timing and amount of costs associated with supporting our platform, the extent to which we expand our customer success team and the rate at which we develop or acquire new products, significant features and additional content to be added to our platform. We intend to continue to invest
additional resources in our platform, content development and support services which we expect to result in steady gross margin over time.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs, including salaries and wages, stock compensation expenses and sales commissions, costs of general marketing programs and promotional activities, travel-related expenses and allocated overhead. Sales commissions earned by our sales force that are considered to be incremental to the cost of acquiring a customer are deferred and amortized over the estimated period of benefit. Marketing programs consist of advertising, events, including our KB4-CON customer conference, which has historically been held during the second quarter of each year, corporate communications, brand building and product marketing activities. We expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis as we continue to make significant investments in our sales and marketing organization to drive additional revenue, increase market share and expand our global customer base.
Technology and Development
Technology and development costs consist primarily of research and development activities, non-capitalizable costs of developing platform features and content and certain overhead allocations. These costs include employee-related costs, including salaries and wages and stock compensation expenses, consulting services, expenses related to the design, development, testing and enhancements of our subscription services. Technology and development costs are expensed as incurred. From a unit cost standpoint, our technology and development costs are lower primarily due to favorable costs of living in the geographic locations in which our offices are based but could be impacted in the future by the ongoing trend towards remote work and overall wage inflation. We expect that our technology and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars and may increase as a percentage of our revenue as we continue to enhance our platform functionality and develop new content and features. Additionally, our technology and development expense may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period to period depending on the timing and nature of development activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related costs for accounting, finance, legal, IT and human resources personnel and also include expenses related to consulting services, audit fees, tax services, legal services and other general corporate items. Our general and administrative costs also include our investment in internal initiatives and tools which we believe promotes our corporate culture and helps us attract and retain talent. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars in future periods as we continue to expand our operations, hire additional personnel, see the ongoing impact of overall wage inflation and incur costs to support the requirements of being a public company.
Interest and Other Income
Interest and other income primarily consists of interest earned on overnight cash deposits and fluctuates with market rates of interest and overall cash balances.
Interest Expense
Interest expense primarily relates to imputed interest calculated on certain contingent consideration obligations arising from our historical business combinations along with fees associated with our revolving line of credit.
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Income tax (expense) benefit consists of federal and state income taxes in the United States and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions. Our provision for income taxes has not historically been significant to our business as we have incurred operating losses to date. We maintain a valuation allowance on our U.S. federal, state and certain
foreign deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be realized.
Results of Operations
The following table is a summary of our consolidated statements of operations:
________________
(1)Amounts include stock compensation expense as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Revenues increased by $71.4 million, or 40.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Due to the nature of our subscription-based business model, a large portion of our revenues in a given period results from the recognition of revenues deferred in prior periods. As such, $37.7 million of the year-over-year increase in revenue is related to the recognition of deferred revenues from the accumulation of
contracts entered into during prior periods. Revenues earned in foreign jurisdictions has increased by $18.3 million compared to the prior year. The remaining increase is attributable to revenues from new customers combined with revenues from cross-selling additional products into our existing customer base. Our customer base grew by 28.4% and the number of customers with active subscriptions to more than one of our products has increased to 22.1% of our total customer base.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased by $8.4 million, or 31.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The overall increase in cost of revenues is in line with our increase in revenues over the same period, while maintaining our margin position. The total dollar value increase in cost of revenues is primarily driven by approximately $6.3 million of additional personnel and other allocated costs related to a combination of headcount expansion, comparatively higher performance bonuses resulting from the growth in revenues over the period and higher overhead allocations. Additionally, $1.2 million of the increase relates to increased costs of hosting our platform with the remaining cost increases attributable the amortization of both our acquired and internally developed technology and content. Gross margin slightly increased compared to the prior year period as we continue to scale our customer support functions.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $25.3 million, or 30.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in sales and marketing expenses primarily relates to increased personnel costs of $21.2 million, including salaries, commissions and performance bonus costs primarily driven by a corresponding increase in headcount which is consistent with our overall business growth. These personnel costs include an increase in stock compensation expense of $6.9 million, the majority of which relates to the issuance of RSUs to certain executives in conjunction with our initial public offering or IPO in April 2021. Additionally, $2.6 million of the increase primarily relates to marketing campaigns to support new product launches and public relations efforts to evangelize the need to address the human risk in cybersecurity. The remaining increases are attributable to overall growth in the business, including overhead allocations, of approximately $1.3 million.
Technology and Development
Technology and development expenses increased by $8.3 million, or 41.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in technology and development costs is primarily driven by $7.5 million of additional personnel costs as we increase developer headcount to support our
product development initiatives combined with higher performance bonuses. The increased developer headcount has also led to higher subscription costs and overhead allocations which make up the remaining increase. These expenses have remained consistent as a percentage of revenue as they align to growth in our business.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $34.4 million, or 72.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is driven by $29.6 million of additional personnel costs, which includes additional stock compensation expense of $16.1 million the majority of which relates to the issuance of RSUs to certain executives in conjunction with the completion of our IPO in April 2021. The remaining increase in personnel costs is driven by increases in headcount across our administrative functions, such as legal, finance and human resources, to support overall business growth and costs of operating as a public company. An additional $2.7 million of the increase relate to consulting and professional fees incurred primarily to support the completion of our IPO, secondary offerings and the two business combinations completed during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Income Tax Expense
Income tax expense increased by $2.1 million, or 112.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is due to additional deferred tax expense recognized in our foreign jurisdictions due to growth in our international operations.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenues
Revenues increased by $54.3 million, or 45.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Due to the nature of our subscription-based business model, a large portion of our revenues in a given period results from the recognition of revenues deferred in prior periods. As such, $39.0 million of the year-over-year increase in revenue is related to the recognition of deferred revenues from the accumulation of contracts entered into during prior periods. The remaining increase is attributable to revenues from new customers combined with revenues from cross-selling additional products into our existing customer base, including substantial increases in revenues earned in foreign jurisdictions. Our customer base grew by 21.5% and the number of customers with active subscriptions to more than one of our products has increased to 13.7% of our total customer base.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Margin
Cost of revenues increased by $6.2 million, or 29.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall increase in cost of revenues is primarily driven by increased headcount to support our overall business growth combined with increases in amortization related to our developed technology and content assets. The year-over-year increase in cost of revenues is slightly less than the increase in revenues over the same period due to efficiencies experienced in our customer support functions which contributed to the increase in gross margins for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to December 31, 2019.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $13.1 million, or 19.0%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in sales and marketing expenses relates to a $8.4 million increase in employee-related costs, including salaries and commissions, primarily driven by increased headcount during the year, a $2.6 million increase in software license fees and additional increases in expenditures for marketing and promotional activities and allocated overhead.
Technology and Development
Technology and development expenses increased by $9.1 million, or 85.7%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in technology and development costs is driven by an $8.0 million increase in employee-related research and development costs associated with the development of new platform features and preliminary development activity related to new products. The increase is further attributable to increased overhead allocations and production expenses which are in line with the overall growth of our business.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased by $98.1 million, or (67.3)%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is primarily due to $110.6 million of stock compensation expense recognized in conjunction with the Series C and C-1 Preferred Stock transactions during the
year ended December 31, 2019. Excluding the impact of these transactions, the change in general and administrative expenses was an increase of $12.5 million or 35.4%. These increases in general and administrative expenses as compared to the prior year relate to $9.4 million in additional employee-related expenses within our administrative functions along with an additional $3.1 million of costs to support overall growth in the business including professional fees and other general operating costs, such as depreciation and amortization expenses, lease and utilities costs.
Income Tax Benefit (Expense)
Income tax expense increased by $2.2 million, or (599.2)%, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. This increase is primarily due to a $2.7 million valuation allowance recorded as a result of continuing losses generated at our German subsidiary.
Quarterly Results of Operations
The following tables set forth selected unaudited quarterly statements of operations data for each of the eight quarters ended December 31, 2021, as well as the percentage of total revenue that each line item represents for each quarter. The information for each of these quarters has been prepared on the same basis as the audited annual consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K and, in the opinion of management, includes all adjustments, which consist only of normal recurring adjustments, necessary for the fair presentation of the results of operations for these periods. This data should be read in conjunction with our audited
consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These quarterly results are not necessarily indicative of our results of operations to be expected for any future period.
________________
(1)Amounts include stock compensation expense as follows:
(2)See the sections entitled “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Key Business Metrics-Annual Recurring Revenue” for additional information regarding ARR and “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Free Cash Flow” for additional information regarding free cash flow and for a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP.”
Percentage of Revenues Data
All values from the statement of operations, expressed as percentage of total revenues are as follows:
Quarterly Trends
Our quarterly revenue increased in each of the periods presented due to the combination of increases in the number of new customers, contract renewals with existing customers and sales of our newer products. Additionally, our fourth quarter has historically been our strongest quarter for new business and renewals, driven by the overall timing of existing customer contract renewals and customer budget timing. The effect of this seasonality in both invoicing patterns and overall new and renewal business causes the value of invoices that we generate in the fourth quarter for both new business and renewals to increase as a proportion of our total annual invoices.
Cost of revenues has increased in the majority of the periods presented. This overall increase in cost of revenues is in line with our increase in revenue and is primarily driven by increased headcount to support our overall business growth, particularly within our customer success team, combined with increases in amortization related to both our internally developed and acquired assets and costs of hosting our technology platform. Gross margin has slightly improved over the periods presented due to achieving some scale with our customer success team. We expect margins to remain steady in the future as we continue to build out our customer support structure to support our overall business growth.
Our operating expenses have generally increased over the periods presented primarily due to increases in headcount and other related expenses to support our growth. Any periods in which operating expenses have not increased sequentially were due to variability in our stock compensation expense. Additionally, our technology and development expenses fluctuate quarter to quarter based on the timing and extent of research and development and content production activities while our sales and marketing expenses can be impacted by the timing of industry events. Excluding the impact of the non-recurring stock compensation expense, our general and administrative expenses remain relatively consistent quarter over quarter when considering the growth in our business and impact of non-recurring transactions, such as business combinations and public offerings.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $273.7 million and accounts receivable of $54.1 million. Our cash and cash equivalents are comprised of time deposits with financial institutions. To date, we have financed our operations primarily through payments received from customers using our platform supplemented by proceeds from private placements of our equity securities and our recent IPO. Our positive cash flows from operations enable us to make continued investments in the growth of our business. We expect our operating cash flows to further improve over the intermediate to long term as we increase our operational efficiency and experience economies of scale.
We typically invoice our subscription customers annually in advance. Therefore, a substantial source of our cash is from customer prepayments, which are included on our consolidated balance sheets as deferred revenue. Deferred revenue consists of invoiced fees for our subscription services, prior to satisfying the criteria for revenue recognition, which are subsequently recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $265.8 million, of which $81.3 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recorded as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria are met.
Our remaining performance obligation represents contracted revenue that has not yet been recognized and includes deferred revenue, which has been invoiced and is recorded on the consolidated balance sheets, and unbilled amounts that are not recorded on the consolidated balance sheets, that will be recognized as revenue in future periods. As of December 31, 2021, our remaining performance obligation was $323.7 million.
On March 12, 2021, we entered into a three-year $100.0 million revolving credit facility with Bank of America, or the Revolving Credit Facility. Interest on any borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest, at our option, at (i) a base rate equal to the highest of (a) the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, (b) the rate of interest in effect for such date as publicly announced from time to time by Bank of America as its “prime rate”, or (c) the eurodollar rate plus 1.0%, provided that such rate will not be less than 0.5%. We are obligated to pay other customary fees for a credit facility of this size and type, including letter of credit fees, an upfront fee, and an unused commitment fee. The terms of our Revolving Credit Facility include a number of covenants that limit our ability and our subsidiaries’ ability to, among other things, incur additional indebtedness, grant liens, merge or consolidate with other companies or sell substantially all of our assets, pay dividends, make redemptions and repurchases of stock, make investments, loans and acquisitions, or engage in transactions with affiliates. We expect to use the revolving credit facility for general corporate purposes, including potential future acquisitions and expansions. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all covenants and there were no amounts outstanding under this facility.
On April 26, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we sold 10,925,000 shares of our Class A common stock at a price to the public of $16.00 per share, including 1,425,000 shares pursuant to the exercise in full of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares and 500,000 shares of our Class A common stock sold by certain selling stockholders. We received net proceeds of $153.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $10.8 million and offering expenses paid by us of approximately $3.0 million.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operating activities, available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, and unbilled amounts related to contracted non-cancelable subscription agreements, which are not reflected on the balance sheets, will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs over the next 12 months. In the future, we may enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products and technologies, and intellectual property rights, though we currently have no agreements or commitments to do so. To facilitate these acquisitions or investments, we may seek additional equity or debt financing, which may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all, impacting our ability to complete subsequent acquisitions or investments.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities.
Operating Activities
Our largest source of cash flows from operations is cash collections from our customers for subscription services while our primary use of cash for operating activities is for employee-related expenses, including salaries, commissions and monthly performance bonuses. We have historically generated positive cash flows from operations as a result of our efficient sales model and period-over-period growth in subscription services.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $76.8 million, which consisted of net loss of $11.8 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $57.7 million and net cash inflows of $30.9 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $19.5 million of amortization of deferred commissions, $13.6 million of depreciation and amortization of our capital assets and $29.3 million of stock compensation expense, which was primarily incurred in conjunction with our initial public offering (IPO). Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily resulted from a $14.5 million increase in the total deferred commissions balance, a $15.4 million increase in the accounts receivable balance and a $4.5 million increase in the prepaid and other assets balance. The increases in our deferred commissions balance is due to the addition of new customers and renewal of existing contracts during the period while the increase in accounts receivable is due to the timing of billings and collections combined with growth in sales. The increase in prepaid and other assets is primarily due to a payroll tax credit recorded during the current year of $3.2 million and additional director and officer insurance costs. Cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relate to a $80.1 million increase in the total deferred revenue balance resulting from the sale of additional subscription services under our standard advanced invoicing practices and an $18.4 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expense balances due primarily to increases in payroll related accruals resulting from payment timing and overall headcount growth.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $44.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $2.4 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $26.9 million and net cash inflows of $20.4 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $5.3 million of stock compensation expense, $14.2 million of amortization of deferred commissions and $11.8 million of depreciation and amortization of our capital assets. Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily resulted from a $6.7 million increase in the accounts receivable balance and a $8.0 million increase in the total deferred commissions balance. The increase in both accounts receivable and deferred commissions balances is due to the addition of new customers and renewal of existing contracts during the period. The accounts receivable balance is also impacted by the timing of cash collections received. Cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relate to an $46.7 million increase in the total deferred revenue balance resulting from the sale of additional subscription services under our standard advanced invoicing practices.
Net cash provided by operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 was $29.7 million, which consisted of a net loss of $124.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $131.3 million and net cash inflows of $22.7 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of $118.1 million of stock compensation expense, $12.3 million of amortization of deferred commissions and $7.9 million of depreciation and amortization of our capital assets. Cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily resulted from an $11.8 million increase in the accounts receivable balance and a $10.1 million increase in the total deferred commissions balance. The increase in both accounts receivable and deferred
commissions balances is due to the addition of new customers and renewal of existing contracts during the period. The accounts receivable balance is also impacted by the timing of cash collections received. Cash inflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities primarily relate to a $55.3 million increase in the total deferred revenue balance resulting from the sale of additional subscription services under our standard advanced invoicing practices.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to the $11.2 million of net cash paid for the acquisition of MediaPro Holdings, LLC, which closed on March 1, 2021, and the $22.6 million of net cash paid for the acquisition of SecurityAdvisor Technologies, Inc., which closed on November 1, 2021, combined with $2.5 million and $3.0 million of capital expenditures for internal-use software and the purchase of property and equipment, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 related to $2.7 million and $5.4 million of capital expenditures for internal-use software and the purchase of property and equipment, respectively.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 related to $5.0 million of business combinations completed during the year, combined with $5.2 million and $5.6 million of capital expenditures for internal-use software and the purchase of property and equipment, respectively.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to $156.0 million of net proceeds received from the issuance of common stock in connection with the IPO, as well as $5.8 million of cash received upon the issuance of common stock from the exercise of stock options and $3.3 million cash received from the issuance of common stock under the employee stock purchase plan. These financing activities proceeds were offset by $12.3 million paid for taxes related to the net share settlement of our outstanding equity instruments and $1.2 million paid to repurchase shares of our common stock, prior to the IPO.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to $4.9 million paid for the repurchase of common stock and options offset by $4.3 million of cash received upon the issuance of common stock from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash used in financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily related to a $10.0 million one-time dividend payment issued to our existing shareholders offset by the net impact of the Series C and C-1 Preferred Stock transactions where we received proceeds of $340.4 million for the issuance of preferred stock and paid $339.9 million to repurchase existing common stock and outstanding stock options.
Backlog
Our backlog is made up of remaining performance obligations associated with our customer contracts. These remaining performance obligations represent all future revenue under contract that has not yet been recognized which includes deferred revenue and unbilled amounts.
Indemnification Agreements
Our subscription agreements generally contain standard indemnification obligations. Pursuant to these agreements, we will indemnify, defend and hold the other party harmless with respect to a claim, suit, or proceeding brought against the other party by a third party alleging that our intellectual property infringes upon the intellectual property of the third party, or results from a breach of our representations and warranties or covenants, or that results from any acts of negligence or willful misconduct. The term of these indemnification agreements is generally perpetual any time after the execution of the agreement. Typically, these indemnification provisions do not provide for a maximum potential amount of future payments we could be required to make. However, in the past we have not been obligated to make significant payments for these obligations and no liabilities have been recorded for these obligations on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020.
We also indemnify our officers and directors for certain events or occurrences, subject to certain limits, while the officer is or was serving at our request in such capacity. The maximum amount of potential future indemnification is unlimited. However, our director and officer insurance policy limits our exposure and enables us to recover a portion of any future amounts paid. Historically, we have not been obligated to make any payments for these obligations and no liabilities have been recorded for these obligations on our consolidated balance sheets as of December 31, 2021 or December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In the preparation of these consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. To the extent that there are material differences between these estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations would be affected. We base our estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which we discuss below.
Revenue Recognition
We account for revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, Topic 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers, and apply the following five-step approach for considering contracts:
1.Identification of the contract, or contracts, with the customer.
2.Identification of the performance obligations in the contract.
3.Determination of the transaction price.
4.Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
5.Recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
We recognize revenue at the time the related performance obligation is satisfied by transferring the service to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services, net of any sales or other tax. Our subscription contracts typically vary from one year to three years and are generally noncancellable and nonrefundable.
Subscription services revenue consists of subscription fees earned from providing access to our cloud-based platform, including support services and feature upgrades, if and when available. Our cloud-based platform also includes training content which can be downloaded by the customer during their subscription term. Our subscription service contracts do not provide customers with the right to take possession of the software operating on the cloud platform and, as a result, are accounted for as service arrangements. Our customers’ ability to access our platform represents a series of distinct services, which fulfills our performance obligation over the subscription term. Accordingly, the amounts invoiced related to the ratable portion of subscription revenue are recorded as deferred revenue and recognized on a straight-line basis over the contract term, beginning on the date that the service is made available to the customer.
Additionally, our customers’ ability to access and download the content hosted within our KMSAT product is considered distinct and accounted for as a separate performance obligation, as our customers benefit from the use of the content independent of the KMSAT product through the download. The portion of the transaction price allocated to the downloadable content performance obligation is recognized as revenue at contract inception when the customer gains access to the downloadable content.
The transaction price is allocated to the separate performance obligations on a relative stand-alone selling price, or SSP, basis. The SSP for the ratable portion of subscription revenue is determined using observable stand-alone sales data, including adjustments for standard discounting practices. As it relates to the content available for download, we determine SSP using an adjusted market assessment approach , which requires significant judgment.
The calculation of SSP primarily utilizes suggested royalty rates, assumptions regarding content production costs and other industry pricing data.
Deferred Commissions
We capitalize sales commissions and associated payroll taxes and benefits paid to internal sales personnel that are considered incremental to the acquisition of customer contracts. These costs are recorded as deferred commissions on the consolidated balance sheets upon invoicing to the customer and are paid upon cash collection from the customer. We determine whether costs should be deferred based on sales compensation plans if the commissions are incremental and would not have occurred absent the customer contract. Sales commissions related to an initial subscription contract are considered incremental to the acquisition of the customer contract to the extent that they exceed commissions earned on renewal sales. Sales commissions related to the renewal of a subscription contract are not considered commensurate with the commissions paid for the acquisition of the initial subscription contract given the substantive difference in commission rate between new and renewal contracts.
The portion of commissions paid upon the initial acquisition of a contract that are incremental to acquisition of the customer contract are amortized over an estimated period of benefit of six years. The portion of commissions paid upon initial acquisition that are commensurate with those paid on a renewal contract and commissions paid related to renewal contracts are amortized over the average length of the related revenue contract. An estimate of the portion of commissions related to the downloadable content performance obligation is made, which is recognized at contract inception consistent with the pattern of revenue recognition. This estimate is made in a consistent manner to the SSP allocated to the related portion of revenue, which requires judgment. Judgment is also required when determining the period of benefit for commissions paid for the acquisition of the initial subscription contract. We evaluate both qualitative and quantitative factors including the initial estimated customer life, the technological life of our platform and related significant features, customer attrition and industry practices.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customers, acquired technology, trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives and discount rates. Additionally, contingent consideration arrangements are considered to be part of the purchase consideration and are measured at their acquisition date fair value which is determined using complex valuation methodologies. The inputs to the valuation methodologies used to determine management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded in the consolidated statement of operations.
Stock Compensation
Prior to our IPO and before there was an active market for our Class A common stock, we primarily issued stock options and estimated the fair value of those stock options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The most significant estimate utilized in the model was the fair value of our common stock which was historically determined by the board of directors who exercised judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock including (i) valuations performed at or near the time of grant; (ii) rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; (iii) our actual operating and financial performance at the time of the option grant; (iv) likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an IPO or a merger or acquisition of our business; (v) the value of comparable companies with respect to industry, business model, stage of growth, financial risk or other factors; (vi) our stage of development and future financial projections; (vii) market transactions at or near the time of grant;
and (viii) the lack of marketability of our common stock. Following the IPO, there is an active market for our Class A common stock, and we are no longer estimating the fair value of our common stock.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for more information.