Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and notes thereto included herein. In connection with, and because we desire to take advantage of, the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, we caution readers regarding certain forward looking statements in the following discussion and elsewhere in this report and in any other statement made by, or on our behalf, whether or not in future filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Forward-looking statements are statements not based on historical information and which relate to future operations, strategies, financial results or other developments. Forward looking statements are necessarily based upon estimates and assumptions that are inherently subject to significant business, economic and competitive uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control and many of which, with respect to future business decisions, are subject to change. These uncertainties and contingencies can affect actual results and could cause actual results to differ materially from those expressed in any forward looking statements made by, or our behalf. We disclaim any obligation to update forward-looking statements.
Results of operations for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021.
Revenue
We do not generate revenue from operations or investments. We continue with Due Diligence about GSS Infrastructure and NTEC in Ecuador. Besides we have initiated evaluation of other business opportunities in Panama and Colombia.
Our gross revenue for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 was $0 and $0 respectively. Our cost of revenues for the year ended September 30, 2022 was $0 resulting in a gross income of $0.
Costs and Expenses
The major components of our expenses for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 are outlined in the table below:
Accounts Payable - Related Parties
As of September 30, 2022 and 2021 the Company owed its shareholders-directors and officers is as following:
Liquidity
Our internal liquidity is provided by our shareholders and sale of common stocks operations. During the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 the Company reported net loss from operations of -$52,857 and - $21,000, respectively.
To date we have financed our operations by cash generated from sales of shares of our common stock and cash from our shareholders. We were able to sustain our operations by closing acquisitions in Ecuador and acquisitions in Panama or Colombia, increasing the number of operations.
To date we have not sold shares of common stock to our officers and directors. We sold 10,000 shares at $2.00 per share in the open market to generate cash to cover expenses.
If not additional capital may be required to maintain ongoing operations.
We have explored and are continuing to explore options to provide additional financing to fund future operations as well as other possible courses of action. Such actions include, but are not limited to, securing lines of credit, sales of debt or equity securities (which may result in dilution to existing shareholders), loans and cash advances from our directors or other third parties, and other similar actions. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional funding (if needed), on acceptable terms or at all, through a sale of our common stock, loans from financial institutions, our directors, or other third parties, or any of the actions discussed above. If we cannot sustain profitable operations, and additional capital is unavailable, lack of liquidity could have a material adverse effect on our business viability, financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Cash Flows
The table below, for the period indicated, provides selected cash flow information:
We have not generated revenues during the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. In addition, we received proceeds of $20,000 and $0 from sale of our common stock during the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021. We received $24,112 during the reporting periods from our shareholders.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
We did not generate any cash from investing activities during the year ended September 30, 2022.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Not applicable.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Financial Statements.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of September 30, 2022 and 2021, we did not have any significant off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.