ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of KORE Group Holdings, Inc. should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. A detailed discussion comparing our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 can be found in “KORE’s Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” of our Form S-4
Registration Statement filed on August 11, 2021. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those projected in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors”. Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to “the Company” “KORE,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Maple Holdings, Inc. prior to the Business Combination, and to KORE Group Holdings, Inc. following the consummation of the Business Combination on September 30, 2021.
Overview
KORE Group Holdings, Inc. is the parent entity of KORE Wireless Group, Inc., its wholly owned and principal operating subsidiary. Both entities are incorporated in Delaware. Our corporate headquarters are located in Alpharetta, Georgia.
KORE simplifies IoT adoption by putting more intelligence into our software and platforms. Our technology stack enables our customers with an easy way to assemble and configure the ‘IoT Building Blocks’ they need to deploy their End Solutions. IoT Building Blocks enable the data journey from the Edge Device to the customer Application, hence driving the solutions and outcomes our customers desire.
KORE is one of the largest global independent IoT companies enabling mission-critical CaaS, or “IoT Connectivity” for reporting purposes, IoT Solutions and Analytics (or simply “IoT Solutions” for reporting purposes) to enterprise customers across five key industry verticals, comprising (i) Connected Health, (ii) Fleet Management, (iii) Asset Monitoring, (iv) Communications Services and (v) Industrial IoT (or “IIoT”).
Example customer use cases across our five key verticals are illustrated below:
•
Connected Health
: Remote patient monitoring and telemedicine enabled by connected medical devices, IoT device enabled clinical drug trials, mPERS connected emergency devices, connected medical equipment diagnostics, electronic visit verification.
•
Fleet Management
: Stolen vehicle recovery location tracking, connected cameras for tracking vehicle driving conditions and driver behavior, connected route optimization, fuel consumption optimization, connected preventive maintenance, usage-based insurance, connected cars.
•
Asset Monitoring
: Home/business security sensor and camera solutions, offender tracking through ankle bracelets, tank monitoring, supply chain inventory and asset tracking, fuel pipeline flow monitoring.
•
Communication Services:
IoT and consumer service providers, carrier IoT business units, enterprise connectivity / failsafe, private networking-we may provide Connectivity Enablement as a Service for some of these customers.
•
Industrial IoT:
Smart utilities / meters, smart cities / buildings, smart factories, field service automation, manufacturers of smart or connected products providing global connectivity to devices across the globe, over different networks and protocols is a highly complex undertaking.
KORE’s portfolio of IoT connectivity services capabilities, proprietary technology and IP stack, combined with its vast network of 44 carrier integrations globally enables the Company to be a market leader in working with enterprise customers. Apart from basic IoT connectivity services, we also provide connectivity enablement services to enable other service providers to provide IoT connectivity.
Successful deployment of IoT Solutions is extremely complex; notably, some of the significant challenges in IoT deployment include:
•
Lack of readily available in-house
IoT resources and expertise;
•
Significant time required to get to market;
•
High failure rate of IoT initiatives;
•
A highly fragmented vendor landscape;
•
An ecosystem that is quickly evolving and changing rapidly;
•
Substantial and increasing regulatory/compliance issues;
•
Interoperability and compatibility with assorted technologies.
Through early 2018, KORE has been executing a multi-year strategic transformation program to transform from a ‘connectivity only’ player to a market leading, global enabler of IoT providing IoT Connectivity, IoT Solutions and Analytics. The elements of this transformation program are building the core technology platform of the future ‘KORE One™
’, building IoT Solutions products and a strategic repositioning of the Company in the market including strategic M&A. This multi-year strategic transformation program is expected to be complete by end of 2023. As a result of this transformation program:
•
We believe KORE One is now an industry leading platform for IoT subscription and network management, and which provides us with a competitive edge in the market.
•
Amongst industry analysts, KORE has continued to establish and improve its position as the only pure play IoT enabler. Recognized in 2019 by Gartner as the only independent service provider to be named a “Leader” in the Magic Quadrant for Managed IoT Connectivity Services, KORE continued its upward momentum in 2020 as it improved upon its position to be ranked among the top global services providers within the same category.
•
KORE’s product portfolio has expanded significantly. A few years ago, KORE was primarily IoT Connectivity Services focused while today its product portfolio includes IoT Solutions such as IoT Deployment Services and Security Software and Services. KORE’s IoT Connectivity Services have also become richer through the addition of the eSIMs and “Connectivity Enablement as a Service” to the IoT Connectivity Services product portfolio.
•
IoT Solutions has increased as a proportion of KORE’s total revenue each year since 2018. For the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, IoT Solutions represented 32% and 26% of KORE’s total revenue.
KORE’s IoT and analytics solutions include IoT device management services, IoT location-based services software, and IoT device security services software for the Machine-to-Machine
market.
Customers of KORE’s products include fleet owners and transportation companies, fleet management software providers, healthcare companies including healthcare device manufacturers, healthcare payors and healthcare contract research organizations, telecommunications service providers, manufacturers and industrial automation providers, application service providers and enterprises in various other industries, including consumer electronic devices, retail, home and office security and safety etc. KORE’s largest customers include Fortune 500 enterprises and innovative solution providers across multiple high growth vertical markets.
KORE’s products compete with a variety of solutions, including other subscription-based IoT platforms and solutions. Our current competitors include:
•
For IoT Connectivity
-telecom carriers such as T-Mobile and Vodafone; Mobile Virtual Network Operators such as Aeris and Wireless Logic; and
•
For IoT Solutions and Analytics
-device management services providers such as Velocitor and Futura, fleet management SaaS providers such as Fleetmatics and GPS Trakit, and analytics services providers such as Galooli and Intellisite. KORE has made several key acquisitions that have enhanced solutions to new and existing customers.
Trends Affecting Our Business
All of the markets in which we operate are characterized by rapid technological change, frequent introductions of new products, services and solutions and evolving customer demands. We expect our market to be competitive especially with the focus on IoT with the development and deployment of 5G technologies. In addition, we are affected by changes in the many industries related to the products or services we offer, including the fleet management, connected biomedical devices and home security industries. As the technologies used in each of these industries evolves, we will face new integration and competition challenges.
Our ability to expand our business through new solutions and penetration into new sectors.
The success of our business depends, in part, on our ability to maintain and protect our proprietary technologies, information, processes and know-how.
We rely primarily on trademark, copyright, trade secret and other intellectual property laws in the U.S. and similar laws in other countries, confidentiality agreements and procedures and other contractual arrangements to protect our technology. The growing number of IoT, eSIM and 5G use cases presents opportunity for us to deliver critical solutions in these rapidly growing industries. We expect that product offerings such as the highly scalable KORE One platform and the growth of eSIMs will position us for growth in the connectivity market.
Our growth strategy consists of the following:
•
Organic volume growth - leveraging the strong IoT industry growth expressed in terms of our customers’ revenue, device and data usage growth, while continuing to maintain high customer retention.
•
Cross-sell and upsell - selling KORE’s growing portfolio of IoT Solutions developed during the prior two years and going-forward, to our large base of connectivity services only customers.
•
Deepening our presence in focused industry sectors - developing more of a vertical orientation in our business and deepening industry domain knowledge that will in turn allow the development and deployment of pre-configured
industry solutions.
•
Enhancing AIoT (Artificial Intelligence + IoT) and Edge Analytics capabilities.
•
Strategic acquisitions that will allow KORE to expand our IoT Solutions and advanced IoT connectivity capabilities while ensuring a highly disciplined use of capital for such acquisitions.
We operate in a highly competitive market.
The market for KORE’s products and solutions is rapidly evolving and highly competitive. It is likely to continue to be affected by new product introductions and industry participants. The unique expertise required to design its product offerings and customers’ reluctance to try unproven products has confined the number of competing firms to a relatively small number.
KORE competes in the IoT connectivity market on the basis of the following factors:
•
The number of carrier integrations (44)
•
KORE One platform (7 engines)
•
ConnectivityPro service and related APIs
•
eSIM technology stack/ proprietary IP
•
Hypercore technology
KORE competes in the IoT Solutions market on the basis of the following factors:
•
Deep industry vertical knowledge and experience (e.g., in Connected Health through FDA, HIPAA, ISO 9001/13485 compliance)
•
Breadth of solutions and analytics services
•
3,300+ connectivity-only customers provides us a unique opportunity to cross-sell and upsell our existing connectivity-only customers
While the abovementioned factors provide KORE with certain competitive advantages, KORE’s market is highly competitive, and we expect it to continue to be so especially with the greater focus on the IoT market through the development and deployment of 5G technologies.
Impact of transitions of IoT connections from 2G/3G to LTE.
In the United States, the major carriers have announced intentions to phase out their 2G and 3G networks by the end of 2022 which will result in carriers migrating customers onto LTE platforms. While we expect customers to experience increased customer satisfaction from the migration onto superior LTE platforms, the rate plans under these platforms are typically lower in price than legacy 2G and 3G rate plans. As a result, the phase out of 2G and 3G may result in lower revenue per unit and/or lower revenue to KORE. While KORE has strong relationships with many of the affected customers and expects to retain most of the connections which will not be retired on 4G or 5G technologies, some of these connections may be lost as a result of competitive bidding processes. The projected impact of this is incorporated in KORE’s projections.
Business Combination
On March 12, 2021, KORE entered into a definitive merger agreement with CTAC, a special purpose acquisition company affiliated with Cerberus Capital Management, L.P. On September 30, 2021, as contemplated by the Merger Agreement, (i) CTAC merged with and into LLC Merger Sub (the “Pubco Merger”), with LLC Merger Sub being the surviving entity of the Pubco Merger and Pubco as parent of the surviving entity, (ii) immediately prior to the First Merger (as defined below), Cerberus Telecom Acquisition Holdings, LLC (the “Sponsor”) contributed 100% of its equity interests in Corp Merger Sub to Pubco (the “Corp Merger Sub Contribution”), as a result of which Corp Merger Sub became a wholly owned subsidiary of Pubco, (iii) following the Corp Merger Sub Contribution, Corp Merger Sub merged with and into KORE (the “First Merger”), with KORE being the surviving corporation of the First Merger, and (iv) immediately following the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, KORE merged with and into LLC Merger Sub (the “Second Merger” and, together with the First Merger, being collectively referred to as the “Mergers” and, together with the other transactions contemplated by the Merger Agreement, the “Transactions” and the closing (the “Closing”) of the Transactions, the “Business Combination”), with LLC Merger Sub being the surviving entity of the Second Merger and Pubco being the sole member of LLC Merger Sub. In connection with the Business Combination, Pubco changed its name to “KORE Group Holdings, Inc.”
The most significant change in the post-combination Company’s reported financial position and result was an increase in cash of $63.2 million. We paid $19.0 million in transaction costs relating to the Business Combination at the closing.
Following the Business Combination, the Company trades under the ticker symbol “KORE” on the NYSE. We expect to incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
COVID-19
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the COVID-19 a global pandemic, which has resulted in significant disruption and uncertainty in the global economic markets, and which in turn has impacted our business as well as most other businesses. Given the amount of uncertainty currently regarding the scope and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are currently unable to predict the precise impact that COVID-19 pandemic will have on our business, financial condition and results of operations in the future. As of the date of this filing, the Company has experienced certain negative impacts from the pandemic; such as the loss of one major customer and multiple smaller customers that experienced financial distress, resulting in payment delays and a reduction in revenue from those customers. Overall, as of the date of this filing, COVID-19 has not had a significant negative impact on the Company’s results of operations, as evidenced by factors such as continued revenue growth and a decrease in the Company’s bad debt expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
We believe COVID-19’s continued impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations will be driven by a number of factors that we are unable to predict or control, including, for example: the severity and duration of the pandemic, including the timing of availability of a treatment or vaccine for COVID-19; the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. and global economies; the timing, scope and effectiveness of additional governmental responses to the pandemic; the timing and path of economic recovery; and the negative impact on our clients, counterparties, vendors and other business partners that may indirectly adversely affect us.
Operating Segments
We have determined that we operate in a single operating and reportable segment, consistent with how our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) allocates resources and assesses performance.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive revenue from:
-Services: IoT Connectivity services and IoT Solutions services.
-Products: SIMs (IoT Connectivity) and IoT devices (IoT Solutions).
KORE views our business as being constituted of two services lines: IoT Connectivity and IoT Solutions.
The fees for IoT Connectivity generally consist of a monthly subscription fee and additional data usage fees that are part of a bundled solution which enable other Providers and Enterprise customers to complete their platform for solutions to provide IoT Connectivity. IoT Connectivity also includes charges for each subscriber identity modules (SIMs) sold to a customer.
In IoT Solutions, we derive revenue from IoT device management services, location-based software services and IoT security software services. Fees charged for device management services include the cost of the underlying IoT device and the cost of deploying and managing such devices. Fees charged for device management services are generally billed on a fee per deployed IoT device basis which depends on the scope of the underlying services and the IoT device being deployed. Location based software services and IoT security software services are charged on a per-subscriber
basis.
Costs and Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of costs associated with IoT Connectivity and those associated with IoT Solutions. IoT Connectivity costs include carrier costs, network operations, technology licenses, and other costs such as shipping a SIM. IoT Solution costs include the cost of devices, shipping costs, warehouse lease and related facilities expenses, and personnel costs. Total cost of revenue excludes depreciation and amortization.
Operating expenses
We incur expenses associated with sales, marketing, customer support, and administrative activities related to the operation of our business, which are generally included as part of selling, general and administrative expenses. We also incur significant charges for depreciation and amortization of our intangible assets (including intangible assets we acquired or developed), other acquired intellectual property, as well as our fixed assets which support the deployment of our IoT Connectivity services and IoT Solutions services. We also incur engineering expenses developing and supporting the operation of our communications systems and the early stage engineering work on new products and services that are not yet determined to be technologically feasible.
Key Metrics
KORE reviews a number of metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, prepare financial projections, and make strategic decisions. The calculation of the key metrics and other measures discussed below may differ from other similarly titled metrics used by other companies, securities analysts, or investors.
Number of Connections
Total Connections constitutes the total of all KORE IoT Connectivity services connections, including both CaaS and CEaaS connections, but excluding certain connections where mobile carriers license KORE’s subscription management platform from KORE. Total Connections include the contribution of eSIMs and is the principal measure used by management to assess the performance of the business on a periodic basis.
DBNER
DBNER (Dollar Based Net Expansion Rate) tracks the combined effect of cross-sales of IoT Solutions to KORE’s existing customers, its customer retention and the growth of its existing business. KORE calculates DBNER by dividing the revenue for a given period (“given period”) from existing go-forward
customers by the revenue from the same customers for the same period measured one year prior (“base period”).
The revenue included in the current period excludes revenue from (i) customers that are non go-forward customers, meaning customers that have either communicated to KORE before the last day of the current period their intention not to provide future business to KORE or customers that KORE has determined are transitioning away from KORE based on a sustained multi-year time period of declines in revenue and (ii) new customers that started generating revenue after the end of the base period. For example, to calculate our DBNER for the trailing 12 months ended December 31, 2021, we divide (i) revenue, for the trailing 12 months ended December 31, 2021, from go-forward customers that started generating revenue on or before December 31, 2020 by (ii) revenue, for the trailing 12 months
ended December 31, 2020, from the same cohort of customers. For the purposes of calculating DBNER, if KORE acquires a company during the given period or the base period, then the revenue of a customer before the acquisition but during either the given period or the base period is included in the calculation. Further, it is often difficult to ascertain which customers should be deemed not to be go-forward customers for purposes of calculating DBNER. Customers are not required to give notice of their intention to transition off of the KORE platform, and as discussed above in “Information about KORE-Customer and Key Partners”, a customer’s exit from the KORE platform can take months or longer, and total connections of any particular customer can at any time increase or decrease for any number of reasons, including pricing, customer satisfaction or product fit - accordingly, a decrease in total connections may not indicate that a customer is intending to exit the KORE platform, particularly if that decrease is not sustained over a period of several quarters. DBNER would be lower if it were calculated using revenue from non go-forward customers.
As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, DBNER excludes approximately 0.6 million, 1.1 million connections, respectively, from non go-forward customers, in each case, the vast majority of which are connections from Non-Core Customers.
KORE defines “Non-Core Customers” to be customers that management has judged to be lost as a result of the integration of Raco, Wyless and other acquisitions completed during in the 2014-2017 period, but which continue to have some connections (and account for some revenue) each year with KORE. Non-Core Customers are a subset of non go-forward customers.
DBNER is used by management as a measure of growth at KORE’s existing customers (i.e., “same store” growth). It is not intended to capture the effect of either new customer wins or the declines from non go-forward customers on KORE’s total revenue growth. This is because DBNER excludes new customers which started generating revenue after the base period, and also excludes any customers which are non go-forward customers on the last day of the current period. Revenue increases from new customer wins, and a decline in revenue from non go-forward customers are also important factors in assessing KORE’s revenue growth, but these factors are independent of DBNER.
Results of Operations for the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
(in thousands USD)
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $34.5 million, or 16%, to $248.2 million from $213.8 million in 2020.
Services revenue growth
of $15.1 million was driven by the growth in IoT Connectivity services revenue of $10.1 million as well as the growth of IoT Solutions services revenue of $5.0 million. IoT Connectivity services revenue growth of $10.1 million was driven by the organic growth of our existing IoT customers of $20.5 million and new customers acquired of $1.5 million. These increases were offset partially by a decrease of $6.0 million in revenue from Non-Core Customers (customers lost from integration of old acquisitions in 2014-17) and the migration of customers from 2G and 3G technologies to LTE (“Long Term Evolution”) cellular technologies involving a one-time adjustment in price estimated at $6.0 million. Services revenue growth of $5.0 million was due to an increase in product deployments by KORE related to its IoT Solutions. This growth was driven by our largest customer and their LTE transition project.
Products revenue growth
of $19.3 million was driven primarily by an increase in the number of devices deployed by KORE related to its IoT Solutions. Within product revenue, there was a $18.5 million increase driven by our largest customer and their LTE transition project.
The table below presents how management views our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the percentage of total revenue represented by each revenue category:
(in thousands USD)
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $34.5 million, or 16%, to $248.2 million from $213.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
IoT Connectivity growth
of $10.0 million, which includes SIM revenue, was driven by the organic growth of our existing IoT customers of $20.5 million as well as $1.5 million from newly acquired customers. These increases were partially offset by $6.0 million from Non-Core
Customers (customers lost from the integration of old acquisitions in 2014-17)
as well as the migration of customers from 2G and 3G technologies to LTE cellular technologies which resulted in a one-time
adjustment in price estimated at $6.0 million. Notably, most new IoT Connectivity customers relationships usually start small and often expand significantly in the first 12 to 24 months, depending on the device requiring connectivity in the use case.
KORE grew its total number of connections from 11.8 million on December 31, 2020 to 14.6 million on December 31, 2021, mostly as a result of additional connections from existing customers, which resulted in the growth of KORE IoT Connectivity revenue in the year ended December 31, 2021 with respect to the year ended December 31, 2020.
IoT Solutions growth
of $24.4 million was driven by the organic growth of our Connected Health IoT Solutions. A large portion of the IoT Solutions growth was due the LTE transitions project with our largest customer.
Within IoT Solutions, there was an increase in devices deployed and provided by KORE to its IoT Solutions customers, and a proportionate increase in IoT deployment services revenue associated with each device shipped. Directionally, we expect the growth in IoT Solutions to continue to be driven primarily by an increase in device deployments although actual deployment volumes may vary from quarter to quarter.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, KORE’s DBNER was 122% compared to 106% in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Costs of revenue, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, and gross margins
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $24.3 million, or 25%, to $122.2 million from $97.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of services
increased by $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the cost of services was primarily driven by increased carrier costs resulting from the growth in IoT Connectivity revenue which was partially offset by the $1.1 million settlement of a disputed amount owed to a Carrier from 2020.
During fiscal 2021, the gross margin percentage of our services business increased nominally compared to the same period in fiscal 2020.
Cost of products
increased $18.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in the cost of devices associated with the growth in IoT Solutions. Notably, in the year ended December 31, 2021, there was an increase in devices deployed by KORE to its Connected Health IoT Solutions customers. Additionally, increased shipping costs during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 contributed the increase in the cost of products.
During fiscal 2021, the gross margin percentage of our products business declined as compared to the same period in fiscal 2020. The decline was mainly due to the large volumes associated with our largest customer’s LTE transition project. To win the large volumes associated with this project, additional one-time
project-specific discounts were given, which contributed significantly to the decline in gross margins on products. Additionally, increased shipping costs during fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 also pressured gross margin percentage on products.
The table below presents how management views our costs of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, exclusive of depreciation and amortization:
(in thousands USD)
Total cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $24.3 million, or 25%, to $122.2 million from $97.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of IoT Connectivity
increased by $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was driven by increased carrier costs associated with the growth in IoT Connectivity revenue offset by a $1.1 million settlement of a disputed amount owed to a Carrier from 2020. The amount in dispute arose in the normal course of business and did not result in any actual or pending litigation.
During fiscal 2021, the gross margin percentage of IoT Connectivity increased nominally compared to the same period in fiscal 2020.
Cost of IoT Solutions
increased by $21.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This was primarily driven by the increased cost of devices and labor associated with the volume growth in IoT Solutions. Notably, in the year ending December 31, 2021, there was an increase in devices provided and shipped by KORE to its Connected Health IoT Solutions customers. This resulted in an increase in the cost of devices provided and shipped, and a proportionate increase in IoT deployment and device management services revenue associated with each device shipped which also resulted in an increase in the labor and other costs of providing such IoT deployment and device management services.
In fiscal 2021, the gross margin percentage of IoT Solutions declined as compared to the same period last year. The decline was mainly due to the large volumes associated with our largest customer’s LTE transition project. To win the large volumes associated with this project, additional one-time
project-specific discounts were given, which contributed significantly to the decline in gross margins on IoT Solutions. Additionally, market-wide increases in shipping and labor costs in fiscal 2021 as compared to fiscal 2020 also pressured the gross margins on IoT Solutions.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
(in thousands USD )
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses relate primarily to expenses for general management, sales and marketing, finance, audit and legal fees and general operating expenses. The increase in SG&A expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a decreased foreign currency gain of $0.3 million, an increase in salary and benefit related items of $7.2 million, an increase in stock compensation expense of $3.5 million and costs associated with going public of $6.4 million. All other items, which includes marketing, travel, information technology and facilities related items increased $1.4 million.
Depreciation and amortization
(in thousands USD)
There were no significant changes in depreciation and amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other (income) expense
(in thousands USD)
The decrease in other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to a $12.8 million decrease in expense related to the change in fair value of our warrant liability. Additionally, but insignificantly, our interest expense decreased because of a reduction in LIBOR rates compared to the prior year.
Income taxes
(in thousands USD)
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized an income tax benefit of $9.7 million and $5.3 million, respectively, in the consolidated statements of operations.
The change to the income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to changes in the jurisdictional mix of earnings period over period as well as differences in the deductibility of certain expenses resulting from the Business Combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our liquidity requirements arise from our working capital needs, our obligations to make scheduled payments of interest on our indebtedness and our need to fund capital expenditures to support our current operations and to facilitate growth and expansion. We have financed our operations and expansion with a combination of debt and equity.
At December 31, 2021, we had total equity of $272.1 million, net of an accumulated deficit of $(138.2) million. Our primary sources of liquidity consist of cash and cash equivalents totaling $86.0 million and a Revolving Credit Facility of $30.0 million of which the full $30.0 million was available for use for working capital and general business purposes. We believe this will be sufficient to provide working capital, make interest payments and make capital expenditures to support operations and facilitate growth and expansion for the next twelve months.
Our ability to pay dividends on our common stock is limited by restrictions under the terms of agreements governing our indebtedness. Subject to the full terms and conditions under the agreements governing our indebtedness, we may be permitted to make dividends and distributions under such agreements if there is no event of default and certain pro-forma
financial ratios (as defined by such agreements) are met.
In July 2017, the United Kingdom’s Financial Conduct Authority announced that it would no longer require banks to submit rates for the LIBOR after 2021. In November 2020, the ICE Benchmark Administration (IBA), LIBOR’s administrator, proposed extending the publication of USD LIBOR through June 2023. Subsequently, in March of 2021, IBA stated it will cease publication of certain LIBOR rates after December 31, 2021. USD LIBOR rates that do not cease on December 31, 2021 will continue to be published through June 30, 2023. The Company has reviewed its debt facilities and continues to evaluate commercial contracts that may utilize LIBOR as the reference rate. The Company will continue its assessment and monitor regulatory developments during the transition period.
Cash flows (used in)/provided by from operating activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $14.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $26.5 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our operating cash flows changed primarily due to increases in accounts receivable and inventories, of $11.9 and $9.9 million, respectively to support the growth of the business, as well as $8.2 million of payments to reduce the Company’s outstanding vendor payables. Cash paid for interest decreased by $1.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a lower LIBOR interest rate.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we also had a net benefit from working capital management, and while accounts receivable and inventories increased to support the growth of the business, these were offset by increased vendor payables. Cash paid for interest decreased by $2.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a lower LIBOR interest rate.
Cash flows from investing activities
Cash used in our investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 was $13.1 million resulting primarily from capital expenditures during the period related to technology equipment, software licenses, and internally developed software.
Cash used in our investing activities in 2020 was $11.6 million, resulting primarily from capital expenditures during the period related to technology equipment, software licenses, and internally developed software.
Cash flows from financing activities
Cash provided by our financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021, was $103.9 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our financing cash flows changed primarily due to the net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $224.0 million, the receipt of approximately $119.6 million proceeds from the Backstop Notes (net of issuance costs), of which $15.4 million was required under US GAAP to be allocated as “equity portion of convertible debt”. These cash inflows were partially offset by the $229.9 million settlement of preferred stock, the $3.2 million repayment of long-term debt and, repayment of related party note of $1.5 million, and payment of capital lease obligations of $1.2 million.
Cash used in our financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020, was $12.7 million, primarily due to repayment of revolving credit facility of $8.3 million, and $3.5 million of term loan principal payments.
Future Liquidity and Capital Resource Requirements
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents along with expected cash flows from operating activities and additional funds available under our Revolving Credit Facility, will be sufficient over the next 12 months to provide working capital, cover interest payments on our debt facilities and fund growth initiatives, and capital expenditures.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $24.3 million of purchase and lease commitments for the remainder of the 2022 fiscal year. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, the Company has $3.2 million of scheduled principal payments relating to the UBS term loan for the remainder of the 2022 fiscal year. The Company’s compliance with the term loan from UBS is measured partially based on Consolidated EBIT, a measure of which is shown in “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section of the Company’s 10-K.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has $45.4 million of purchase and lease commitments for the fiscal years 2022 through 2026 and thereafter. We also have scheduled principal payments relating to the UBS term loan of $3.2 million for each of the fiscal years 2022 through 2024, with all outstanding principal due on December 24, 2024. Further, the Company has semi-annual interest payments due on $120 million related to the Backstop Notes. All outstanding principal on the Backstop Notes is due in full in 2028.
From 2022 to 2026, we expect to fund supplier and carrier-related purchase and lease commitments (all of which are costs of operating the business) entirely from cash inflows from our customers. We currently expect that the excess cash flows after paying the abovementioned contractual commitments, as well as other costs of business, such as payroll, costs incurred on suppliers and carrier spend (which is not currently committed contractually in addition to the committed spend), interest and taxes - will be sufficient to meet outstanding debt principal payments from 2022 to 2024.
Our available cash and cash equivalents, together with our results of operations, are expected to be sufficient to meet our operating expenses, debt service payments, capital requirements and other obligations for at least the next 12 months. However, to increase available liquidity or to fund acquisitions or other strategic activities, we may seek additional financing. We have no commitments for any additional financing and have no lines of credit or similar sources of financing, other than the borrowings available under the Credit Facilities, and the Bank Overdraft Facility. We cannot be sure that we can obtain additional financing on favorable terms, if at all, through the issuance of equity securities or the incurrence of additional debt. Additional equity financing may dilute our stockholders, and debt financing, if available, may restrict our ability to repurchase common stock or debt, declare and pay dividends, raise future capital and make acquisitions. If we are unable to obtain additional needed financing, it may prohibit us from refinancing existing indebtedness and making acquisitions, capital expenditures and/or investments, which could materially and adversely affect our business. We may need additional capital to fund future mergers & acquisitions.
Key activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
•
The Company closed the Business Combination on September 30, 2021, resulting in a net increase in cash of $63.2 million and a recapitalization of the Company’s equity structure.
•
The Company used $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and provided $26.5 million of cash flows from operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020.
•
The Company’s investment activity used $13.1 million and $11.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, resulting primarily from capital expenditures during the period related to technology equipment, software licenses, and internally developed software.
•
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company drew and repaid $25.0 million on its revolving credit facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company repaid $8.3 million of its revolving credit facility.
Non-GAAP
Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe the following non-GAAP measures are useful in evaluating our operational performance. We use the following non-GAAP financial information to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial
information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors in assessing our operating performance. Non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and may be different from similarly-titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies.
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
“EBITDA” is defined as net income (loss) before other non-operating expense or income, income tax expense or benefit, and depreciation and amortization. “Adjusted EBITDA” is defined as EBITDA adjusted for unusual and other significant items that management views as distorting the operating results from period to period. Such adjustments may include stock-based compensation, integration and acquisition-related charges, tangible and intangible asset impairment charges, certain contingent liability reversals, transformation, and foreign currency transaction gains and losses. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are intended as supplemental measures of our performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. We believe that the use of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA provides an additional tool for investors to use in evaluating ongoing operating results and trends and in comparing the Company’s financial measures with those of comparable companies, which may present similar non-GAAP financial measures to investors. However, you should be aware that when evaluating EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA we may incur future expenses similar to those excluded when calculating these measures. In addition, our presentation of these measures should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. Our computation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures computed by other companies, because all companies may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same fashion.
Because of these limitations, EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for performance measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA on a supplemental basis. You should review the reconciliation of net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA below and not rely on any single financial measure to evaluate our business.
The following table reconciles net loss to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods shown:
(in thousands USD)
Transformation expenses are related to the implementation of our strategic transformation plan, which include the costs of a re-write of our core technology platform, expenses incurred to design certain new IoT Solutions and “go-to-market” capabilities.
Acquisition and integration-related restructuring costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 relate to legal, accounting, advisory, and other professional services costs associated with the Integron Acquisition and Integron’s integration into KORE, certain synergies related to our acquisitions, certain one-time
severance costs associated with our transformation, and accounting and advisory fees related to the Business Combination. The Business Combination is the primary driver of the increase in acquisition and integration-related restructuring costs period over period.
Concentration of Credit Risk and Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
Cash and cash equivalents are financial instruments that are potentially subject to concentrations of credit risk. The Company’s cash and cash equivalents are deposited in accounts at large financial institutions, and amounts may exceed federally insured limits. The Company believes it is not exposed to significant credit risk due to the financial strength of the depository institutions in which the cash and cash equivalents are held.
The Company has a total of $45.4 million of purchase and lease commitments payable that are not recorded as liabilities on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, the Company has a $0.4 million standby letter of credit and bank guarantees as of December 31, 2021. The Company has no other financial instruments or commitments with off-balance-sheet
risk of loss.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our results of operations, liquidity and capital resources are based on our consolidated financial statements which have been prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are most critical to understanding our financial condition and historical and future results of operations:
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenue primarily from IoT Connectivity and IoT Solutions. IoT Connectivity arrangements provide customers with secure and reliable wireless connectivity to mobile and fixed devices through various mobile network carriers. Revenue from IoT Connectivity consists of monthly recurring charges (“MRC’s
”) and overage/usage charges, and contracts are generally short-term in nature (i.e.
, month-to-month arrangements). Customers generally may cancel with 30 days’ notice without substantive cost or fees. Revenue for MRC’s and overage/usage charges are recognized over time as the Company satisfies the performance obligation (generally starting when an enrolled device is activated on the Company’s platform). MRC’s are billed monthly in advance (generally in the last week of a month); any amounts billed for which the service has not been provided as of the balance sheet dates are reported as a contract liability and components of deferred revenue. Overage/usage charges are billed in arrears on a monthly cycle. Overage/usage charges are evaluated on a monthly basis, and any overage/usage charges determined by management as unlikely to be collected due to a customer disputing the charge or due to a concession are reserved. Reserved items are written off when deemed uncollectible or recognized as revenue if collected. Certain IoT Connectivity customers also have the option to purchase products and/or equipment (e.g.
, subscriber identification module or “SIM” cards, routers, phones, or tablets) from us on an as needed basis. Sales of products IoT Connectivity customers are recognized when control is transferred to the customer, which is typically upon shipment of the product.
IoT Solutions arrangements includes device solutions (including connectivity), deployment services, and/or technology-related professional services. We evaluate each IoT Solutions arrangement to determine the contract for accounting purposes. If a contract contains more than one performance obligation, we allocate consideration to each performance obligation based on the standalone selling prices of each performance obligation. Standalone selling prices are based on analyses performed by management based on readily observable prices or utilizing a cost-plus-margin approach if prices are not observable. Hardware, deployment services, and connectivity services generally have readily observable prices. The standalone selling price of our warehouse management services (which is associated with our bill-and-hold inventory and determined to be immaterial as discussed below) was determined using a cost-plus-margin approach with the primary assumptions including Company profit objectives, internal cost structure, and current market trends. Device and other hardware sales in IoT Solutions arrangements are generally accounted for as separate contracts since the customer is not obligated to purchase additional services when committing to the purchase of any products. Such sales are typically recognized upon shipment to the customer. However, in certain contracts, the customer has requested us to hold the products ordered for later shipment to the customer’s remote location or to the customer’s end user as a part of a vendor managed inventory model. In these situations, we have concluded that transfer of control to the customer occurs prior to shipment. In these “bill-and-hold” arrangements, the right to invoice, transfer of legal title and transfer of the risk and rewards associated with the products occurs when we receive the hardware from a
third-party vendor and have deemed it to be functional. Additionally, the products are identified both physically and systematically as belonging to a specific customer, are usable by the customer, and are only shipped, used, or disposed as directed by the specific customer. Based on these factors, we recognize revenue on bill-and-hold
hardware when the hardware is received by us and deemed functional.
Deployment services consist of us preparing hardware owned by a customer for use by a customer’s end user. Deployment and connectivity may both be included within a single IoT Solutions contract and are considered separate performance obligations. While consideration for deployment services is generally fixed when ordered by the client, consideration for connectivity services is variable and solely related to the connectivity services. Therefore, the fixed consideration is allocated to the deployment services and is recognized as revenue when the services are provided (i.e.
, when the related hardware is shipped to the customer). Connectivity within IoT Solutions contracts are recognized similar to the IoT Connectivity as described above, since such contracts are generally short term in nature and variability is resolved each month as the services are provided.
Professional services are generally provided over a contract term of one to two months. Revenue is recognized over time on an input method basis (typically, based on hours completed to date and an estimate of total hours to complete the project).
Accounting for Business Combinations
We account for acquired businesses using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded at their respective fair values on the date of acquisition. We assign fair value of the consideration paid to the underlying net assets of the acquired business based on their respective fair values. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the net assets acquired is recorded to goodwill. Intangible assets are amortized over the expected life of the asset. We recognize acquisition-related expenses and restructuring costs separately from the business combination and expense as incurred. All changes in accounting for deferred tax asset valuation allowances and acquired income tax uncertainties after the measurement period are recognized as a component of provision for income taxes. We make significant assumptions and estimates in determining the preliminary estimated purchase price and the preliminary allocation of the estimated purchase in the consolidated financial statements. These preliminary estimates and assumptions are subject to change as we finalize the valuations. The final valuations may change significantly from the preliminary estimates. Fair value determinations and useful life estimates are based on, among other factors, estimates of expected future cash flows from revenue of the intangible assets acquired, estimates of appropriate discount rates used to calculate the present value of expected future cash flows, estimated useful lives of the intangible assets acquired, customer attrition rates, future changes in technology and brand awareness, and other factors. Although we believe the assumptions and estimates we have made have been reasonable and appropriate, they are based, in part, on historical experience, information obtained from the management of the acquired companies and future expectations. For these and other reasons, actual results may vary significantly from estimated results. During the preliminary purchase price measurement period, which may be up to one year from the business combination date, we will record adjustments to the provisional amounts recognized at the acquisition date to reflect new information obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date, with a corresponding offset to goodwill. After the preliminary purchase price measurement period, we will record adjustments to assets acquired or liabilities assumed subsequent to the purchase price measurement period in our operating results in the period in which the adjustments were determined.
Internal Use Software
Certain costs of platform and software applications developed for internal use are capitalized as intangible assets. Capitalization of costs begins when two criteria are met: (i) the preliminary project stage is completed (i.e.
, application development stage) and (ii) it is probable that the software will be completed and used for its intended function. The Company also capitalizes costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable the expenditures will result in additional functionality. Costs incurred for maintenance, minor upgrades and enhancements are recorded under selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations as incurred. Costs related to preliminary project activities and postimplementation operating activities are also recorded under selling, general and administrative expense in the consolidated statement of operations as incurred. The Company amortizes the capitalized costs on a straight-line basis over the useful life of the asset. The average useful life for capitalized internal use computer software is between 3-5 years. Capitalized internal use computer software, net of accumulated amortization, was $25.2 million and $23.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and was included in intangible assets.
Intangible Assets
Identifiable intangible assets acquired individually or as part of a group of other assets are initially recognized and measured at cost. The cost of a group of intangible assets acquired in a transaction, including those acquired in a business combination that meet the specified criteria for recognition apart from goodwill, is the sum of the individual assets acquired based on their acquisition date fair values. The cost incurred to enhance the service potential of an intangible asset is capitalized as a betterment.
Identifiable intangible assets comprise assets that have a definite life. Customer relationship intangibles are amortized on an accelerated basis and the other intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows:
Customer Relationships
10-13 years
Technology
5-9
years
Carrier Contracts
10 years
Trademarks
9-10
years
Non-compete
agreements
3 years
Internally developed and computer acquired software
3-5
years
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company determined that there were no indicators of impairment and did not recognize any impairment of its intangible assets.
Goodwill
Goodwill is not amortized but tested for impairment on an annual basis and between annual tests whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment, or one level below the operating segment. We operate in one operating segment, which is our only reporting unit.
We test for an indication of goodwill impairment on October 1st of each year or when indicators of impairment exist. A significant amount of judgment is involved in determining if an indicator of impairment has occurred. We perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting units is less than its carrying amount. Qualitative factors that we consider include macroeconomics conditions such as geographical location and fluctuations in foreign exchange, industry and market conditions, financial performance, a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the business climate, unanticipated competition, entity-specific events and share price trends. If, based on the evaluation, we determine that the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, then an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to that excess, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Under a quantitative test, we obtain a third-party valuation of the fair value of the reporting unit. Assumptions we use in the fair value calculation include revenue growth and profitability, terminal values, discount rates, and implied control premium. Impairments, if any, are recorded to the statement of operations in the period the impairment is recognized. As of October 1, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company determined there were no indicators of impairment and we did not recognize any impairment of our goodwill.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences of temporary differences between the carrying amounts and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted rates. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred taxes is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We recognize the financial statement effect of an uncertain income tax position when it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits, that the position will be sustained upon examination. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely to be realized. A valuation allowance is recorded to reduce deferred income tax assets to an amount, which in the opinion of management is more likely than not to be realized.
Management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. We consider factors such as the cumulative income or loss in recent years; reversal of deferred tax liabilities; projected future taxable income exclusive of temporary differences; the character of the income tax asset, including income tax positions; tax planning strategies and the period over which we expect the deferred tax assets to be recovered in the determination of the valuation allowance. In the event that actual results differ from these estimates or we adjust our estimates in the future, we may need to adjust our valuation allowance, which could materially impact our financial position and results of operations.
Stock Based Compensation
Our share-based compensation plans consist of the 2014 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2014 Plan”), under which the board is authorized to grant stock options to eligible employees, and directors of the Company and the 2021 Incentive Award Plan (“2021 Plan”), under which the board is authorized to grant stock options and restricted stock units. See “Note 14-Stock Based Compensation” in our accompanying consolidated financial statements for information on the Plan and related stock options.
We use the Black-Scholes valuation model to estimate the fair value of each option award on the date of grant, which uses assumptions for expected volatility, expected dividends, expected term, and the risk-free interest rate. We expense the fair value of the option awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period and have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur.
Recent accounting pronouncements
As an emerging growth company (“EGC
”), the JOBS Act allows the Company to delay adoption of new or revised accounting pronouncements applicable to public companies until such pronouncements are applicable to private companies. The Company has elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act until such time the Company is no longer considered to be an EGC.
See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and our results of operations.