Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” and “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. All dollar amounts are in thousands, unless otherwise specified.
Overview
We are an e-commerce focused financial technology company offering e-commerce point-of-sale (“POS”) lease-purchase options for non-prime U.S. consumers. Our fully-digital, next-generation technology platform provides non-prime consumers with a flexible lease purchase option to enable them to obtain durable goods from our network of e-commerce merchants. See the section titled “Business” for further details on our business.
Key events impacting our business are as follows:
•COVID-19 - Due to the economic uncertainty that has and may continue to result from the COVID-19 pandemic, there is an added risk factor in the overall future outlook of the Company. We have implemented cost containment and cash management initiatives to mitigate the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and liquidity. Although we experienced positive performance during the onset of the pandemic due to increased customer activity and the resiliency of our business model, our business has been impacted by a number of factors including changes in consumer spending habits, government stimulus, new variants and other potential factors. Management continues to monitor both positive and negative potential business trends as these factors continue throughout 2022.
Key factors and trends impacting our business include the following:
•In the first quarter 2021, consumers were bolstered by two stimulus payments, one in January and the other in March, which drove spending and consequently our gross originations volume. These stimulus payments also changed historic 90-day buyout and delinquency patterns during 2020 through the first quarter 2021, with these trends now normalizing to pre-pandemic levels. Recent macro headwinds we have observed since fourth quarter 2021 that are continuing include key merchant partners experiencing lower sales volumes than they did in 2020 and early 2021. In addition, in response to these trends and a deterioration in overall payment ability of our customers, we initiated tightening of our underwriting in fourth quarter 2021 continuing into 2022, which has led to fewer approvals. The combination of these factors is resulting in gross originations trending down significantly year-over-year through February 2022.
•Record levels of inflation combined with supply chain issues (including availability of raw materials from Russia and Ukraine) are expected to impact customers ability to make lease payments and impact key merchant partners
•We anticipate that the challenging macro environment will continue in 2022 but expect that our largest merchant partners will be able to return to growth in the second half of 2022. We also anticipate that impairment charges will continue to rise back to pre-pandemic levels.
•Based on historical trends, if prime lenders that had previously expanded their underwriting due to record low delinquencies in 2020 and early 2021, tighten their underwriting, this would result in potential additional volume and higher credit customers to the Company.
Segment Information
We conduct our business within one business segment, which is defined as providing lease payment options to consumers for the purchase of durable goods from e-commerce partners. Our operations are aggregated into a single reportable operating segment based upon similar economic and operating characteristics as well as similar markets.
Key Performance Metrics
We regularly review several metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions, which may also be useful to an investor.
Gross Originations
We measure gross originations to assess the growth trajectory and overall size of our lease portfolio. There is a direct correlation between gross origination growth and revenue growth. We define gross originations as the retail price of the merchandise associated with lease-purchase agreements entered into during the period through our platform. Gross originations do not represent revenue earned. However, we believe this is a useful operating metric for both the Company and investors to use in assessing the volume of transactions that take place on our platforms.
The following table presents gross originations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
Wayfair represented 63%, 70% , and 60% of gross origination during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Gross originations have increased as a result of the addition of new merchant partners, government stimulus, and a continued shift of consumer spending online. The growth of gross originations from customers, excluding Wayfair, year-over-year was 29.9%.
Total Revenue and Bad Debt Recoveries
Total revenue represents the sum of rental revenue, other revenue, and service fees. Bad debt recoveries represent customer payments for receivables that had previously been written off. Bad debt recoveries represent a reduction to bad debt expense in the period in which they are collected. We measure these metrics to assess the total view of paythrough performance of our customers. We believe looking at these components of our consolidated financial statements is useful to an investor as it helps to understand the total payment performance of customers.
The following tables present total revenue and bad debt recoveries for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively:
(1) Bad debt recoveries represent 21%, 22%, and 16% of total bad debt expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Gross Profit
Gross profit represents total revenue less cost of revenue, and is a measure presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. We also use adjusted gross profit as a key performance indicator to provide an understanding of one aspect of our performance specifically attributable to total revenue and the variable costs associated with total revenue.
Adjusted Gross Profit
Adjusted gross profit represents gross profit less variable operating expenses, which are servicing costs, underwriting fees, and bad debt expense. We believe that adjusted gross profit provides a meaningful understanding of one aspect of our performance specifically attributable to total revenue and the variable costs associated with total revenue. See “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” section below for a reconciliation of adjusted gross profit, which is a non-GAAP measure utilized by management, to gross profit.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue consists of rental revenue, other revenue and service fees. Rental revenue consists of revenue earned from property held for lease and agreed-upon charges related to lease-purchase agreements. Other revenue consists of sub-lease revenue, revenue from merchant partnerships, and infrequent sales of property formerly on lease when customers terminate a lease and elect to return the property to the Company rather than the Company’s merchant partners. Service fees consists of fees related to leases originated by the Company’s former subsidiary Cognical SPV-4 LLC (which was liquidated in December 2020) on behalf of a third-party merchant which the Company services for a contractually determined fee.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of depreciation expense related to property held for lease, impairment of property held for lease, net book value of property buyouts, payment processing fees, and other costs associated with offering lease-purchase transactions to customers.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of servicing costs, underwriting fees, professional and consulting fees, technology and data analytics expense, bad debt expense, compensation costs and general and administrative expense. Servicing costs primarily consist of permanent and temporary call center support. Underwriting fees primarily consist of data costs related to inputs from customer underwriting models. Professional and consulting fees primarily consist of corporate legal and accounting costs. Technology and data analytics expense primarily consist of salaries and benefits for computer programming and data analytics employees that support our underlying technology and proprietary risk model algorithms. Bad debt expense primarily consists of provisions for uncollectible accounts receivable, net of recoveries. Compensation costs consist primarily of payroll and related costs and stock-based compensation. General and administrative expense consists primarily of occupancy costs, travel and entertainment, and other general overhead costs, including depreciation and amortization related to office equipment and software.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Rental revenue
Rental revenue increased by $55.9 million, or 22.6%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in rental revenue was attributed to the addition of new merchant partners on the Katapult platforms. During the period we onboarded 102 new merchant partners. In addition, we experienced a 5% increase in originations, which is a direct result of the increases in e-commerce activity.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue increased $46.7 million, or 27.9%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by various promotions and pricing concessions combined with the increase in rental revenue and origination volume over this period.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased by $9.2 million, or 11.5%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to the addition of new merchant partners and an increase in originations during the period. Gross profit as a percentage of total revenue decreased to 29% for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 32% for the same period in 2020. This decrease was driven by the normalization of customer payment performance as compared to the 2020 period and various promotions and pricing concession for merchant partners.
Servicing Costs
Servicing costs increased by $0.7 million, or 16.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due an increase in call center headcount to service the increase in originations during the same period and was offset by scalability efficiencies achieved in the latter part of 2020 and throughout 2021.
Underwriting fees
Underwriting fees decreased by $0.5 million, or 20%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to efficiencies achieved during the latter part of 2020 related to the continual refinement of our customer underwriting model and specifically, our ability to favorably renegotiate third party data costs, despite an increase in underwriting activity associated with increased revenue volume over the period.
Professional and consulting fees
Professional and consulting fees increased by $3.0 million, or 103%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by the Merger, which resulted in $1.2 million of non-capitalizable expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021. Further contributing to the increase were an increase in accounting and legal fees in preparation of becoming a public company and consulting fees associated with SOX compliance readiness as compared to 2020.
Technology and data analytics
Technology and data analytics expense increased by $1.9 million, or 30.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to added employee headcount to continue the build-out of the Company’s technological infrastructure and continued improvement of our proprietary risk model algorithms, partially offset by a greater portion of software development activities qualifying for capitalization in 2021.
Bad debt expense
Bad debt expense increased $12.2 million, or 76.2%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in our lease base resulting in a larger accounts receivable balance year over year. In addition, delinquencies were at record lows during part of 2020 due primarily to the U.S. government stimulus to individuals for COVID-19 relief.
Compensation costs
Compensation costs increased by $20.1 million or 292% for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase is related to an increase in stock-based compensation for the immediate vesting of restricted stock awards
upon the Merger, payment of transaction related employee bonuses and added headcount to support our growth trajectory. Stock-based compensation increased $12.7 million from $0.4 million to $13.1 million year over year.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $7.0 million, or 164%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase is related to an increase in insurance and other related costs as a public company, and increased marketing, advertising expenses, and software related expense.
Interest expense and other fees
Interest expense and other fees increased by $2.9 million, or 21.3%, for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was primarily due to an increase in total outstanding principal balance of indebtedness on our debt facilities during 2021. The principal balances on our indebtedness increased due to increased origination volume combined with borrowings on the term loan facility that we entered into during 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
The change in fair value of warrant liability was $36.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The balance consists of changes in the fair value of the Company’s warrant liability, which decreased due to the decline in the fair value of the public warrants.
Provision for income taxes
Provision for income taxes was $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The provision is related to certain states where accelerated federal tax depreciation is disallowed.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Rental revenue
Rental revenue increased by $155.9 million, or 171.4%, to $246.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $91.0 million for 2019. This was primarily due to the Company’s addition of Wayfair as a merchant partner, which accounted for 72% of origination dollars in 2020, versus 58% in 2019. The difference in percentage of origination dollars was mainly driven by Wayfair being a merchant partner for the full year in 2020, versus a partial year in 2019. Additionally, the Company experienced a 119.1% increase in originations over the period due to the acceleration of e-commerce activity during the COVID-19 pandemic. A timing lag exists between originations and rental revenue because an origination in a given period will result in revenue over the resulting lease term, which can occur in subsequent periods. The 171.4% increase in rental revenue during 2020 was partly driven by a larger proportion of 2019 originations occurring towards the end of the year, as 38.3% of 2019 originations occurred in the fourth quarter 2019. These later 2019 originations resulted in increased rental revenue in early 2020.
Other revenue
Other revenue decreased by approximately $0.2 million, or 45.7%, to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $0.4 million in 2019 due to our sub-lease arrangement ending in July 2019.
Service fees
Revenue from service fees decreased by $0.4 million, or 85.8%, to $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $0.5 million in 2019. This was primarily driven by the termination of a pilot partnership in February 2019.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue increased $96.2 million, or 135.1%, to $167.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $71.2 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the proportional increase in rental revenue and origination volume over this period, which was offset by lower depreciation related to property held for lease. Cost of revenue as a percentage of total revenue decreased to 67.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 77.5% in 2019. Cost of revenue decreased as a percentage of total revenue due to improved underwriting and payment collection performance.
Gross profit
Gross profit increased by $59.1 million, or 286.3%, to $79.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $20.7 million in 2019. This was due to the individual revenue and cost of revenue drivers described above. These individual drivers were caused by an overall increase in performance on recently originated leases, which was due to improved underwriting and payment collection performance.
Operating expenses
The following tables quantify the dollar amounts of operating costs versus total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
Servicing Costs
Servicing costs increased by $1.1 million, or 39.0%, to $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.9 million in 2019. This was primarily due to the increase in overall revenue during the same period and was offset by scalability efficiencies achieved in 2020.
Underwriting fees
Underwriting fees decreased by approximately $0.2 million, or 8.5%, to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, from $2.6 million in 2019. This was primarily due to scalability efficiencies achieved during the year as the Company refines its customer underwriting model, specifically the Company’s ability to favorably renegotiate third party data costs, despite an increase in underwriting activity associated with increased revenue volume over the period.
Professional and consulting fees
Professional and consulting fees increased by $1.6 million, or 118.9%, to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $1.3 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the pending business combination, which resulted in $1.0 million of non-capitalizable expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Additionally, the Company incurred approximately $0.4 million of legal fees associated with investor transactions for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Technology and data analytics
Technology and data analytics expense increased by $2.0 million, or 46.7%, to $6.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $4.3 million in 2019. This was primarily due to a proportional addition to employee headcount to continue the build-out of the Company’s technological infrastructure and continued improvement and management of our proprietary risk model algorithms.
Bad debt expense
Bad debt expense primarily consists of provisions for uncollectible accounts receivable, net of recoveries. Bad debt expense increased by $6.9 million, or 75.3%, to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $9.2 million in 2019. This increase was primarily driven by the proportional increase in rental revenue over this period, which was offset by decreased charge-off rates due to better underwriting and payment collection performance.
Compensation costs
Compensation costs increased by $1.4 million or 24.7% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase is related to added headcount to support the growth trajectory of the Company.
General and administrative
General and administrative expense consists primarily of occupancy costs, travel and entertainment, and other general overhead costs, including depreciation and amortization related to office equipment. General and administrative expense was flat year over year.
Loss on extinguishment of debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt decreased by $0.4 million, or 51.2%, to $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $0.8 million in 2019. Loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to the repayment of the Company’s non-revolving line of credit and bridge loan, and the 2019 loss on extinguishment was related to the capital raising activities and conversion of convertible notes during that period.
Interest expense and other fees
Interest expense and other fees increased by $5.0 million, or 58.4%, to $13.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to $8.6 million in 2019. This was primarily due to an increase in total outstanding principal balances on our debt during 2020. Principal balances increased due to increased origination volume.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was $0 in 2019. This consists of changes in the fair value of the Company’s warrant liability, in 2020 which was driven by a reduction in the fair value of this liability between issuance and year-end.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to gross profit and net income, which are measures presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we believe that adjusted gross profit and adjusted EBITDA provide relevant and useful information which is widely used by analysts, investors, and competitors in our industry in assessing performance. Adjusted gross profit and adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of our performance that are neither required by nor presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted gross profit and adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as substitutes
for U.S. GAAP metrics such as gross profit, operating income, net income, or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similar measures used by other companies.
Adjusted gross profit represents gross profit less variable operating expenses, which are servicing costs, underwriting fees, and bad debt expense. We believe that adjusted gross profit provides a meaningful understanding of one aspect of our performance specifically attributable to total revenue and the variable costs associated with total revenue.
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure that is defined as net income (loss) before interest expense and other fees, change in fair value of warrant liability, (provision) benefit for income taxes, depreciation and amortization on property and equipment, impairment of leased assets, stock-based compensation expense, and transaction costs associated with the Merger. Adjusted net income is a non-GAAP financial measure that is defined as net (loss) income before change in fair value of warrant liability, stock-based compensation expense and transaction costs associated with the Merger.
Adjusted gross profit and adjusted EBITDA are useful to an investor in evaluating our performance because these measures:
•Are widely used to measure a company’s operating performance;
•Are financial measurements that are used by rating agencies, lenders and other parties to evaluate our credit worthiness; and
•Are used by our management for various purposes, including as measures of performance and as a basis for strategic planning and forecasting.
The following table presents gross profit and adjusted gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The reconciliations of net income (loss) to adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 are as follows:
(1) Includes $0.5 million of employer payroll taxes in 2021.
(2) Consists of non-capitalizable transaction cost associated with the Merger.
(3) Consists of legal expenses incurred in connection with non-recurring investor-related matters including stock transfers, sale of founder shares, and warrant exercises.
NM - calculation is not meaningful
The reconciliations of net income to adjusted net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
(1) Includes $0.5 million of employer payroll taxes.
(2) Consists of non-capitalizable transaction cost associated with the Merger.
NM- calculation is not meaningful
ASC 842 Adoption
For illustrative purposes only, we are disclosing non-GAAP results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively as if the lessor accounting impacts of ASC 842 were in effect for these periods. Total revenue under ASC 842 and bad debt expense (net of recoveries) under ASC 842 are supplemental disclosures that are neither required by nor presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Management believes these non-GAAP measures for 2021 and 2020 provide relevant and useful information for users of our financial statements, as it provides comparability with the financial results we will be reporting beginning in 2022 when ASC 842 becomes effective and we begin to recognize revenue from customers when the revenue is earned and cash is collected instead of on an accrual basis as we have historically done. Upon adoption, we will no longer record accounts receivable arising from lease receivables due from customers incurred during the normal course of business for lease payments earned but not yet received from the customer or any corresponding allowance for doubtful accounts.
*Total revenue under ASC 842 also reflects the impact of the change in recognizing revenue when it is earned and cash is collected.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table presents our cash, restricted cash, and accounts receivable, net, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The table below sets forth a summary of our cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This reflects our net income of $21.2 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $213.5 million and net cash outflows of $232.5 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of increases in depreciation and amortization of $144.0 million, net book value of property buyouts of $45.6 million, bad debt expense of $28.3 million and stock compensation of $13.0 million. Partially offsetting these increases was $14.6 million of impairment expense.
Net cash used in operating activities was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $29.4 million from $31.6 million used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019. This reflects our net income of $22.5 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $177.1 million and net cash outflows of $201.8 million from changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of depreciation and amortization, which increased $64.4 million; net book value of property buyouts, which increased $19.4 million; impairment expense, which increased $7.1 million; and bad debt expense, which increased $6.9 million.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was primarily due to an increase in capitalized software of $1.0 million coupled with $0.4 million of purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to purchases of property and equipment of $0.2 million and capitalized software of $0.2 million.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and was due to $38.9 million of cash received from the Merger, net of transaction costs and consideration paid to selling stockholders, $7.0 million of advances on the revolving line of credit, and $0.7 million of proceeds from exercise of stock options. These increases were offset by $20.5 million of principal repayments on the revolving line of credit.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $59.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was primarily due to proceeds from revolving line of credit of $39.9 million and net proceeds from term loan of $49.1 million, which was offset by principal repayment on the revolving line of credit of $4.8 million, principal repayment of long term debt of $7.5 million, and principal repayment of the non-revolving line of credit of $16.0 million.
Financing Arrangements
Senior Secured Term Loan and Revolving Loan Facility
On May 14, 2019, Katapult SPV-1 LLC, as borrower ("Borrower"), and Katapult Group, Inc. (f/k/a Cognical, Inc.) entered into a loan and security agreement (the “credit agreement”) with Midtown Madison Management, LLC as agent for various funds of Atalaya Capital Management (“Atalaya”), for a senior secured revolving loan facility (“revolving loan facility”) with an initial commitment of $50.0 million and the lender having the right to increase to a maximum of $150 million commitment over time. The revolving loan facility is subject certain covenants and originally had an 85% advance rate on eligible accounts receivable, which was increased to 90% in March 2020. The annual interest rate on the principal was the LIBOR plus 11% per annum through July 2020. Beginning in August 2020, the interest rate stepped down to LIBOR plus 7.5% per annum. There is a 2% floor on the LIBOR. On September 28, 2020, the lenders increased the maximum commitment to a total of $125.0 million. On December 4, 2020, the Company entered into the ninth amendment to the revolving loan facility. This amendment provided the lenders with the right to increase the revolving commitment amount from $125.0 million to $250.0 million. This right has not yet been exercised by the lenders as of the date of these consolidated financial statements.
Pursuant to the ninth amendment to the credit agreement entered into on December 4, 2020, Atalaya also provided the Company with a senior secured term loan (“term loan facility”) commitment of up to $50.0 million. The Company drew down the full $50.0 million of the term loan facility on December 4, 2020. The term loan facility bears interest at one-month LIBOR plus 8.0% (with a 1% LIBOR floor) and an additional 3% interest per annum will accrue to the principal balance as paid-in-kind (“PIK”) interest. Total outstanding principal and PIK interest is $51.7 million at December 31, 2021. An additional 3% interest per annum will accrue to the principal balance as paid-in-kind (“PIK”) interest. The term loan facility matures on December 4, 2023.
This credit facility is also subject to certain customary representations, affirmative covenants and negative covenants, which consist of maintaining lease performance metrics, financial ratios related to operating results, and lease delinquency ratios, along with customary negative covenants. The outstanding line of credit, including unpaid principal and interest, is due December 4, 2023 unless there is an earlier event of default such as bankruptcy, default on interest payments, or a change of control (excluding an acquisition by a special purpose acquisition company), at which point the facility may become due earlier. Total outstanding principal under the revolving line of credit was $62.0 million at December 31, 2021.
The negative covenants limit our ability to: incur additional indebtedness; pay dividends, redeem stock or make other distributions; amend our material agreements; make investments; create liens; transfer or sell the collateral for the credit facility; make negative pledges; consolidate, merge, sell or otherwise dispose of all or substantially all of our assets; and enter into certain transactions with affiliates. Early repayments of certain amounts under our credit facility are subject to prepayment penalties.
The credit agreement governing our credit facility also requires us to maintain the following financial covenants:
•Minimum Trailing Twelve Month Adjusted EBITDA: As of the end of each fiscal month, the TTM Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the credit agreement) must not be less than (i) during the period on and after October 1, 2021 and until (and including) June 30, 2023, ($15,000,000), (ii) during the period on and after July 1, 2023 and until (and including) December 31, 2023, $0.00, and (iii) at all times thereafter, $20,000,000.
•Minimum Tangible Net Worth: As of the end of each fiscal month, the Tangible Net Worth (as defined in the credit agreement) of Katapult Holdings, Inc. and its subsidiaries, on a consolidated basis, must be greater than or equal to the sum of (i) $(18,500,000) plus (ii) the greater of (A) zero dollars and (B) fifty percent of all aggregate Parent Consolidated Net Income (as defined in the credit agreement) since April 30, 2019 (as determined in accordance with GAAP.
•Minimum Liquidity: As of any date of determination, Katapult Holdings, Inc. must not permit Liquidity (as defined in the credit agreement) to be less than $50 million of cash and cash equivalents on hand.
•Compliance with Total Advance Rate: At the end of each fiscal month and as of the making of any advance under the credit agreement, the Total Advance Rate (as defined in the credit agreement) must not exceed (i) from the period on or after October 1, 2021 to and including December 31, 2022, 140%, (ii) from January 1, 2023 to and including December 31, 2023, 130% and (iii) at all times thereafter, 120%. If at any time during which there is a Total Advance Rate Reserve Account (as defined in the credit agreement), the Total Advance Rate exceeds the applicable rate for any of the foregoing periods, the borrower may cure such Default (as defined in the credit agreement) by depositing funds in the Total Advance Rate Reserve Account in an amount necessary to reduce the Total Advance Rate to the maximum permitted rate for such period; provided that borrower's right to cure a default may be exercised no more than a total of five (5) times.
Failure to comply with any of these covenants or other obligation or agreement under the credit agreement that is not cured within the specified period under the credit agreement would result in an event of default under the agreement. Upon an event of default, the lenders can exercise their remedies under the credit agreement including the immediate termination of any loan commitments under the agreement and the acceleration of repayment of all obligations under the credit agreement immediately.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the credit agreement was amended to, among other things: (1) amend the trailing twelve month ("TTM") Adjusted EBITDA (as defined in the credit agreement) financial covenant to (2) increase the minimum liquidity covenant to $50.0 million; (3) amend the definition of “Liquidity” to include Cash Equivalents (as defined in the credit agreement): and (4) amend the Total Advance Rate (as defined in the credit agreement) financial covenant. No modifications were made to applicable funding costs or the maturity date of the revolving loan facility.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company was in compliance with the covenants in the credit agreement.
On March 14, 2022, the borrower, Katapult Holdings, Inc. and Katapult Group, Inc. entered into the thirteenth amendment to the credit agreement to amend the number of times the borrower can cure a default with respect to compliance with the Total Advance Rate covenant from two to five. As of the date of this report, the Borrower has exercised its right to cure such a default two times.
For additional information on our loan obligations, refer to Notes 7 and 8 of the audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Pledge and Guaranty
Pursuant to the Pledge Agreement, dated as of May 14, 2019, between Katapult Group, Inc. (f/k/a Cognical, Inc.) and Midtown Madison Management, LLC, Katapult Group, Inc. pledged and granted a first priority security interest in all equity interests of the Borrower and any investment property and general intangibles evidenced by or related to such membership interests. Pursuant to the Corporate Guaranty and Security Agreement, dated as of December 4, 2020, by and among Katapult Group, Inc., Legacy Katapult and Midtown Madison Management, LLC, Katapult and Katapult Group, Inc. have granted a first priority security interest in all of their respective assets and Katapult and Katapult Group, Inc. guarantee payment of all obligations of the Borrower under the facility.
Sources and Material Cash Requirements
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash, cash flows generated from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility. Our primary uses of cash include purchases of assets held for lease and funding for growth initiatives.
Our ability to fund future operating needs will be dependent on our ability to generate positive cash flows from operations and obtain financing for growth as needed. We have $92.5 million of unrestricted cash at December 31, 2021 which we believe is sufficient to meet our liquidity needs for the next 12 months. We believe we will meet longer-term (beyond 12 months) cash requirements through a combination of available cash on hand, cash flows generated from operations and availability under our revolving credit facility.
The table below summarizes our material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021:
(1) Future cash obligations include scheduled interest payments due based on the interest rate of 9.5% as of December 31, 2021.
(2) Future cash obligations include scheduled interest payments due based on the interest rate of 9.0%, plus 3.0% paid-in-kind interest as of December 31, 2021.
As the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our business evolves, we will continue to evaluate our liquidity needs. Should we require additional sources of liquidity, we believe that we can finance our future needs through debt or issuance of additional equity. However, we cannot guarantee that we will be able to obtain financing through debt or equity issuances on reasonable/favorable terms.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the periods presented. We evaluate our significant estimates on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, impacting our reported results of operations and financial condition.
We believe that the accounting estimates described below involve a significant degree of judgment and complexity and have the greatest potential effect on our consolidated financial statements. Accordingly, we believe these are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
For further information, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II Item 8 contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Rental Revenue Recognition
Property held for lease is leased to customers pursuant to lease purchase agreements with an initial term: typically one week, two weeks, or one month, with non-refundable lease payments. Generally, the customer has the right to acquire title and ownership either through a 90-day purchase option, an early purchase option (buyout) available prior to completion of the full agreement, or by completing all lease renewal payments, generally 10, 12 or 18 months, for ownership. On any current lease, customers have the option to terminate the agreement at any time without penalty in accordance with lease-purchase agreement terms. Accordingly, customer agreements are accounted for as operating leases with lease revenues recognized in the month they are earned based on the accrual basis of accounting. Amounts received from customers who elect purchase options (buyouts) are included in rental revenue, when earned. Lease payments received prior to their due dates are deferred and recorded as unearned revenue and are recognized as revenue in the period in which they are earned. Rental revenue also includes agreed-upon charges assessed to customer lease applications. Payments are received upon submission of the applications and execution of the lease purchase agreements. Services are considered to be rendered and revenue earned over the initial lease term. The Company also may assess fees for missed or late payments, which are recognized as revenue in the billing period in which they are assessed if collectability is reasonably assured. Revenues from leases are reported net of sales taxes.
There are uncertainties involved with applying rental revenue recognition due to the non-prime nature of our consumers, and the conclusion about likelihood to pay after a customer goes delinquent.
Accounts Receivable and Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Accounts receivable are recorded net of allowances for doubtful accounts. Accounts receivable consist primarily of lease receivables due from customers incurred during the normal course of business for lease payments earned not yet received from the customer. On a periodic basis, management evaluates its accounts receivable and determines whether to provide an allowance for doubtful accounts or if any accounts should be written off based on past history of write-offs, collections, and current credit conditions. We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts to provide for uncollected amounts based on historical collection experience and an analysis of the aging of receivables per the following categories: 1-30 days, 31-60 days, 61-90 days. This analysis results in the determination of loss rate percentages that are applied to outstanding receivables in each of these categories as of period end. We write off accounts receivables that are over 90 days contractually past due. Bad debt expense is classified in operating expenses within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. We do not require any security or collateral to support its receivables.
There are uncertainties involved in estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts due to unanticipated changes in the business environment, as well as factors and risks associated with our customers’ behaviors.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure and record compensation expense related to stock-based awards based on the fair value of those awards as determined on the date of the grant. We recognize stock-based compensation expense over the requisite service period of the individual grant, generally equal to the vesting period and uses the straight-line method to recognize stock-based compensation. We use the Black-Scholes-Merton (“Black-Scholes”) option-pricing model to determine the estimated fair value of stock-based awards. The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires estimates of highly subjective assumptions, such as expected term, common share price, and volatility, which affect the fair value of each stock option. Forfeitures are accounted for as they are incurred.
There are uncertainties involved when recognizing stock-based compensation expense due to the lack of publicly available share price and volatility data for our common stock. Our valuation utilizes peer company volatility data as well as internally developed valuation models for the common share price which could vary from actual market results.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method pursuant to ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized based on all available positive and negative evidence. The determination of whether a deferred tax asset will be realizable is a highly subjective decision based upon estimated future taxable income and could vary from actual results. We recognize a tax benefit only if it is more likely than not the tax position will be sustained on examination by the local taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such positions are then measured based on the largest benefit greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon settlement with the related tax authority. The changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs. We record interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in the provision for income taxes.
Property Held for Lease, Net of Accumulated Depreciation and Impairment
Property held for lease consists of furniture, consumer electronics, appliances, and other durable goods offered for lease-purchase in the normal course of business. Such property is provided to consumers pursuant to a lease-purchase agreement with a minimum term; typically one week, two weeks, or one month. The renewal periods of the initial lease term of the agreement are typically 10, 12 or 18 months. Consumers may terminate a lease agreement at any time without penalty. The average consumer continues to lease the property for 7 months because the consumer either exercises the buyout (early purchase) options or terminates the lease purchase agreement prior to the end of the 10 to 18 month renewal periods. As a result, property held for lease is classified as a current asset on the consolidated balance sheets.
Property held for lease is carried at net book value. Depreciation for property held for lease is generally provided using the income forecasting method and is included within cost of revenue. Under the income forecasting method, property held for lease is depreciated in the proportion of rents received to total expected rents received based on historical data, which is an activity-based method similar to the units of production method. We provide for impairment for the undepreciated balance of the property held for lease assuming no salvage value with a corresponding charge to cost of revenue. Impairment expense includes expense related to property identified as impaired based on historical data, including default trends, such that the recorded amount closely approximates actual impairment expense incurred during the period. We derecognize the undepreciated net book value of property buyouts as buyouts occur with a corresponding charge to cost of revenue. We periodically evaluate fully depreciated property held for lease, net. When it is determined there is no future economic benefit, the related assets and accumulated depreciation are written-off.
There are uncertainties involved when recognizing expenses related to property held for lease due to the subjective nature of the income forecasting method and estimated salvage value, which could vary from actual results.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements in this filing for a discussion of accounting pronouncements recently adopted and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted and their potential impact to our consolidated financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company
As of December 31, 2021, we are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying
with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies, allowing them to delay the adoption of those standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to the financial statements of companies that are required to comply with the effective dates for new or revised accounting standards that are applicable to public companies. We will remain an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (a) December 31, 2024, (b) the last date of our fiscal year in which we have a total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (c) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates or (d) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.