Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis and set forth elsewhere in this report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the section titled “Risk Factors” in Part I-Item 1A of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a commercial-stage pharmaceutical company pioneering novel cancer therapies and dedicated to the discovery, development and commercialization of first-in-class drugs directed against nuclear export for the treatment of cancer and other diseases. Our scientific expertise is based upon an understanding of the regulation of intracellular communication between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. We have discovered and are developing and commercializing novel, small molecule Selective Inhibitor of Nuclear Export (“SINE”) compounds that inhibit the nuclear export protein exportin 1 (“XPO1”). These SINE compounds, representing a new class of drug candidates with a novel mechanism of action that have the potential to treat a variety of diseases with high unmet medical need, were the first oral XPO1 inhibitors to receive marketing approval. Our lead asset, XPOVIO® (selinexor), received its initial U.S. approval from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) in July 2019 and is currently approved and marketed in the U.S. for the following indications:
•In combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone for the treatment of adult patients with multiple myeloma who have received at least one prior therapy. Approval in this indication was supported by data from the BOSTON (Bortezomib, Selinexor and Dexamethasone) study;
•In combination with dexamethasone for the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma who have received at least four prior therapies and whose disease is refractory to at least two proteasome inhibitors, at least two immunomodulatory agents, and an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody. Approval in this indication was supported by data from the STORM (Selinexor Treatment of Refractory Myeloma) study; and
•For the treatment of adult patients with relapsed or refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (“DLBCL”), not otherwise specified, including DLBCL arising from follicular lymphoma, after at least two lines of systemic therapy. This indication was approved under accelerated approval based on response rate and was supported by data from the SADAL (Selinexor Against Diffuse Aggressive Lymphoma) study. Continued approval for this indication may be contingent upon verification and description of clinical benefit in confirmatory trial(s).
Our primary focus is on marketing XPOVIO in its currently approved indications as well as developing and seeking the regulatory approval of selinexor and eltanexor as oral agents in multiple myeloma, endometrial cancer, myelofibrosis, myelodysplastic syndromes, and in additional cancer indications with significant unmet medical need. We plan to continue to conduct clinical trials and to seek additional approvals for the use of selinexor and eltanexor as single agents or in combination with other oncology therapies to expand the patient populations that are eligible for treatment with selinexor or eltanexor.
On February 8, 2022, we announced top-line results from our Phase 3 SIENDO study evaluating the efficacy and safety of selinexor for front-line maintenance therapy in patients with advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer (the “SIENDO Study”). On February 25, 2022, we attended a pre-supplemental New Drug Application (“sNDA”) submission meeting with the FDA during which we received feedback, including that the top-line results from the SIENDO Study are unlikely to support an sNDA approval. Considering the FDA’s feedback, we intend to initiate a new placebo-controlled randomized clinical study of selinexor in patients with p53 wild-type with advanced or recurrent endometrial cancer this year.
In December 2021, we entered into a license agreement (the “Menarini Agreement”) with Berlin-Chemie AG, an affiliate of the Menarini Group (“Menarini”), pursuant to which we granted Menarini a non-exclusive license to develop, and an exclusive license to commercialize, products containing selinexor for all human oncology indications (the “Product”) in Europe and other key global territories. We received an upfront cash payment of $75.0 million in December 2021 and are entitled to receive up to $202.5 million in milestone payments from Menarini if certain development and sales performance milestones are achieved. We are further eligible to receive tiered royalties ranging from the mid-teens to mid-twenties based on future net sales of the Product in the Menarini territory. The payments owed by Menarini to us are subject to reduction in specified circumstances. Menarini will reimburse us for 25% of all documented expenses we incur for the global development of the Product during 2022 through 2025, provided that such reimbursements shall not exceed $15.0 million per calendar year.
In June 2021, we amended our Revenue Interest Agreement (the “Amended Revenue Interest Agreement”) with entities managed by HealthCare Royalty Management, LLC (“HCR”) and received $60.0 million in connection with such amendment. For additional information on the Amended Revenue Interest Agreement, see Note 16, “Long-Term Obligations”, to the consolidated financial statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In April 2021, the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) validated our Type II variation to the marketing authorization application (“MAA”) based on the data from the Phase 3 BOSTON Study, which evaluated once-weekly administration of selinexor in combination with once-weekly administration of Velcade® (bortezomib) and low-dose dexamethasone compared to standard twice-weekly administration of Velcade® plus low-dose dexamethasone in patients with multiple myeloma who have received one to three prior lines of therapy. In January 2022, as part of the MAA approval process, the EMA conducted a preapproval good clinical practices (“GCP”) inspection at our corporate headquarters, which was also attended by the FDA. In addition, an inspection of one clinical site that participated in the BOSTON Study took place in late 2021. In February 2022, the EMA issued its initial GCP inspection reports, which included certain questions and findings. We have promptly addressed the questions and findings including in the inspection reports, however, there can be no assurances that our proposals will be acceptable to the EMA. We expect that the review of the Type II variation will be completed in the first half of 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $1.2 billion. We had net losses of $124.1 million, $196.3 million and $199.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. We recognized total revenue of $209.8 million in 2021, including $98.4 million of XPOVIO net product revenue and $111.4 million of license revenue. License revenue included $75.0 million in revenue recognized from the Menarini Agreement and $29.3 million recognized in development/regulatory milestone revenue from Antengene Therapeutics Limited (“Antengene”). As of December 31, 2021, we had $235.6 million in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and investments.
Uncertainty Relating to the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has and will continue to affect economies, healthcare systems, and businesses around the world. We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including the impact on our employees, patients and business operations. We have experienced and may continue to experience in the future, disruptions that could impact our results of operations, including product revenue and our financial condition. Although we do not currently expect that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will have a material impact on our business plans or results of operations, we are unable to predict the full extent of the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have on our operating results and financial condition due to numerous uncertainties. These uncertainties include the availability, administration rates and effectiveness of vaccines and therapeutics against any variants as new strains of the virus evolve, the continued duration and severity of the pandemic, governmental, business or other actions, changes to our operations and how quickly and to what extent normal economic and operation conditions can resume, among others. In addition, in October 2021, we began to require that all of our employees be fully vaccinated, subject to limited medical and religious exemptions. It is uncertain to what extent compliance with the vaccine mandate may result in workforce attrition or difficulty securing future labor needs. We will continue to monitor the COVID-19 situation closely and intend to follow health and safety guidelines as they evolve. Further, the impacts of a potential worsening of global economic conditions and the continued disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets, as well as other unanticipated consequences, remain unknown. The situation surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic remains fluid and we are actively managing our response and assessing potential impacts to our operating results and financial condition, as well as adverse developments in our business. For further information regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us, see Item 1A - Risk Factors included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We believe that the estimates and assumptions involved in the accounting policies described below may have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements and, therefore, consider these to be our critical accounting estimates. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. See Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for information about our significant accounting policies.
Product Revenue Reserves
We recognize product revenues, net of variable consideration related to certain allowances and accruals, when the customer takes control of the product, which is typically upon delivery to the customer. Revenue from product sales is recorded at the net sales price, which includes estimates of variable consideration for which reserves are reported. These reserves are based on the amounts earned, or to be claimed on the related sales, and are generally classified as reductions of accounts receivable (if the amount is payable to the customer) or a current liability (if the amount is payable to a party other than a customer). On a quarterly basis, we update our estimates and record any needed adjustments in the period we identify the adjustments.
The estimates for our product revenue allowances and accruals are most significantly affected by chargebacks, which are contractual commitments to provide products to qualified healthcare entities at prices lower than the list prices charged to our customers who purchase XPOVIO directly from us, and rebates that represent discount obligations under government programs, including Medicaid, Medicare, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Defense, and others.
Certain of the amounts noted are known at the time of sale based on contractual terms and, therefore, are recorded pursuant to the most likely amount method under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”). Other amounts are estimated and take into consideration a range of possible outcomes, which are probability-weighted and recorded in accordance with the expected value method in ASC 606 for relevant factors, such as current contractual and statutory requirements, specific known market events and trends, industry data, and forecasted customer buying and payment patterns. Overall, these reserves reflect our best estimates of the amount of consideration to which we are entitled based on the terms of the respective underlying contracts.
A 10% increase or decrease in these estimates would impact net sales by a corresponding increase or decrease of less than $2.0 million.
License and Asset Purchase Agreements
We generate revenue from license or similar agreements with pharmaceutical companies for the development and commercialization of certain of our products and product candidates. For elements of collaboration arrangements that are accounted for pursuant to ASC 606, we identify the performance obligations and allocate the total consideration we expect to receive on a relative standalone selling price basis to each performance obligation. We utilize judgment to determine the transaction price. In connection therewith, we evaluate contingent milestones at contract inception to estimate the amount which is not probable of a material reversal to include in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. Milestone payments that are not within our control, such as regulatory approvals, are not considered probable of being achieved until those approvals are received and therefore the variable consideration is constrained. The transaction price is then allocated to each performance obligation on a relative stand-alone selling price basis, for which we recognize revenue as or when the performance obligations under the contract are satisfied. At the end of each reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achieving development milestone payments that may not be subject to a material reversal and, if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis, which would affect license and other revenue, as well as earnings, in the period of adjustment.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We estimate our accrued research and development costs. This process involves reviewing quotes and contracts, identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued research and development costs at each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development costs include fees paid to contract research organizations (“CROs”), and contract manufacturing organizations (“CMOs”), in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced. To date, our estimates have not been materially different than amounts actually incurred.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our results of operations (in thousands):
Product Revenue, net (in thousands, except for percentages)
Net product revenue from U.S. commercial sales of XPOVIO for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased 29% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 following the December 2020 FDA approval of the expanded indication for XPOVIO in the U.S., which allowed us to penetrate earlier lines of therapy in multiple myeloma.
We expect net product revenue to increase in 2022 as compared to 2021 due to an increasing number of patients shifting into earlier lines of therapy and increasing utilization of XPOVIO by physicians.
License and Other Revenue (in thousands, except for percentages)
License and other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $79.5 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the $75.0 million upfront payment we recognized in connection with the execution of our license agreement with Menarini in the fourth quarter of 2021. In addition, we recognized $29.3 million of development/regulatory milestone revenue from Antengene following the South Korean approval, and subsequent commercial launch, of selinexor in two indications during the year ended December 31, 2021. We also recognized $0.3 million into revenue from deferred revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021, which was related to the 2020 upfront payment received upon execution of the amendment to our May 2018 license agreement with Antengene.
We expect license and other revenue to decrease in 2022 due to the one-time $75.0 million upfront payment we recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021 from Menarini. In 2022, we expect to receive certain payments related to reimbursable research and development activities.
Operating Costs and Expenses (in thousands, except for percentages)
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the cost of producing and distributing inventories that are related to U.S. XPOVIO product revenue during the respective period, including salary-related and stock-based compensation expenses for employees involved with XPOVIO production and distribution, freight, and indirect overhead costs, as well as third-party royalties payable on our net product revenue for XPOVIO. In addition, shipping and handling costs for product shipments are recorded in cost of sales as incurred. Finally, cost of sales may also include costs related to excess or obsolete inventory adjustment charges, abnormal costs, unabsorbed manufacturing and overhead costs, and manufacturing variances.
We began capitalizing XPOVIO inventory costs during the third quarter of 2019 subsequent to FDA approval as it is our expectation that such costs will be recoverable through the commercialization of XPOVIO. Prior to the capitalization of XPOVIO inventory costs, such costs were recorded as research and development expenses in the period incurred. Therefore, cost of sales recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 only reflect a portion of the costs related to the manufacturing of XPOVIO and related materials, since, prior to FDA approval, these costs were expensed. The manufacturing costs of XPOVIO on-hand upon approval were approximately $2.8 million. At December 31, 2021, we had $2.1 million of this previously expensed XPOVIO and related material on-hand. We expect to utilize zero cost inventory with respect to XPOVIO for an extended period of time.
We expect cost of sales to increase in 2022 as a result of an expected increase in net product sales.
Research and Development Expense (in thousands, except for percentages)
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including CROs, CMOs and consultants that help conduct clinical trials and preclinical studies;
•the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials, including comparator products;
•costs associated with preclinical activities and regulatory operations;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense; and
•facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, and other operating costs.
Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations, and information provided to us by our vendors on their actual costs incurred. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual arrangements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected as prepaid expenses or accrued research and development expenses.
Since our research and development has been focused primarily on using our drug discovery and optimization platform to identify product candidates, we have not historically tracked research and development costs by project. In addition, we use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development projects. The majority of our research and development expenses to date have been related to selinexor.
Research and development expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately $10.0 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to:
•$7.4 million in costs incurred in connection with the acquisition of certain assets from Neumedicines Inc. (“Neumedicines”) in the third quarter of 2021; and
•an increase of $4.9 million in personnel costs, primarily related to an increase in headcount; partially offset by
•a decrease of $2.8 million in clinical trial costs.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect our research and development expenses to decrease in 2022 as compared with 2021 due to our prioritization of our core clinical development programs, including anticipated costs associated with a new SIENDO study to evaluate selinexor in the p53 wild-type patient population. We do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control could impact our clinical development programs and plans.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense (in thousands, except for percentages)
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, travel, and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, commercial and administrative functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters and fees for accounting and consulting services.
Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by approximately $17.4 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to:
•an increase of $7.9 million in personnel costs, primarily related to an increase in headcount;
•an increase of $3.7 million in stock-based compensation costs, primarily related to an increase in headcount;
•an increase of $3.2 million in travel, consulting and professional costs as certain COVID-19 restrictions were lifted; and
•an increase of $2.5 million in commercial-related activities, including costs to support our BOSTON launch.
We expect our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in 2022 as compared to 2021 to support our expanding operating and commercial activities related to sales and marketing of XPOVIO.
Other Expense, net (in thousands, except for percentages)
Other expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1.4 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a decrease in interest income of $2.2 million combined with a decrease in interest expense of $1.1 million. The $1.1 million decrease in interest expense primarily related to a $7.3 million decrease in non-cash interest expense from our 3.00% convertible senior notes due 2025 (the “Notes”), partially offset by a $6.2 million increase in interest expense related to the deferred royalty obligation associated with the June 2021 Amended Revenue Interest Agreement. The $7.3 million decrease related to the Notes was a result of our January 1, 2021 adoption of ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity. As a result of the adoption of this accounting standard, our non-cash interest expense was significantly reduced.
We expect interest expense to increase in 2022 due to the imputed interest on our Amended Revenue Interest Agreement.
Results of Operations-Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included under the heading “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 as filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021 (“2020 Form 10-K”).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flows
To date, we have financed our operations through a combination of product revenue sales and through private placements of our preferred stock, proceeds from our initial public offering and follow-on offerings of common stock, proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt, proceeds pursuant to the deferred royalty obligation, proceeds from sales of common stock under our Open Market Sale Agreement (as defined below), and cash generated from our business development activities. We have had recurring annual losses since inception and incurred a loss of $124.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our cash, cash equivalents and investments balances were $228.6 million.
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities in each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 primarily reflects our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in the components of working capital. The decrease in cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was driven by a $72.2 million decrease in our net loss due primarily to increased revenues year over year offset by an increase of $5.5 million in non-cash charges and a $24.5 million decrease in the change in operating assets and liabilities.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities changed by approximately $195.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to a $229.3 million increase in the purchases of investments offset by $28.3 million decrease in proceeds from sales and maturities of investments. We also used $5.5 million to acquire in-process research and development as a result of our acquisition of assets from Neumedicines in the third quarter of 2021.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities decreased by $98.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily related to a decrease of $151.9 million in proceeds from the sale of shares of our common stock year over year, offset by $60.0 million in proceeds received from the Amended Revenue Interest Agreement in 2021.
A discussion of changes in our cash flow from the year ended December 31, 2019 to the year ended December 31, 2020 can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of the 2020 Form 10-K.
Sources of Liquidity
On June 23, 2021, we and certain of our subsidiaries entered into an amendment to the Revenue Interest Agreement with HCR. Pursuant to the Revenue Interest Agreement, HCR paid us $75.0 million, less certain transaction expenses, on September 27, 2019 and pursuant to the Amended Revenue Interest Agreement, HCR paid us $60.0 million on June 23, 2021. For additional information on the Amended Revenue Interest Agreement, see Note 16, “Long-Term Obligations”, to the Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
On May 5, 2020, we entered into Amendment No. 1 to the Open Market Sale Agreement, dated August 17, 2018 (the “Open Market Sale Agreement”), with Jefferies LLC, as agent (“Jefferies”), pursuant to which we increased the maximum aggregate offering price of shares of our common stock that we may issue and sell from time to time through Jefferies, by $100.0 million from $75.0 million to up to $175.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we have sold an aggregate of 4,350,700 shares under the Open Market Sale Agreement, for net proceeds of approximately $56.2 million. As of December 31, 2021, $100.0 million of shares of our common stock may be issued and sold under the Open Market Sale Agreement.
On March 6, 2020, we completed a follow-on offering under our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 pursuant to which we issued an aggregate of 7,187,500 shares of common stock, which included the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a public offering price of $24.00 per share. We received aggregate net proceeds of approximately $161.8 million from the offering after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we received $75.0 million and $17.2 million, respectively, in upfront payments under our license and distribution arrangements pursuant to which we are also entitled to receive milestone payments, if certain development goals and sales milestones are achieved, as well as royalties on future net sales of the licensed and sold products in the territories under such arrangements. In addition, under our license agreement with Menarini, Menarini will reimburse us for 25% of all documented expenses we incur for the global development of selinexor during 2022 through 2025, provided that such reimbursements shall not exceed $15.0 million per calendar year.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses, excluding stock-based compensation, to remain consistent. We expect to continue to incur significant commercialization expenses related to sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution of any of our products, to the extent that these functions are not the responsibility of our collaborators, or costs related to launch preparation for any of our product candidates that may receive regulatory approval in the near future. However, we expect our research and development expenses to decrease due to our prioritization of our core clinical development programs.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete. In addition, our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval may not achieve commercial success. Our ability to become and remain profitable depends on our ability to generate revenue. There can be no assurance as to the amount or timing of any such revenue, and we may not achieve profitability for several years, if at all, as described more fully in the risk factor entitled “We have incurred significant losses since inception, expect to continue to incur significant losses, and may never achieve or maintain profitability,” under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. We may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations, even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or commercialization efforts.
We currently expect that cash, cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments at December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our current operating plans and capital expenditure requirements for at least twelve months from the date of issuance of the financial statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K while we continue to commercialize XPOVIO in the U.S. and continue the clinical trials of our product candidates. Our future long-term capital requirements will depend on many factors, as described more fully in the risk factor entitled “We will need additional funding to achieve our business objectives. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs and/or commercialization efforts,” under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to the expenses required to fund our operations described above, our funding requirements also include the following:
•Lease costs for our headquarters in Newton, Massachusetts with a term through September 30, 2025, which totaled $2.8 million in 2021 and increase annually; we expect total future lease costs to be approximately $13.9 million over the next four years;
•Increased cash operating expenditures over our 2021 totals of $107.1 million;
•Future long-term debt obligations related to the Notes of $169.3 million over the next four years; and
•Future royalty obligations to HCR under our Revenue Interest Financing Agreement of approximately $233.4 million.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recent accounting pronouncements which may be applicable to us are described in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our Consolidated Financial Statements included under Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.