ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our plans and financial condition. The following financial information is derived from our financial statements and should be read in conjunction with such financial statements and notes thereto set forth elsewhere herein.
Overview
We are an AI driven, end-to-end allogenic cell therapy company, currently developing the multi-indication allogeneic T cell therapy that exploits the natural potency of GDTs to target solid tumors. Our end-to-end approach consists of target discovery and validation, product development, and GMP manufacturing, which we believe will allow us to leverage a new framework for the next generation of cell therapies. We also have new technologies in development that we believe will support our end-to-end approach.
We are developing our brand of CAR-T cell product candidates known as ALEXIS. Our two product candidates are called ALEXIS-ISO-1 and ALEXIS-PRO-1. ALEXIS-ISO-1 is our allogenic gamma delta CAR-T cell therapy product candidate targeting Isomesothelin (the isoform of Mesothelin). ALEXIS-PRO-1 is our allogeneic gamma delta chimeric T cell therapy product candidate targeting PD-L1. These are designed to treat cancer by capitalizing on the immune system’s ability to destroy cancer cells. We filed two IND applications in May 2021 for ALEXIS-ISO-1 and ALEXIS-PRO-1. The IND applications for these trial candidates are currently on a clinical hold as of June 2021. We are currently working on addressing the FDA’s comments. Accordingly, for ALEXIS-PRO-1, we expect the clinical hold will be lifted in the second half of 2022 allowing us to begin the activation process for the clinical trial by the end of the last quarter of 2022. For ALEXIS-ISO-1, we expect to begin the activation process for the clinical trial by the end of the last quarter of 2023.
CAR-T cell therapy, a form of cancer immunotherapy, has recently emerged as a revolutionary and potentially curative therapy for patients with hematologic cancers, including refractory cancers. In 2017, two autologous anti-CD19 CAR-T cell therapies, Kymriah, developed by Novartis International AG, and Yescarta, developed by Kite Pharma, Inc., were approved by the FDA for the treatment of relapsing/remitting B cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia and relapsing/remitting large B cell lymphoma, respectively. Autologous CAR-T cell therapies are manufactured individually for the patient’s use by modifying the patient’s own T cells outside the body, causing the T cells to express CARs. The entire manufacturing process is dependent on the viability of each patient’s T cells and takes approximately two to four weeks. Allogenic T cell therapies involve engineering healthy donor T cells, which we believe will allow for the creation of an inventory of OTS products that can be delivered to a larger portion of eligible patients throughout the world.
We have not generated any revenue from sales to date, and we continue to incur significant research and development and other expenses related to our ongoing operations. As a result, we are not and have never been profitable and have incurred losses in each period since we began principal business operations in 2012.
Trends and Uncertainties-COVID-19
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, as the responses that we, other businesses and governments are taking continue to evolve. Furthermore, capital markets and economies worldwide have also been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and it caused a local and/or global economic recession and global supply chain shortages. Policymakers around the globe have responded with fiscal policy actions to support the healthcare industry and economy as a whole. The magnitude and overall effectiveness of these actions remain uncertain.
The severity of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business will depend on a number of factors, including, but not limited to, the duration and severity of the pandemic and the extent and severity of the impact on the Company's service providers, suppliers, CROs and our clinical trials, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. As of the
date of this report, the extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may in the future materially impact our financial condition, liquidity or results of operations is uncertain.
Recent Developments
We do not have sufficient cash on hand and available liquidity to meet our obligations through the twelve months following the date the consolidated financial statements are issued. Therefore, this condition raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans were updated to evaluate different strategies to obtain the required funding of future operations. These plans may include, but are not limited to, additional funding from current or new investors; however, if we are unable to raise additional funding to meet working capital needs, we will be forced to delay or reduce the scope of our research programs and/or limit or cease operations. The negative cash flows and lack of financial resources raised substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern, and that substantial doubt has not been alleviated.
Updates on KiroVAX/BSK01 Phase 1 clinical trial
On October 25, 2021, we announced to the public, results of a published pilot Phase 1 clinical trial of KiroVAX/BSK01 that showed that the KiroVax/BSK01 vaccine, in combination with chemotherapy, demonstrated a significant progression free survival (PFS) benefit in one of the patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer who participated in the trial.
KiroVax/BSK01, was the Company’s Phase 1 cancer vaccine candidate and consisted of professional antigen presenting cells (dendritic cells) which were matured and pulsed with tumor specific antigens, yielding a tumor-targeted, next-generation therapeutic vaccine designed for multiple types of solid cancers. The trials terminated during fiscal year 2018 due to enrollment limitations. Although strategies have not yet been activated to advance the KiroVax/BSK01 platform, Kiromic is planning to leverage its clinical experience with KiroVax/BSK01 to develop an innovative technology aimed to boost the persistency of its allogenic cell therapy products.
IND Application Resubmission Announcement
On December 17, 2020, we filed two IND applications with the FDA. The first application was for a Phase 1 clinical trial of intravenously administered allogenic CAR-T for epithelial ovarian carcinoma (“EOC”) and malignant pleural mesothelioma (“MPM”). The second application was for a Phase 1 clinical trial of an intrapleural/intraperitoneal administered allogenic CAR-T for EOC and MPM.
Since filing the original applications in December 2020, we have had communications with the FDA, and numerous consults with scientific board and clinical advisors regarding resubmission. On March 9, 2021, we announced that we planned to resubmit the two IND applications. The revised applications will be for first in-human dosing of our OTS, Allogenic GDT therapy for metastatic and progressive locally advanced solid malignancies.
In May 2021, we resubmitted the two IND applications. The revised IND applications are for first in-human dosing of our OTS, Allogenic GDT therapy for metastatic and progressive locally advanced solid malignancies. On May 17, 2021, we announced that the first IND application was for a Phase I clinical trial of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 product candidate. On May 24, 2021, we announced that the second IND application was for a Phase 1 clinical trial of our ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidate.
In June 2021, the FDA placed the IND applications on clinical hold and asked us to address key components regarding the chemical manufacturing and control components of the application. Those components included tracing of all reagents used in manufacturing, flow chart of manufacturing processes, and Certificate of Analysis. We are working to address each of the FDA’s comments.
InSilico Acquisition
In July 2021, we completed our previously announced acquisition of InSilico pursuant to the Purchase Agreement with InSilico and Dr. Michael Ryan (“the Seller”). InSilico, based in Fairfax, VA, is a world class bioinformatics and AI services company.
Pursuant to the terms of the Purchase Agreement, the Company acquired 100% of the membership interest of InSilico by delivering 50,189 shares to the Seller, and granting 33,177 restricted stock units (“RSUs”) to the employees of InSilico under the Company’s 2021 Omnibus Equity Incentive Plan. At the closing of the acquisition, InSilico became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company.
Upon closing the acquisition, we recognized a Goodwill asset of $430,000. However, on December 31, 2021 we assessed events and circumstances under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC “) 350, which caused us to incur an impairment expense for the full $430,000 on our Goodwill. The impairment was primarily related to reduced stock prices as of December 31, 2021, which resulted in the carrying value of our equity exceeding the market value of our equity. After analyzing this quantitative circumstance along with other qualitative considerations, we determined the expense incurred above was reasonable.
Results from our Internal Review
On or about August 17 and 23, 2021, Tony Tontat, who at the time was the Chief Financial Officer and a member of the Board, submitted substantially identical reports (the “Complaints”) through our complaint hotline. These Complaints, alleged, among other topics, risks associated with our public disclosures in our securities filings and in statements made to the public, investors, and potential investors regarding (i) the anticipated timing of the FDA authorization of our IND applications and (ii) the anticipated timing of human clinical trials. These Complaints were subsequently submitted to the Audit Committee of the Board.
After receiving the Complaints, the Audit Committee recommended that the Board form, and the Board did in turn form, a Special Committee comprised of three independent directors (Messrs. Americo Cicchetti, Michael Nagel, and Jerry Schneider (until his resignation from the Board on December 3, 2021 due to personal reasons)) (the “Special Committee”) to review the Complaints and other related issues (the “Internal Review”). The Special Committee retained Sidley Austin LLP as independent counsel to assist it in conducting the Internal Review, and Sidley Austin in turn engaged AlixPartners LLP to assist with the Internal Review.
On February 2, 2022, following the conclusion of the Internal Review, the Special Committee reported the results of its Internal Review to the Board. The Board approved certain actions to address the fact that we had received communications from the FDA on June 16 and June 17, 2021 that the FDA was placing our IND applications that we submitted to the FDA on May 14 and May 17, 2021 for the ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates, respectively, on clinical hold (the “June 16 and 17, 2021 FDA Communications”). On July 13, 2021, we received the FDA’s formal clinical hold letters, which asked us to address key components regarding the chemical, manufacturing, and control components of the IND applications. On July 16, 2021, we issued a press release disclosing that it had received comments from the FDA on our two INDs, but did not use the term “clinical hold.” On August 13, 2021, we issued a press release announcing that these INDs were placed on clinical hold. We did not disclose the June 16 and 17, 2021 FDA Communications in (i) our Registration Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-257427) that was filed on June 25, 2021 and declared effective on June 29, 2021, nor the final prospectus contained therein dated June 29, 2021 (collectively, the “Registration Statement”); or (ii) our Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended June 30, 2021 that was filed with the SEC on August 13, 2021. We consummated a public offering of $40 million of our common stock pursuant to the Registration Statement on July 2, 2021.
In the course of the Internal Review, the Special Committee also identified that Mr. Tontat submitted incorrect information regarding his educational background to us. Specifically, although Mr. Tontat represented to us that he held a BA in Economics from Harvard University, it was determined that he had actually received an ALB, a degree conferred by the Harvard Extension School. We have implemented changes to our vetting process for prospective director and officer candidates including the implementation of thorough background checks to verify background information provided by such candidates.
Remediation Actions resulting from the Internal Review
1. The Board approved the inclusion of certain Risk Factors for inclusion in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the fiscal quarter ended September 30, 2021 and in this report. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for more information.
2. On January 10, 2022, the Board approved the formation of a Disclosure Committee comprised of certain members of the management including (i) its Chief Executive Officer; (ii) the executive in charge of overseeing submissions of any nature to the FDA; (iii) its Chief Financial Officer; (iv) its General Counsel, if any; (v) its Controller, if any; (vi) any other finance executive overseeing financial disclosures; (vii) the executive in charge of investor relations, if any; and (viii) such other employees as the Chief Financial Officer, who serves as chairman of the Disclosure Committee, may invite from time to time. The Disclosure Committee shall be responsible for preparing and reviewing all corporate disclosures made by us to our security holders, the SEC and/or the broader investment community to ensure that such disclosures (i) shall be accurate and complete; (ii) shall fairly present, in all material respects, our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows; and (iii) shall be made on a timely basis in accordance with all applicable requirements of (A) the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, (B) the Securities Act of 1933, as amended and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder (C) the Nasdaq Stock Market or such other stock exchange on which the our securities may be traded and (D) any other applicable laws or legal requirements. The Board adopted and approved the Disclosure Committee Charter.
3. The Board terminated Maurizio Chiriva-Internati as Chief Executive Officer for cause on January 27, 2022, after the Special Committee’s Internal Review found evidence of conduct that the Board believed was inconsistent with the Company’s policies. Under the terms of the Executive Employment Agreement between Dr. Chiriva and the Company effective as of July 1, 2020, as amended October 21, 2021, as the result of the termination of his employment, Dr. Chiriva also is deemed to have resigned as a member of the Board effective as of January 27, 2022.
4. The Board named Pietro Bersani as Interim Chief Executive Officer, effective as of January 27, 2022. A search for a permanent Chief Executive Officer will be commenced with the assistance of an executive recruiter. Mr. Bersani has resigned from all Committees of the Board.
5. The Board named independent Director Michael Nagel as Chairperson of the Board, effective as of January 27, 2022.
6. The Board approved the appointment of Frank Tirelli as a member of the Board to fill a vacancy, effective as of January 28, 2022. The Board has determined that Mr. Tirelli is “independent” as that term is defined under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5605(a)(2). Mr. Tirelli has been named Chairperson of the Audit Committee effective January 28, 2022. He was also nominated and appointed as a member of the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee effective March 1, 2022. Mr. Tirelli was nominated by our Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the Board after a thorough review of all his background, relevant experience, and professional and personal reputations.
7. On February 10, 2022, we and Dr. Scott Dahlbeck (“Dr. Dahlbeck”) entered into a Modification to Employment Agreement dated as of February 9, 2022 (the “Dahlbeck Agreement”). The Dahlbeck Agreement amends and supersedes certain terms of the Employment Agreement dated as of January 1, 2020, between the Company and Dr. Dahlbeck. Pursuant to the Dahlbeck Agreement, effective as of February 9, 2022, Dr. Dahlbeck’s title was changed to Chief of Staff, and he ceased to be the Company’s Chief Medical Officer and Head of Clinical.
8. On February 10, 2022, we and Mr. Gianluca Rotino (“Mr. Rotino”) entered into a Transition and Consulting Agreement dated as of February 9, 2022 (the “Rotino Agreement”). Pursuant to the terms of the Rotino Agreement, effective as of February 9, 2022, Mr. Rotino’s employment as our Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer terminated and the Company retained Mr. Rotino to provide consulting services to the Company for a period of nine months (or until November 9, 2022). Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Rotino Agreement may be terminated by either us or Mr. Rotino upon 30 days’ prior written notice, except no such prior notice shall be required in the event the Company terminates the Rotino Agreement for cause.
Under the terms of the Executive Employment Agreement between Mr. Rotino and the Company effective as of July 1, 2020, as amended on October 21, 2020, as the result of the termination of Mr. Rotino’s employment, Mr. Rotino is deemed to have resigned as a member of the Board effective as of February 9, 2022.
9. The Board approved the appointment of Karen Reeves as a member of the Board to fill a vacancy, effective as of February 14, 2022. The Board has determined that Dr. Reeves is “independent” as that term is defined under Nasdaq Listing Rule 5605(a)(2). Dr. Reeves was nominated and appointed to be the Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee Chairperson and a member of the Compensation Committee effective March 1, 2022. Dr. Reeves was nominated by our Nominating and Corporate Governance Committee of the Board after a thorough review of all her background, relevant experience, and professional and personal reputations.
Principal Factors Affecting Our Financial Performance
Our operating results are primarily affected by the following factors:
·
slow or delayed IND applications;
·
slow or delayed clinical trial enrollment;
·
patent reinforcement and prosecution; and
·
changes in laws or the regulatory environment affecting our company.
Emerging Growth Company
We qualify as an "emerging growth company" under the JOBS Act. As a result, we are permitted to, and intend to, rely on exemptions from certain disclosure requirements. For so long as we are an emerging growth company, we will not be required to:
·
have an auditor report on our internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act;
·
comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor's report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (i.e., Critical Audit Matters);
·
submit certain executive compensation matters to stockholder advisory votes, such as "say-on-pay" and "say-on-frequency;" and
·
disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the chief executive officer's compensation to median employee compensation.
In addition, Section 107 of the JOBS Act also provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of the extended transition period provided in Section 7(a)(2)(B) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, for complying with new or revised accounting standards. In other words, an emerging growth company can delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have elected to take advantage of the benefits of this extended transition period. Our financial statements may therefore not be comparable to those of companies that comply with such new or revised accounting standards.
We will remain an emerging growth company for up to five years, or until the earliest of (i) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our total annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion, (ii) the date that we become a "large accelerated filer" as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), which would occur if the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter or (iii) the date on which we have issued more than $1 billion in non-convertible debt during the preceding three-year period.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from product sales in the foreseeable future. We will record revenue from collaboration agreements, including amounts related to upfront payments, annual fees for licenses of our intellectual property and research and development funding. However, none of those agreements have been executed as of the issuance date of this report.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates. These include the following:
·
salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel engaged in research and development functions;
·
expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including CROs and other third parties that conduct preclinical research and development activities and clinical trials on our behalf;
·
costs of developing and scaling our manufacturing process and manufacturing drug products for use in our preclinical studies and future clinical trials, including the costs of contract manufacturing organizations, that will manufacture our clinical trial material for use in our preclinical studies and potential future clinical trials;
·
costs of outside consultants, including their fees and related travel expenses;
·
costs of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing preclinical study and clinical trial materials;
·
license payments made for intellectual property used in research and development activities; and
·
facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs if specifically, identifiable to research activities.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future and will comprise a larger percentage of our total expenses as we initiate a Phase 1/2a clinical trial for our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates.
We cannot determine with certainty the duration and costs of future clinical trials of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates, or any other product candidate we may develop or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any product candidate for which we obtain marketing approval. We may never succeed in obtaining marketing approval for any product candidate. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates and any other our product candidate we may develop will depend on a variety of factors, including:
·
the scope, rate of progress, expense and results of clinical trials of our ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidates, as well as of any future clinical trials of other product candidates and other research and development activities that we may conduct;
·
uncertainties in clinical trial design and patient enrollment rates;
·
the actual probability of success for our product candidates, including their safety and efficacy, early clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability;
·
significant and changing government regulation and regulatory guidance;
·
the timing and receipt of any marketing approvals;
·
the expense of filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights; and
·
our ability to effectively address the deficiencies elucidated in the FDA’s clinical hold letters for our IND applications related to key chemical manufacturing and control components.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could mean a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in our clinical trials due to slower than expected patient enrollment or other reasons, we would be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, business development, operations and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees, including legal fees relating to intellectual property, litigation, and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs that are not specifically attributable to research activities.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our personnel headcount to support our continued research activities and development of product candidates. We also have incurred and expect to continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth key components of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Research and development expenses. Our research and development expenses increased by $6,314,900, or 124.98%, to $11,367,800 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5,052,900 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses by product candidate or development program:
As illustrated above, the increase in research and development expenses resulted from (i) a $1,423,100 increase in ALEXIS-ISO-1 direct research and development costs which primarily included a $1,199,500 increase in disposables and consumables, a $44,600 increase in outsourced research and development fees, and a $74,700 increase in supplies, all of which attributed to GDT manufacturing and in-vitro and in-vivo experimentation (ii) a $1,602,500 increase in employee related costs, which primarily included a $2,118,900 increase in wages, benefits and payroll taxes offset by a $574,000 decrease in stock compensation expenses attributable to research and development employees; (iii) a $722,300 increase in laboratory supplies in services, which primarily included a $558,700 increase in spending on disposables and consumables for in-vitro testing and validation of pipeline candidates, with the remaining balance driven by supplies
spending; (iv) a $595,700 increase in facility-related costs, primarily driven by a $103,100 increase in allocated rent net of granting agency reimbursements, and a $260,100 increase in allocated depreciation expenses with the remaining amount attributed to repairs, maintenance, and utilities; (v) a $163,100 increase in intellectual property expenses, which was driven by legal expenses and intellectual property filings for new patents; (vi) a $71,000 increase in laboratory equipment and maintenance, which mainly consisted of increased spending on supplies, disposables, and consumables for experimentation, testing, validation of our other key value drivers; and (vii) a $1,746,600 increase in outsourced research and development costs driven by a $2,052,200 increase in research studies and other consulting fees offset by decreased stock based compensation expenses attributed to non-employees.
These cost increases were primarily incurred to support ALEXIS-PRO-1 and ALEXIS-ISO-1 product candidate manufacturing, regulatory and chemical manufacturing and control consulting fees, as well as experimentation and validation of our product candidates.
1.
Augmented our research and development team: in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our average headcount increased to 27.5 employees from nine employees allocable to research and development and clinical trials preparation.
2.
ALEXIS-ISO-1 manufacturing and experimentation: $1,423,100 increase in spending during the year ended December 31, 2021, from manufacturing expanded GDTs in the GMP facilities. In addition, in-vivo experimentation costs in the recently completed vivarium facilities contributed to the increase.
3.
Increased regulatory consulting costs: in the year ended December 31, 2021 we incurred an increase of $1,746,600 in regulatory and chemical manufacturing and control consulting fees as we were working to address the FDA’s comments regarding our IND applications filed during May 2021.
General and administrative expenses. Our general and administrative expenses decreased by $206,100, or 1.46%, to $13,937,900 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $14,144,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease in stock compensation expenses of $8,617,800, was offset by an increase in professional services of $5,992,100, an increase in personnel and recruiting expenses totaling $1,552,700, and an increase in insurance expense of $476,200.
The decrease in stock compensation expense was driven by the June 2020 common stock issuances of 722,000 shares to our Chief Financial Officer, and Chief Strategy and Innovation Officer which resulted in $9,386,000 of non-recurring stock compensation expenses. The remaining offsetting balance is mainly driven by increased stock compensation expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 from stock grant modifications.
The increase in professional services were impacted primarily by increased legal fees of $4,034,500, increase in corporate finance and development fees of $312,400, and remaining increase driven by professional audit fees. Between October 1, 2021 and February 28, 2022, we incurred $3,542,000 in legal fees and other professional services directly attributed to the Internal Review and related matters. During that same period, we incurred $680,700 in accounting professional fees directly related to the Internal Review. These elevated legal, accounting, and other related professional services expenses are continuing through the date of this report, and are expected continue thereafter.
Personnel and recruiting expenses were impacted by increases to average headcount, and employee salary rates. During the twelve months December 31, 2021 and 2020, the average headcount for employees allocated to general and administrative purposes increased to 11.5 employees from 4.5 employees, respectively. This resulted in increases in salaries, wages, payroll taxes, and benefits totaling $1,297,800. The remaining difference was driven by recruiting expenses for all head count increases across the organization.
Impairment expense. Impairment expense was $430,000 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we assessed events and circumstances under ASC 350, which caused us to incur an impairment expense on our Goodwill. The impairment was primarily related to a reduced stock price as of December 31, 2021, which resulted in the carrying value of our equity exceeding the market value of our equity. After analyzing
this quantitative circumstance along with other qualitative considerations, we determined to incur impairment expense for the entire balance of our Goodwill.
Gain on loan extinguishment. Gain on loan extinguishment was $105,800 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we applied for forgiveness of the SBA Loan in accordance with the terms of the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). On February 16, 2021 the SBA granted forgiveness of the SBA Loan and all applicable interest. On the date of forgiveness, the principal and accrued interest totaled $105,800.
Other income. Other income was $53,400 and $0 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is entirely driven by service billings from our bioinformatics employees to large academic institutions. The bioinformatics employees joined us in July 2021 as part of the InSilico acquisition. The contracts whereby these billings were generated is not considered part of our ordinary course of business.
Interest expense. Interest expense was $12,200 and $3,300 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is entirely driven by cash paid for interest attributed to the financing arrangement for our Director and Officer Insurance policy. In November 2020, the Company entered into a financing arrangement for its Director and Officer Insurance policy. The total amount financed was approximately $540,500 with an annual interest rate of 4.59%, to be paid over a period of nine months. As of December 31, 2021, this financing arrangement was paid in its entirety.
In November 2021, the Company entered into a financing arrangement for its Director and Officer Insurance policy. The total amount financed was approximately $665,900 with an annual interest rate of 4.59%, to be paid over a period of ten months. As of December 31, 2021, the remaining payable balance on the financed amount was $454,500.
Net loss. As a result of the cumulative effect of the factors described above, our net loss increased to $25,588,700 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $19,200,200 during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $25,353,900. As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $10,150,500. As of February 28, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $18,081,000. We do not currently have any approved products and have never generated any revenue from product sales. To date, we have financed our operations primarily with proceeds from the sale of our convertible promissory notes, preferred stock, and common stock from our IPO and follow-on offering.
Based on our forecasted expenditures related to our ongoing clinical trials and research and development efforts following the completion of our public offering on July 2, 2021, we determined that after taking into account our cash flow projections, we do not believe we will have sufficient cash on hand or available liquidity to meet our obligations through the twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021. We have incurred significant operating losses since inception, and we expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. We expect that our research and development and general and administrative costs will increase. These costs include conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials for our product candidates, contracting with CROs and building out internal capacity to have product candidates manufactured to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio and providing general and administrative support for our operations. As a result, substantial doubt exists regarding the going concern assumption on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, these condition raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
We have known material contractual obligations which will require cash to meet their requirements. These applicable obligations include our facility lease agreement, our employment contracts, and our financing arrangement for our Director and Officer Insurance Policy. We also plan to deploy cash for other research and development and general and administrative operating expenses. Our ability to continue meeting these contractual obligations will be reliant upon our ability to secure significant additional capital funding.
In 2022, we intend to seek significant additional capital funding to develop our platform, additional hiring of scientific professionals, hiring other general and administrative employees, and clinical trials. However, there can be no assurance that such efforts will be successful or that, in the event that they are successful, the terms and conditions of such financing will be favorable. Further, we had ineffective disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021 and earlier periods, which could result in our potential exposure to litigation and could adversely affect our ability to raise capital in the future. Further, there are other factors which may make financing our operations more difficult, including pending and potential securities law claims, potential governmental investigation, continued elevated legal and accounting professional fees associated with the Internal Review, litigation and other matters, and other risk factors listed in Item 1A. of Part I of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In consideration of our plans, substantial doubt is not alleviated.
Summary of Cash Flow
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash flows from operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $20,321,500 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $6,126,600 for year ended December 31, 2020. In the year ended December 31, 2021, net loss of $25,588,700, and outflows from prepaid expenses and other current assets in the amount of $1,117,400 and gain on loan extinguishment of $105,800 were the cash drivers. These cash outflows were partly offset by stock compensation expenses from stock options and RSUs of $3,762,900, accounts payable of $1,411,000, depreciation of $469,800, and accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $406,900. Net cash used in operating activities increased by a total of $14,194,900 period-over-period. The main driver for the increase is the $9,482,000 decrease in stock compensation expenses, along with the $6,388,500 increase in net loss. The increase in cash used was partly offset by the increase in accounts payable of $1,418,700, increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $294,000, increase in depreciation of $269,800, as well as increase in impairment loss of $430,000. We primarily used cash to augment our headcount, develop our ALEXIS-ISO-1, and ALEXIS-PRO-1 product candidate, and pay for legal fees and other professional services. See "Results of Operations" above for further details.
Cash flows from investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $1,810,800 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1,457,600 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our net cash used in investing activities consisted of purchases of property and equipment, as well as $84,000 cash received from acquisition of InSilico. This increase was primarily driven by increased outflow used for leasehold improvements related to GMP 1.
Cash flows from financing activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $37,335,700 during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $15,805,600 for the year ended December 31, 2020
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of the public offering which closed on July 2, 2021. This public offering sold 8,000,000 shares of common stock with net proceeds of $37,118,100.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, the net cash provided by financing activities primarily consisted of net proceeds from the IPO of $12,332,700 and proceeds from preferred stock issuance in the amount of $3,000,000. In addition, there were proceeds from a note payable of $362,400 net of repayments, and loan payable of $105,600, net of repayments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) requires our management to make assumptions, estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported, including the notes thereto, and related disclosures of commitments and contingencies, if any. We have identified certain accounting policies that are significant to the preparation of our financial statements. These accounting policies are important for an understanding of our financial condition and results of operation. Critical accounting policies are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require management's difficult, subjective, or complex judgment, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Certain accounting estimates are particularly sensitive because of their significance to financial statements and because of the possibility that future events affecting the estimate may differ significantly from management's current judgments. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant estimates and judgments used in the preparation of our financial statements:
Fair Value Measurements-The carrying value of our cash and cash equivalents, unbilled receivables from the granting agency, prepaid expenses and other assets, accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities approximate their fair value due to their short-term nature.
Fair value is the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. In estimating the fair value of an asset or a liability, we take into account the characteristics of the asset or liability if market participants would take those characteristics into account when pricing the asset or liability at the measurement date.
We account for financial instruments in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures. ASC 820 establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy under ASC 820 are described below:
Level 1-Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities.
Level 2-Quoted prices in non-active markets or in active markets for similar assets or liabilities, observable inputs other than quoted prices, and inputs that are not directly observable but are corroborated by observable market data.
Level 3-Prices or valuations that require inputs that are both significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
There were no changes in the fair value hierarchy leveling during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation-We record stock compensation expense related to our 2017 Equity Incentive Plan and the Omnibus 2021 Equity Incentive Plan in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. We measure and recognize stock compensation expense for all stock-based awards, including stock options and RSUs.
Stock compensation expense for RSUs is estimated based on the number of units that vest multiplied by the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the vesting date. Stock compensation expense for stock options is based on estimated fair values recognized using the straight-line method over the requisite service period. The fair value of stock options is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model. The calculation of stock-based compensation expense requires that we make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the Black- Scholes option-valuation model, including the fair value of our common stock, expected term, expected volatility of the underlying common stock, and risk-free interest rate. Forfeitures are accounted for when they occur.
We estimate the grant-date fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, all equity grants under the 2017 Equity Incentive Plan were granted when we were a non-public company. The assumptions used to value such stock options were determined as follows:
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding. Equity grants during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 had limitations on the sale or transfer of our common stock as a privately held company. Prior to becoming publicly traded, we did not believe our historical exercise pattern was indicative of future exercise patterns. We have consequently used the Staff Accounting Bulletin (“SAB”) No. 110, simplified method to calculate the expected term, which is the average of the contractual term and vesting period. We do not plan to continue to use the SAB 110 simplified method after we have sufficient trading history as a publicly traded company.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. We base the risk-free interest rate used in the Black-Scholes option-valuation model on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term equivalent to that of the expected term of the stock options for each stock option group.
Volatility. We determine the price volatility based on the historical volatilities of industry peers as we have limited trading history for our common stock price. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or a similar peer group of public companies, until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own common stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified peer companies are no longer similar, in which case other suitable peer companies whose common stock prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
Dividend Yield. The expected dividend assumption is based on our current expectations about our anticipated dividend policy. To date, we have not declared any dividends and, therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Common Stock Valuations. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the fair value of the common stock underlying our stock-based compensation grants was determined by our Board, with input from management and third-party valuations. We believe that the Board had the relevant experience and expertise to determine the fair value of our common stock. Given the absence of a public trading market of our common stock, and in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately- Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation, the Board exercised reasonable judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock at each grant date. These factors include:
·
valuations of the common stock performed by third-party specialists;
·
the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our Series A-1 Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock relative to those of our common stock;
·
lack of marketability of the common stock;
·
current business conditions and projections;
·
hiring of key personnel and the experience of management;
·
our stage of development;
·
likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, a merger or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions, or other liquidation event;
·
the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
·
the U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing our common stock, the Board determined the equity value of our business using various valuation methods including combinations of income and market approaches. The income approach estimates value based on the expectation of future cash flows that a company will generate. These future cash flows are discounted to their present values using a discount rate derived from an analysis of the cost of capital of comparable publicly traded companies in our industry or similar business operations as of each valuation date and is adjusted to reflect the risks inherent in our cash flows. The market approach references actual transactions involving (i) the subject being valued, or (ii) similar assets and/or enterprises.
For each valuation, the equity value determined by the income and market approaches was then allocated to the common stock using either the option pricing method (“OPM”), or probability-weighted expected return model (“PWERM”).
The option pricing method is based on the Black Scholes option valuation model, which allows for the identification of a range of possible future outcomes, each with an associated probability. The OPM is appropriate to use when the range of possible future outcomes is difficult to predict and thus creates highly speculative forecasts. In general, while simple in its application, management did not use the OPM approach when considering allocation techniques for the valuation of equity interests in early stage, privately held life science companies. Management determined that applying the OPM would violate the major assumptions of the Black Scholes option valuation model approach. Additionally, the simulation approach can generally be reasonably approximated by a scenario-based approach like the PWERM as described below.
PWERM involves a forward-looking analysis of the possible future outcomes of the enterprise. This method is particularly useful when discrete future outcomes can be predicted at a relatively high confidence level with a probability distribution. Discrete future outcomes considered under the PWERM include an IPO, as well as non-IPO market-based outcomes. Determining the fair value of the enterprise using the PWERM requires us to develop assumptions and estimates for both the probability of an IPO liquidity event and stay private outcomes, as well as the values we expect those outcomes could yield. Since in February 2018, we have valued our common stock based on a PWERM.
Application of our approach involves the use of estimates, judgment, and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding expected future revenue, expenses, and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies, and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
For valuations going forward, the Board will determine the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of the common stock as reported on the date of grant. Future expense amounts for any particular period could be affected by changes in assumptions or market conditions.
Warrants Underlying Shares IPO common stock-We record warrants to purchase shares of common stock underlying our shares of IPO common stock in accordance with ASC 470, Debt with conversion and other options. The fair value of the warrants was estimated on the IPO date using the Black-Scholes option- valuation model. The calculation of warrants requires that we make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the Black-Scholes option-valuation model, including the fair value of our common stock, expected term, expected volatility of the underlying common stock, risk-free interest rate, and exercise price.
We estimate the fair value of warrants using the Black-Scholes option-valuation model and the assumptions used to value such warrants are determined as follows:
Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that our warrants are expected to be outstanding. The expected term was calculated by taking the average of the vesting period and contract period.
Risk-Free Interest Rate. We base the risk-free interest rate used in the Black-Scholes option-valuation model on the implied yield available on U.S. Treasury zero-coupon issues with a term equivalent to that of the expected term of the warrants.
Volatility. We determine the price volatility based on the historical volatilities of industry peers as we had one day of trading history as of the IPO date. We intend to continue to consistently apply this process using the same or a similar peer group of public companies, until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of our own common stock price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified peer companies are no longer similar, in which case other suitable peer companies whose common stock prices are publicly available would be utilized in the calculation.
Dividend Yield. The expected dividend assumption is based on our current expectations about our anticipated dividend policy. To date, we have not declared any dividends and, therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
Common Stock Valuations. The fair value of our common stock when the IPO warrants were issued is equal to the IPO common stock issuance price of $12.00 per share. The fair value of our common stock when the July 2, 2021 warrants were issued is equal to the offering price of $5.00 per share.
Exercise Price. The representative warrants’ exercise price to purchase common stock is $15.00 and $6.25 per share.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) or other standard setting bodies and adopted by the Company as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on the Company’s financial position, results of operations, or cash flows upon adoption.
In February 2016, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-02, Leases (“Topic 842”), which requires lessees to recognize the following for all leases (with the exception of short-term leases) at the commencement date: a lease liability, which is a lessee’s obligation to make lease payments arising from a lease, measured on a discounted basis; and a right-of-use asset, which is an asset that represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified asset for the lease term. In July 2018, the FASB issued ASU 2018-11 to amend certain aspects of Topic 842. These amendments provide entities with an additional (and optional) transition method to adopt Topic 842. Under this transition method, an entity initially applies the transition requirements in Topic 842 at that Topic’s effective date with the effects of initially applying Topic 842 recognized as a cumulative effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings (or other components of equity or net assets, as appropriate) in the period of adoption. On April 8, 2020, the FASB changed the effective date of this standard applicable to the Company as an emerging growth company to January 1, 2022. Though the Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its financial position, results of operations, and cash flows, the Company expects that adopting the new standard will result in recording a material lease liability and right-of-use asset associated with the Company’s facility lease agreement and subsequent amendments thereto.
In June 2016, FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (“Topic 326”). The amendments in ASU 2016-13 affect entities holding financial assets and net investment in leases that are not accounted for at fair value through net income. The amendments affect loans, debt securities, trade receivables, net investments in leases, off-balance-sheet credit exposures, reinsurance receivables, and any other financial assets not excluded from the scope that have the contractual right to receive cash. The amendments in ASU 2016-13 require a financial asset (or a group of financial assets) measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. The allowance for credit losses is a valuation account that is deducted from the amortized cost basis of the financial asset(s) to present the net carrying value at the amount expected to be collected on the financial asset. On April 8, 2020,
the FASB has changed the effective date of this standard applicable to the Company as an emerging growth company to January 1, 2023. The Company is currently evaluating the potential impact of this standard on its financial position, results of operations, and cash flows.
In January 2017, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2017-04, Intangibles - Goodwill and Other (“Topic 350”), which simplifies the test for goodwill impairment. The FASB determined this update was needed because of concern expressed by private companies and their stakeholders about the cost and complexity of the goodwill impairment test. The FASB simplified how an entity is required to test goodwill for impairment by eliminating Step 2 from the goodwill impairment test in this update. Step 2 measures a goodwill impairment loss by comparing the implied fair value of a reporting unit’s goodwill with the carrying amount of that goodwill.
In computing the implied fair value of goodwill under Step 2, an entity had to perform procedures to determine the fair value at the impairment testing date of its assets and liabilities (including unrecognized assets and liabilities) following the procedure that would be required in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination.
Instead, under the amendments in this update, an entity should perform its annual, or interim, goodwill impairment test by comparing the fair value of a reporting unit with its carrying amount. An entity should recognize an impairment charge for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value; however, the loss recognized should not exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. Additionally, an entity should consider income tax effects from any tax deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable. This update was effective for public entities for any annual or any interim goodwill impairment tests in fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2019. Accordingly, the Company has adopted this guidance as of December 31, 2021.