Item 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Overview
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations provide information that the Company’s management believes necessary to achieve an understanding of its financial condition and results of operations. To the extent that such analysis contains statements which are not of a historical nature, such statements are forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. These risks include, but are not limited to, changes in the competitive environment for the Company’s products and services; general economic factors in markets where the Company’s products and services are sold; and other factors including, but not limited to: cost of goods, consumer disposable income, consumer debt levels and buying patterns, consumer credit availability, interest rates, customer preferences, unemployment, labor costs, inflation, fuel and energy prices, weather patterns, climate change, catastrophic events, competitive pressures and insurance costs discussed in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
FYE Transaction
Previously, the Company also operated fye, a chain of retail entertainment stores and e-commerce sites, www.fye.com and www.secondspin.com. On February 20, 2020, the Company consummated the sale of substantially all of the assets and certain of the liabilities relating to fye to a subsidiary of 2428391 Ontario Inc. o/a Sunrise Records (“Sunrise Records”) pursuant to an Asset Purchase Agreement dated January 23, 2020, by and among the Company, Record Town, Inc., Record Town USA LLC, Record Town Utah LLC, Trans World FL LLC, Trans World New York, LLC, 2428392 Inc., and Sunrise Records (the “FYE Transaction”).
Following the FYE Transaction, Kaspien is the Company’s only operating segment.
Impact of COVID-19
To date, as a direct result of COVID-19, most of our employees are working remotely. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, including expenses, reserves and allowances, and employee-related amounts, will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain or treat it, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. Management is actively monitoring this situation and the possible effects on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, industry, and workforce. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the response to curb its spread, currently we are not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak to our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity.
In response to the rapidly evolving COVID-19 pandemic, we activated our business continuity program, led by our Executive Team in conjunction with Human Resources, to help us manage the situation. In mid-March of 2020, we transitioned our corporate office staff to work 100% remotely. This process was aided through the implementation of a flexible work from home policy rolled out to the organization in fiscal 2019, having a companywide communication platform for instant messaging and video conferencing, and cloud-based critical business applications. However, while our business is not dependent on physical office locations nor travel, having a 100% remote workforce does present increased operational risk. Our leadership team believes we have the necessary controls in place to mitigate these impacts and allow the team to continue to operate effectively remotely as long as required by State guidelines.
While e-commerce has largely benefited from the closure of brick-and-mortar locations as consumer spending has been pushed online to marketplaces such as Amazon and Walmart, the industry nor our organization has been immune to the impact to our supply chains. During 2021, we have been impacted by COVID-19 pandemic and related global shipping disruption. Together these have led to substantial increases in supply chain costs and has reduced the reliability and timely delivery of such shipping containers. Further, this global shipping disruption is forcing us to increase our inventory on-hand including advance ordering and taking possession of inventory earlier than expected impacting its working capital.
COVID-19 continues to bring uncertainty to consumer demand as price increases related to raw materials, the importing of goods, including tariffs, and the cost of delivering goods to consumers has led to inflation across the U.S. Coupled with continued changes in governmental restrictions and requirements, which continued to vary across the majority of the country, the Company has noticed changes to consumer buying habits, which may have reduced demand for its products. Further, we have increased the sale prices for our products to offset the increased supply chain costs, which has also led to reduced demand for our goods. Reduced demand for our products and increased prices affecting consumer demand generally have also made forecasting more difficult.
The risk of another wave or increased numbers of positive COVID-19 cases also presents further risk to supply chains. Leadership is actively monitoring the situation and potential impacts on its financial condition, liquidity, operations and workforce but the full extent of the impact is still highly uncertain.
Key Performance Indicators
Management monitors a number of key performance indicators to evaluate its performance, including:
Net Revenue: The Company measures total year over year sales growth. Net sales performance is measured through several key performance indicators including number of partners and active product listings and sales per listing.
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit: Gross profit is calculated based on the cost of product in relation to its retail selling value. Changes in gross profit are impacted primarily by net sales levels, mix of products sold, obsolescence and distribution costs. Distribution expenses include those costs associated with receiving, inspecting & warehousing merchandise, Amazon fulfillment fees, and costs associated with product returns to vendors.
Selling, General and Administrative (“SG&A”) Expenses: Included in SG&A expenses are payroll and related costs, general operating and overhead expenses and depreciation charges. SG&A expenses also include miscellaneous income and expense items, other than interest.
Balance Sheet and Ratios: The Company views cash, merchandise inventory, accounts payable leverage, and working capital as key indicators of its financial position. See “Liquidity and Capital Resources” for further discussion of these items.
Gross Merchandise Value (“GMV”): The total value of merchandise sold over a given time period through a customer-to-customer exchange site. It is the measurement of merchandise value sold across all channels and partners within our platform.
Fiscal Year Ended January 29, 2022 (“fiscal 2021”)
Compared to Fiscal Year Ended January 30, 2021 (“fiscal 2020”)
The Company’s fiscal year is a 52 or 53-week period ending the Saturday nearest to January 31. Fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021, respectively. Both fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 had 52 weeks.
Net Revenue. Net revenue decreased 9.2% to $143.7 million compared to $158.3 million in fiscal 2020. The primary source of revenue is the Retail as a Service (“RaaS”) model, which represented 99% of net revenue. Net revenue from Walmart, Target and Other Marketplaces increased to 1.5% in fiscal 2021 from 0.6% in fiscal 2020. Subscriptions and Other share of net revenue increased to 1.3% of net revenue from 0.8% of net revenue in the comparable period from the prior year. The increase was attributable an increase in the number of partners and higher gross merchandise value (“GMV”) of partner revenue flowing through the platform Amazon Marketplace. The following table sets forth net revenue by marketplace as a percentage of total net revenue:
The Company generates revenue across a broad array of product lines primarily through the Amazon Marketplace. Categories include apparel, baby, beauty, electronics, health & personal care, home/kitchen/grocery, pets, sporting goods, toys & art.
Annual platform GMV for fiscal year 2021 was $271 million as compared to $248 for fiscal 2020. Subscription GMV increased 45% to $120 million or 44.3% of total GMV, compared to $83 million or 33.5% of total GMV in fiscal 2020.
Gross Profit. Gross profit as a percentage of revenue was 22.8% in fiscal 2021 as compared to 24.9% in fiscal 2020. The decrease in the gross profit rate was primarily due to a decrease in merchandise margin to 44.8% in fiscal 2021 as compared to 46.4% in fiscal 2020 and a $2.0 million increase in warehousing and freight expenses. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s gross profit:
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s SG&A expenses:
SG&A expenses decreased $2.8 million, or 6.1%, primarily due to a 10.0% reduction in in Selling expenses. The decline in Selling expenses was attributable to the decline in Net revenue. General and administrative expenses decreased $0.4 million.
SG&A expenses as a percentage of net revenue increased to 29.5% as compared to 28.5% in fiscal 2020. The increase in the rate as a percentage of net revenue was primarily due to lost leverage on the general and administrative expenses.
Depreciation and amortization expense. Consolidated depreciation and amortization expense for fiscal 2021 was $2.1 million, the same level as fiscal 2020.
Interest Expense. Interest expense in fiscal 2021 was $1.9 million, compared to interest expense of $1.7 million in fiscal 2020.
Income Tax (Benefit) expense. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s income tax expense:
The fiscal 2021 income tax expense includes state taxes.
During fiscal 2020, based on the Company’s evaluation of new information that occurred in the current financial reporting period, the Company recorded an income tax benefit of $3.5 million related to the recognition of previously unrecognized income tax benefits pursuant to ASC 740-10-25, Accounting for Income Taxes - Recognition. Prior to the current financial reporting period, the Company had accrued the liabilities for unrecognized income tax benefits, including accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions created by the fye business. As a result of the FYE Transaction and a reorganization of the Company’s corporate structure, the Company will not utilize the tax attributes attributable to the tax positions and the corporate entities associated with the tax positions have been liquidated.
Net Loss. The following table sets forth a year-over-year comparison of the Company’s net loss:
Net loss was $8.0 million for fiscal 2021, compared to $3.9 million for fiscal 2020. The increase in net loss was primarily due to lower net revenue and a lower gross margin rate.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity and Cash Flows:
The consolidated financial statements for the year ended January 29, 2022 were prepared on the basis of a going concern which contemplates that the Company will be able to realize assets and satisfy liabilities and commitments in the normal course of business. The ability of the Company to meet its liabilities and to continue as a going concern is dependent on improved profitability, the continued implementation of the strategic initiative to reposition the Company as a platform of software and services, the availability of future funding and overcoming the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The audited consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of these uncertainties.
The Company incurred net losses of $8.0 million and $3.9 million for the fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively, and has an accumulated deficit of $120.9 million as of January 29, 2022. In addition, net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2021 was $14.5 million. Net cash used in operating activities during fiscal 2020 was $13.4 million.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in further implementing our business strategy or that the strategy, including the completed initiatives, will be successful in sustaining acceptable levels of sales growth and profitability. Based on recurring losses from operations, negative cash flows from operations, the expectation of continuing operating losses for the foreseeable future, negative cash flows from operations and uncertainty with respect to any available future funding, the Company has concluded that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
The Company’s primary sources of liquidity are its borrowing capacity under its Credit Facility, available cash and cash equivalents, and to a lesser extent, cash generated from operations. Our cash requirements relate primarily to working capital needed to operate Kaspien, including funding operating expenses, the purchase of inventory and capital expenditures. Our ability to achieve profitability and meet future liquidity needs and capital requirements will depend upon numerous factors, including the timing and amount of our revenue; the timing and amount of our operating expenses; the timing and costs of working capital needs; successful implementation of our strategy and planned activities; and our ability to overcome the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
On March 18, 2021, the Company closed an underwritten offering of 416,600 shares of common stock of the Company, at a price to the public of $32.50 per share. The gross proceeds of the offering were approximately $13.5 million, prior to deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, including working capital to implement its strategic plans focused on brand acquisition, investments in technology to enhance its scalable platform and its core retail business.
On March 2, 2022, the Company amended its subordinated loan pursuant to which the lenders made an additional $5.0 million secured term loan with a scheduled maturity date of March 31, 2024, which is the same maturity date as the existing loans under the Subordinated Loan Agreement.
In addition to the aforementioned current sources of existing working capital, the Company is continuing its efforts to generate additional sales and increase margins. There can be no assurance that any of the initiatives or strategic alternatives will be implemented, successful or consummated.
The following table sets forth a two-year summary of key components of cash flow and working capital:
During fiscal 2021, cash used in operations was $14.5 million compared to $13.4 million in fiscal 2020. During 2021, cash used in operations consisted primarily of a net loss of $8.0 million, an increase of $4.8 million in inventory and the payment of $2.6 million in accounts payable. During 2020, cash used in operations consisted primarily of a net loss of $3.9 million, an increase of $6.7 million in inventory and the payment of $5.5 million in accounts payable partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and accounts receivables. See the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for further detail.
The Company monitors various statistics to measure its management of inventory, including inventory turnover (annual cost of sales divided by average merchandise inventory balances), and accounts payable leverage (accounts payable divided by merchandise inventory). Inventory turnover measures the Company’s ability to sell merchandise and how many times it is replaced in a year. This ratio is important in determining the need for markdowns and planning future inventory levels and assessing customer response to our merchandise. Inventory turnover in fiscal 2021 and in fiscal 2020 was 4.0 and 5.6, respectively. Accounts payable leverage measures the percentage of inventory being funded by the Company’s product vendors. The percentage is important in determining the Company’s ability to fund its business. Accounts payable leverage on inventory for Kaspien was 20.7% as of January 29, 2022, compared with 36.3% as of January 30, 2021.
Cash used in investing activities was $1.4 million in fiscal 2021, compared to cash provided by investing activities of $10.6 million in fiscal 2020. During fiscal 2021, cash used in investing activities consisted of $1.4 million in capital expenditures. During fiscal 2020, cash provided by investing activities consisted of proceeds from the sale of the fye business of $11.8 million, partially offset by capital expenditures of $1.2 million.
The Company has historically financed its capital expenditures through borrowings under its revolving credit facility and cash flow from operations. The Company anticipates capital spending of approximately $1.5 million in fiscal 2022.
Cash provided by financing activities was $14.2 million in fiscal 2021, compared to $505,000 in fiscal 2020. In fiscal 2021, the primary source of cash was an underwritten offering of 416,600 shares of common stock of the Company, at a price to the public of $32.50 per share. The net proceeds of the offering were approximately $12.2 million. Additional sources of cash included the $10.0 million in proceeds from short term borrowings. The Company used $6.3 million of the proceeds to pay down its Credit Facility. In fiscal 2020, cash provided by financing activities consisted of $6.3 million in proceeds from short term borrowings, $5.1 million in proceeds from long term borrowings, $2.0 million in proceeds from a PPP loan, partially offset by $13.1 million in payment of short-term borrowings
Related Party Transactions.
Directors Jonathan Marcus, Thomas Simpson, and Michael Reickert are the chief executive officer of Alimco Re Ltd. (“Alimco”), the managing member of Kick-Start III, LLC and Kick-Start IV, LLC (“Kick-Start”), and a trustee of the Robert J. Higgins TWMC Trust (the “Trust”), an affiliate of RJHDC, LLC (“RJHDC” and together with Alimco and Kick-Start, “Related Party Entities”), respectively. The Related Party Entities are parties to the following agreements with the Company entered into on March 30, 2020:
•
Subordinated Loan and Security Agreement (as amended), pursuant to which the Related Party Entities made a $5.2 million secured term loan ($2.7 million from Alimco, $0.5 million from Kick-Start, and $2.0 million from RJHDC) to Kaspien with a scheduled maturity date of March 31, 2024, interest accruing at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum and compounded on the last day of each calendar quarter by becoming a part of the principal amount, and secured by a second priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of the Company and Kaspien;
•
Common Stock Purchase Warrants (“Warrants”), pursuant to which the Company issued warrants to purchase up to 244,532 shares of Common Stock to the Related Party Entities (127,208 shares for Alimco, 23,401 shares for Kick-Start, and 93,923 shares for RJHDC), subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the Warrants, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share. As of April 15, 2022, 238,763 warrants were exercised by the Related Party Entities and 5,769 remained outstanding;
•
Contingent Value Rights Agreement (the “CVR Agreement”), pursuant to which the Related Party Entities received contingent value rights (“CVRs”) representing the contractual right to receive cash payments from the Company in an amount equal, in the aggregate, to 19.9% of the proceeds (10.35% for Alimco, 1.90% for Kick-Start, and 7.64% for RJHDC) received by the Company in respect of certain intercompany indebtedness owing to it by Kaspien and/or its equity interest in Kaspien; and
•
Voting Agreement (the “Voting Agreement”), pursuant to which the Related Party Entities, the Trust, Mr. Simpson and their respective related entities agreed to how their respective shares of the Company’s capital stock held by the parties will be voted with respect to the designation, election, removal, and replacement of members of the Board. Pursuant to the Voting Agreement, Messrs. Marcus and Simpson were appointed as directors of the Company, and Mr. Reickert, a trustee of the Trust, remained as a director of the Company. Mr. Subin was also granted board observer rights.
On March 2, 2022, the Company entered into the following agreements with certain of the Related Parties:
•
An amendment to the Subordinated Loan and Security Agreement, pursuant to which Alimco made an additional $5,000,000.00 secured term loan (the “Additional Subordinated Loan”) with a scheduled maturity date of March 31, 2024, interest accruing at the rate fifteen percent (15.0%) per annum, compounded on the last day of each calendar quarter by becoming a part of the principal amount of the Additional Subordinated Loan, and secured by a second priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of the Company and Kaspien;
•
Common Stock Purchase Warrant (“Alimco Warrant”), pursuant to which the Company issued warrants to purchase up to 320,000 shares of Common Stock to Alimco, subject to adjustment in accordance with the terms of the Alimco Warrant, at an exercise price of $0.01 per share;
•
Registration Rights Agreement, pursuant to which Alimco has been granted customary demand and piggyback registration rights with respect to the Warrant Shares issued upon exercise of the Alimco Warrant; and
•
Contingent Value Rights Agreement (the “Second CVR Agreement”) pursuant to which Alimco received additional contingent value rights (“Additional CVRs”) representing the contractual right to receive cash payments from the Company in an amount equal, in the aggregate, to 9.0% of the proceeds received by the Company in respect of certain distributions by the Company or Kaspien; recapitalizations or financings of the Company or Kaspien (with appropriate carve out for trade financing in the ordinary course); repayment of intercompany indebtedness owing to the Company by Kaspien; or sale or transfer of any stock of the Company or Kaspien.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates and assumptions that affect results of operations and the reported amounts of assets and liabilities in the financial statements. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Note 1 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in this report includes a summary of the significant accounting policies and methods used by the Company in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements. Management believes that of the Company’s significant accounting policies and estimates, the following involve a higher degree of judgment or complexity:
Merchandise Inventory and Return Costs. Merchandise inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value under the average cost method. Inventory valuation requires significant judgment and estimates, including obsolescence and any adjustments to net realizable value, if net realizable value is lower than cost. For all merchandise categories, the Company records obsolescence and any adjustments to net realizable value (if lower than cost) based on current and anticipated demand, customer preferences, and market conditions.
Long-Lived Assets other than Goodwill: Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to undiscounted future net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset over its remaining useful life. If the carrying amount of an asset exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the assets exceeds the fair value of the assets. Fair value is generally measured based on discounted estimated future cash flows. Assets to be disposed of would be separately presented in the Consolidated Balance Sheets and reported at the lower of the carrying amount or fair value less disposition costs. As of January 29, 2022, for the purposes of the asset impairment test, the Company has one asset grouping.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements.
The information set forth above may be found under Notes to Consolidated Statements, Note 2.