ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses the operating results and financial condition of the Company for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2018 and 2017. The discussion and analysis set forth below is intended to assist you in understanding the financial condition and results of our operations and should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the accompanying notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
Overview
Operations. The Company has not conducted any substantial operations since May 24, 2010, the date on which AMI foreclosed on and took possession of all of the Company’s then-existing operating entities other than those sold by the Company to an entity affiliated with Mr. King.
During the fiscal years ended September 30, 2013 and 2014, the Company’s primary activities consisted of taking the steps necessary to reactivate its reporting obligations under Section 15(d) of the Exchange Act that had been suspended since 2011 (“Reporting Reactivation”). In the first quarter of the fiscal year ended September 30, 2015, on December 17, 2014, the Company re-activated is filing obligations under the Exchange Act.
Following the re-activation of our filing obligations, we attempted to seek to maximize shareholder value by searching for and identifying suitable potential target private companies or business partners for a business combination that met the Company’s strategic objectives. Although the Company had held preliminary discussions regarding potential business combinations transactions, the Company ultimately was unable to successfully identify a suitable candidate or negotiate the terms of any such business combination.
As of the fiscal year ended September 30, 2016, the Company had expended substantially all of its available cash and had not been able to secure any additional funds to finance its continued operations. As a result, the Company was unable to prepare and timely file its periodic reports under the Exchange Act, commencing with its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2016 and, other than maintaining its corporate status, was dormant from such date through May 2020.
Financial Condition. We did not record revenues from operations during the fiscal years covered by our financial statements included in this Form 10-K and are not currently engaged in any business activities that provide cash flows. We do not expect to generate any revenues over the next 12 months unless we are able to secure additional financing to continue operations. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to develop additional sources of capital, locate and complete a merger with another company, and ultimately, achieve profitable operations.
We have negative working capital, negative shareholders’ equity and have not earned any revenues from operations since the fiscal year ended September 30, 2011. Because we have had no revenues from operations and do not own any significant assets against which we can borrow funds, we historically had relied on funds furnished by Mr. Toomey, a principal shareholder, director and secretary of the Company, in exchange for issuances of our convertible debt securities in order to finance our operations following our Reporting Reactivation. However, Mr. Toomey previously advised the Company that he did not intend to provide the Company with any further loans or equity financing after September 30, 2016 if the Company was unable to enter into a letter of intent or receive a formal offer to engage in a bona fide business combination with a target company or business operation on or before such date.
However, due to our inability to satisfy the conditions for further financing established by Mr. Toomey, Mr. Toomey did not provide the Company with any further loans or equity financing to the Company after July 11, 2016 through the end of the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018, and he indicated that he had no current plans to provide any further financings unless he later determined that market conditions or the Company’s prospects have substantially improved. As a result, the Company had very limited remaining cash resources during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018 and, other than maintaining its corporate status, the Company’s operations were dormant during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018. Unless and until we are able to obtain additional financing, our operations will remain dormant and our ability to continue as a going concern is doubtful. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain any additional financing in the future, and if we are unable to receive sufficient additional financing to finance our operations upon acceptable terms, it is likely that our business would cease operations. See, however, “Subsequent Developments” below for an update on our ability to receive additional financings from Mr. Toomey commencing in 2020.
Except as described in “Subsequent Developments” below, we have no specific plans, understandings or agreements with respect to the raising of any additional financings, and we may seek to raise the required capital by the issuance of equity or debt securities or by other means. Since we have no such arrangements or plans currently in effect (other than as described in “Subsequent Developments” below), our limited ability to raise funds to continue operations and to seek an acquisition may have a severely negative impact on our ability to become a viable company. Our historical operating results disclosed in this Form 10-K are not meaningful to our future results.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended September 30, 2018 and 2017
Revenues. Because we currently do not have any business operations, we have not had any revenues during our fiscal years ended September 30, 2018 and September 30, 2017.
General and Administrative Expenses. We had operating expenses of $6,375 and $6,633 for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2018 and 2017, respectively. These expenses during the fiscal years ended September 30, 2018 and 2017 primarily consisted of payments associated with maintaining our corporate status. The decrease in such expenses for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018 as compared to the fiscal year ended September 30, 2017 was due the reduction in the fees payable to maintain our corporate status during the current fiscal year.
Net Income (Loss). We recognized a net loss of approximately $6,375 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018 as compared to net loss of approximately $6,633 for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2017. The decrease in net loss was due the reduction in the fees payable to maintain our corporate status during the current fiscal year.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 30, 2018, we had limited available cash resources and at September 30, 2018, we had a working capital deficit of approximately $202,024. Our current liabilities were approximately $207,041 at September 30, 2018 and $203,891 at September 30, 2017. Total assets decreased to approximately $5,017 as of September 30, 2018 from approximately $8,242 at September 30, 2017 due to the use of cash to pay various costs associated with maintaining our corporate status.
We had no material commitments for capital expenditures as of September 30, 2018 and 2017.
Because we do not have any revenues from operations, absent a merger or other business combination with an operating company or a public or private sale of our equity or debt securities, the occurrence of either of which cannot be assured, we were dependent upon future loans or equity investments from our present shareholders or management to fund operating shortfalls and do not foresee a change in this situation in the immediate future. However, we were unable to raise capital or secure loans to finance for our operational needs during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018. As a result, other than maintaining our corporate status, the Company’s operations were dormant during the fiscal year ended September 30, 2018. Unless and until we can obtain additional financing, our operations will continue to be dormant. Although we may seek external sources of financing, we have no specific plans, understandings or agreements with respect to any potential debt or equity financings and there can be no assurances that any additional financings will be available to us on satisfactory terms and conditions, if at all. Unless we can obtain additional financing, our ability to continue as a going concern is doubtful.
Subsequent Developments
As of our fiscal year ended September 30, 2016, the Company had been unsuccessful in its efforts to identify and engage in a business combination with a potential target company or business, had used all of its available cash, and was unable to secure any additional source of funds to finance its continued operations. As a result, the Company was unable to timely file its periodic reports under the Exchange Act, commencing with its Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2016 and, other than maintaining its corporate status, has been dormant from such date through May 2020.
In May 2020, the Company determined that the business environment had sufficiently changed so that identifying target and completing a business combination may be more likely than was previously the case. Accordingly, the Company determined to attempt to seek the financing necessary to prepare and file all of its delinquent periodic reports under the Exchange Act and to again aggressively pursue an acquisition target. See “Item 1 - Recent Activities” above for a discussion of the Company’s current efforts taken to date.
In order for the Company to finance the preparation and filing of all of the Company’s delinquent Forms 10-K for filing with the Commission, Mr. Toomey made the following loans to the Company in aggregate amount of approximately $130,000 during the 2020 calendar year (referred to as the Toomey Loans):
·
On May 5, 2020, a loan of $5,000 in principal amount;
·
On October 19, 2020, a loan of $25,000 in principal amount; and
·
On December 21, 2020, a loan of $100,000 in principal amount.
The Toomey Loans are evidenced by a consolidated promissory note, dated February 1, 2021, issued by the Company to Mr. Toomey (the “2021 Promissory Note”). The 2021 Promissory Note bears interest, commencing on the date of the loan, at an initial rate of 2% per annum and the note matures on December 31, 2023. The maturity date of the 2021 Promissory Notes will accelerate and be due and payable immediately upon any change of control, merger, or other business combination (as defined in the 2021 Promissory Note). If the maturity date is extended for any reason whatsoever (including in connection with an acceleration event), the 2021 Promissory Note will bear interest at a rate of 5% per annum, commencing on the date of any such extension. The 2021 Promissory Note is not convertible into our common shares.
Delinquent Filings
The Company is filing this Annual Report on Form 10-K and all other delinquent reports on Form 10-K that it was required to file with the Commission since June 30, 2016, together with delinquent reports on Forms 10-Q for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2021. Although the filing of our delinquent reports under the Exchange Act will bring us current in our reporting obligations, it is the Commission’s position that such filings will not “cure” Section 15(d) violations, and will not make us timely for purposes of eligibility to use certain Securities Act forms.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which requires management to make certain estimates and assumptions and apply judgments.
In its report dated December 7, 2021, our auditors, Accell Audit & Compliance P.A., expressed an opinion that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. Our financial statements do not include any adjustments that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty. We generated no operating revenues for the fiscal years ended September 30, 2018 and 2017, and at September 30, 2018 we had an accumulated stockholders’ deficit of approximately $222,024. Furthermore, at September 30, 2018 and 2017, we had a retained deficit of approximately $4,592,331, and $4,585,956, respectively, and a working capital deficit of approximately $202,024 at September 30, 2018. As a result of our working capital deficiency and anticipated operating costs for the next twelve months, we do not have sufficient funds available to sustain our operations for a reasonable period without additional financing. Our continuation as a going concern is therefore dependent upon future events, including our ability to raise additional capital and to generate positive cash flows.
We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current trends, and other factors that management believes to be important at the time the financial statements are prepared; actual results could differ from our estimates and such differences could be material. We have identified below the critical accounting policies, which are assumptions made by management about matters that are highly uncertain and that are of critical importance in the presentation of our financial position, results of operations and cash flows. Due to the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain, materially different amounts could be reported under different conditions or using different assumptions. On a regular basis, we review our critical accounting policies and how they are applied in the preparation our financial statements.
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets, if any, at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Income Taxes. Deferred taxes are provided on the asset and liability method whereby deferred tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences and operating loss and tax credit carry forwards and deferred tax liabilities are recognized for taxable temporary differences. Temporary differences are the differences between the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and their tax bases. Future tax benefits for net operating loss carry forwards are recognized to the extent that realization of these benefits is considered more likely than not. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance when, in the opinion of management, it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company follows the provisions of FASB ASC 740-10 “Uncertainty in Income Taxes” (ASC 740-10). A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits has not been provided since there are not unrecognized benefits for all periods presented. The Company has not recognized interest expense or penalties as a result of the implementation of ASC 740-10. If there were an unrecognized tax benefit, the Company would recognize interest accrued related to unrecognized tax benefit in interest expense and penalties in operating expenses.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share. Basic income (loss) per share is computed by dividing net income (loss) available to common shareholders by the weighted average number of outstanding common shares during the period of computation. Diluted loss per share gives effect to potentially dilutive common shares outstanding. The Company gives effect to these dilutive securities using the Treasury Stock Method. Potentially dilutive securities also include other convertible financial instruments. The Company gives effect to these dilutive securities using the If-Converted-Method.
New Accounting Pronouncements
For a description of recent accounting standards, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects, if any, on our financial statements, see “Note 8: Recent Accounting Pronouncement” in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.