ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide information necessary to understand our audited consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 and highlight certain other information which, in the opinion of management, will enhance a reader’s understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of operations. In particular, the discussion is intended to provide an analysis of significant trends and material changes in our financial position and the operating results of our business during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 and related notes included elsewhere in this 10-K. These historical financial statements may not be indicative of our future performance. This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains numerous forward-looking statements, all of which are based on our current expectations and could be affected by the uncertainties and risks described throughout this filing, particularly in “Item 1A. Risk Factors.”
The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations and financial condition, will depend on future developments that are uncertain, including as a result of new information that may emerge concerning COVID-19 and the actions taken to contain it or treat COVID-19, as well as the economic impact on local, regional, national and international customers and markets. We have made estimates of the impact of COVID-19 within our financial statements, and although there is currently no major impact, there may be changes to those estimates in future periods. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Company Summary
We are a biotechnology company focused on the research and discovery of new and effective treatments for psychiatric and neurological disorders. Epidemiological data indicate neuropsychiatric disorders as being some of the most prevalent, devastating, and yet poorly treated illnesses. We believe that the current treatments for these disorders, such as depression, are inadequate and that conventional medicines have low success rates in long-term treatment. According to an article published by PLOS One, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials of antidepressants were only effective for 42-51% of patients with MDD. For example, current pharmacotherapies for MDD and bipolar depression (BDep) have a distinct lag of onset that can generate further distress and impairment in patients. According to an article published in 2000 by The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry and an article published in 2010 by Pharmaceuticals (Basel), available antidepressant medications usually take several weeks before patients display significant therapeutic benefit. This delayed onset of treatment can result in increased morbidity and increased risk for suicidal behavior. This has been reported in a base population study including 159,810 users of 4 antidepressant drugs showing that the risk of suicidal behavior increased in the first month after starting antidepressants, and in particular during the first 1 to 9 days, regardless of the chemical class of antidepressant. This study was published in a 2004 article published by The Journal of the American Medical Association. Similarly, other studies including a 2006 article published by The American Journal of Psychiatry have shown a significantly higher risk of suicide attempts during the first week of antidepressant treatment compared to subsequent weeks. Furthermore, depressive symptoms are commonly known to affect the ability of patients to function across multiple domains, impacting self-esteem, motivation and cognitive function. Delayed onset of antidepressants contributes to ongoing functional impairment and may interfere with integration back into daily life, in turn delaying full functional recovery. Furthermore, according to a 2012 article published by Biological Psychiatry and a 2013 article published by Brain Stimulation, the continued presence of depressive symptoms may promote chronic neuronal loss and suppress neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
Traditional psychiatric drugs can also cause side effects. Furthermore, the approval of psychotropic drugs with novel mechanisms of action has been rare in recent years. Our biotech operations focus on developing drugs that target the pathophysiology underlying such disorders rather than symptomatic treatments, with the goal of developing new pharmacological agents that display significant advantages over conventional therapies with respect to efficacy and tolerability. We particularly focus on the cross-talk between the immune system and brain disorders and how immune dysregulation affects CNS function.
Company Strategy
Our core strategy is to become a leader in solving psychiatric and neurological disorders, one of the world’s biggest clinical problems, through research, development, and commercialization of novel CNS drugs. Key elements of our business strategy are as follows:
● Research new drugs or the treatment of CNS disorders targeting the pathophysiology underlying the disease and with different mechanisms of action than conventional psychiatric and neurological drugs. Research will be conducted under the leadership of Professor Lawrence Steinman, a renowned neurologist and immunologist based at Stanford University, and Dr. Tiago Reis Marques, a psychiatrist and neuroscientist at Imperial College and King’s College London;
● Partner with reputable and successful healthcare companies and clinics to support the intravenous administration of ketamine to treat treatment-resistant depression and PTSD;
o Create a capital efficient revenue stream with significant client bases across the United States and the U.K., including in Los Angeles, New York City, London; and
o Create a diversified revenue stream by establishing and supporting clinics to provide greater visibility of revenue and EBITDA.
Private Placements
November 2021 Private Placement
On November 24, 2021, the Company entered into a purchase agreement with institutional investors to issue 8,680,000 common shares (the “PIPE Shares”) and 8,680,000 warrants to purchase up to 8,680,000 shares of common stock in a private placement (“November 2021 Private Placement”). The combined purchase price for one PIPE Share and warrant was $3.50. The warrants are immediately exercisable, expire five years from the date of issuance and have an exercise price of $3.50 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment as set forth in the warrants.
The investors may exercise the warrants on a cashless basis if the warrant shares are not then registered pursuant to an effective registration statement. The investors have contractually agreed to restrict their ability to exercise the warrants such that the number of shares of common stock held by the investors and any of their affiliates after such exercise does not exceed either 4.99% or 9.99% of the Company’s then issued and outstanding shares of common stock, at the investor’s election.
In connection with the Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with the investors. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the Company are be required to file a resale registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) to register for resale the shares and the warrant shares and to have such Registration Statement declared effective within 60 days after the date of the Purchase Agreement, or 90 days of the date of the Purchase Agreement in the event the Registration Statement is subject to a “full review” by the SEC. The Company are obligated to pay certain liquidated damages to the investor if it fails to file the resale registration statement when required, fail to cause the Registration Statement to be declared effective by the SEC when required, or if it fails to maintain the effectiveness of the Registration Statement.
Pursuant to a Placement Agent Agreement (the “Placement Agent Agreement”), dated as of November 24, 2021, by and between us and EF Hutton, division of Benchmark Investments, LLC (“EF Hutton”), the Company engaged EF Hutton to act as its exclusive placement agent in connection with the November 2021 Private Placement. Pursuant to the Placement Agent Agreement, the Company paid EF Hutton a cash fee of 9.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the November 2021 Private Placement, and a cash fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the November 2021 Private Placement for non-accountable expenses, and also reimbursed EF Hutton $70,000 for accountable expenses, including “road show”, diligence, and reasonable legal fees and disbursements for EF Hutton’s counsel. Additionally, the Company granted EF Hutton a right of first refusal following the closing of the November 2021 Private Placement, whereby EF Hutton shall have an irrevocable right of first refusal (the “Right of First Refusal”) until November 29, 2022, to act as sole investment banker, sole book-runner, and/or sole placement agent, at EF Hutton’s sole discretion, for each and every future public and private equity and debt offering, including all equity linked financing.
On November 29, 2021, the Company consummated the November 2021 Private Placement, pursuant to which it issued 8,680,000 PIPE Shares and 8,680,000 warrants to institutional investors. The offering price per PIPE Share and accompanying warrant was $3.50, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $30,380,000 and net proceeds to the Company, net of underwriter discounts and fees, of approximately $27 million. We bear all fees and expenses incidental to our obligation to register the shares of common stock. Brokerage fees, commissions and similar expenses, if any, attributable to the sale of shares offered will be assumed by the selling stockholder. The Company intends to use such proceeds from the November 2021 Private Placement for general corporate and working capital purposes.
A total of 8,680,000 warrants remain outstanding as of December 31, 2021. No liability accounting or valuation is deemed necessary for these warrants.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 to the Year Ended December 31, 2020.
Our financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 are summarized as follows in comparison to the year ended December 31, 2020:
The increase is mainly attributable to an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses as a result of the proceeds received from the sale of equity and further expansion of operations, offset partially by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $2,334,400.
Working Capital
Current assets increased by $53,052,499 between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to an increase in cash and cash equivalents due to the Company’s sale of its Units, common stock and warrants during the period.
Current liabilities increased by $440,677 between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to expansion of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and cash equivalents increased by $52,723,056 between December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to the Company’s sale of its Units, common stock and warrants during the period.
November 2021 Private Placement
On November 24, 2021, the Company entered into a purchase agreement with institutional investors to issue 8,680,000 common shares (the “PIPE Shares”) and 8,680,000 warrants to purchase up to 8,680,000 shares of common stock in a private placement (“November 2021 Private Placement”). The combined purchase price for one PIPE Share and warrant was $3.50. The warrants are immediately exercisable, expire five years from the date of issuance and have an exercise price of $3.50 per share of common stock, subject to adjustment as set forth in the warrants.
The investors may exercise the warrants on a cashless basis if the warrant shares are not then registered pursuant to an effective registration statement. The investors have contractually agreed to restrict their ability to exercise the warrants such that the number of shares of common stock held by the investors and any of their affiliates after such exercise does not exceed either 4.99% or 9.99% of the Company’s then issued and outstanding shares of common stock, at the investor’s election.
In connection with the Purchase Agreement, the Company entered into a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”) with the investors. Pursuant to the Registration Rights Agreement, the Company are be required to file a resale registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) to register for resale the shares and the warrant shares and to have such Registration Statement declared effective within 60 days after the date of the Purchase Agreement, or 90 days of the date of the Purchase Agreement in the event the Registration Statement is subject to a “full review” by the SEC. The Company are obligated to pay certain liquidated damages to the investor if it fails to file the resale registration statement when required, fail to cause the Registration Statement to be declared effective by the SEC when required, or if it fails to maintain the effectiveness of the Registration Statement.
Pursuant to a Placement Agent Agreement (the “Placement Agent Agreement”), dated as of November 24, 2021, by and between us and EF Hutton, division of Benchmark Investments, LLC (“EF Hutton”), the Company engaged EF Hutton to act as its exclusive placement agent in connection with the November 2021 Private Placement. Pursuant to the Placement Agent Agreement, the Company paid EF Hutton a cash fee of 9.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the November 2021 Private Placement, and a cash fee equal to 1.0% of the gross proceeds raised in the November 2021 Private Placement for non-accountable expenses, and also reimbursed EF Hutton $70,000 for accountable expenses, including “road show”, diligence, and reasonable legal fees and disbursements for EF Hutton’s counsel. Additionally, the Company granted EF Hutton a right of first refusal following the closing of the November 2021 Private Placement, whereby EF Hutton shall have an irrevocable right of first refusal (the “Right of First Refusal”) until November 29, 2022, to act as sole investment banker, sole book-runner, and/or sole placement agent, at EF Hutton’s sole discretion, for each and every future public and private equity and debt offering, including all equity linked financing.
On November 29, 2021, the Company consummated the November 2021 Private Placement, pursuant to which it issued 8,680,000 PIPE Shares and 8,680,000 warrants to institutional investors. The offering price per PIPE Share and accompanying warrant was $3.50, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $30,380,000. We bear all fees and expenses incidental to our obligation to register the shares of common stock. Brokerage fees, commissions and similar expenses, if any, attributable to the sale of shares offered will be assumed by the selling stockholder. The Company intends to use such proceeds from the November 2021 Private Placement for general corporate and working capital purposes. As of March 23, 2022, no warrants have been exercised.
The consummation of the private placement offering resulted in gross proceeds of $30,380,000 and net proceeds to the Company, net of underwriter discounts and fees, of approximately $27 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Outlook
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $52,966,706 in its operating bank account and working capital of $52,853,177. The Company’s liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering had been satisfied through proceeds from the issuance of common stock in private placements. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the November 2021 Private Placement (Note 5), the Company’s liquidity will be satisfied through the net proceeds from the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and the November 2021 Private Placement. Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital to meet its needs through twelve months from the date of these financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in the notes to our financial statements included in this 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021. We believe that the accounting policies below are critical for one to fully understand and evaluate our financial condition and results of operations.
None.
Subsequent Events
Amendment to Business Support Services Subcontract - The IV Doc
On January 19, 2022, the Pasithea Clinics, an affiliate of the Company, entered into an Amended Business Support Services Subcontract (the “Amended Subcontract”) with The IV Doc, pursuant to which The IV Doc will provide certain non-clinical administrative, back office, and other business support services to one or more professional medical practices in the State of New York. The Amended Subcontract was modified with the start date effective January 1, 2022.