Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes and the other financial information appearing elsewhere in this report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See the section titled "Forward-Looking Statements" for more information. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Unless specifically noted otherwise, as used throughout this Management’s Discussion and Analysis section, “we,” “our,” "us," "the Company" or “Kennedy Wilson” refers to Kennedy-Wilson Holdings, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. “Equity partners” refers to the subsidiaries that we consolidate in our financial statements under U.S. GAAP (other than wholly-owned subsidiaries) and third-party equity providers. Please refer to “Non-GAAP Measures and Certain Definitions” for definitions of certain terms used throughout this report.
Overview
Kennedy Wilson is a global real estate investment company. We own, operate and develop real estate with the objective of maximizing earnings over the long run for ourselves and our equity partners. We focus primarily on multifamily and office properties located in the Western United States, United Kingdom, and Ireland. As of December 31, 2021, we have 220 employees in 12 offices primarily located throughout the United States, the United Kingdom, Ireland and Spain. As of December 31, 2021, our AUM stood at $21.6 billion. The real estate that we hold in our global portfolio consists primarily of multifamily apartments (55%) and commercial (45%) based on Consolidated NOI and JV NOI. Geographically, we focus on the Western United States (60%), the United Kingdom (18%) and Ireland (19%).
COVID-19 Impact and Business Update
The following discussion is intended to provide shareholders with certain information regarding the Company's operations and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and management’s efforts to respond to the same. The pandemic commenced during the first quarter of 2020 and the duration and magnitude of it still remain uncertain at this time. Unless otherwise specified, the statistical and other information regarding our portfolio and tenants are estimates based on information available to us as of February 16, 2022. As a result of the rapid development, fluidity and uncertainty surrounding this situation, we expect that such statistical and other information may change, potentially significantly, going forward and may not be indicative of the actual impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, operations, cash flows and financial condition for 2022 and future periods.
Health and Safety of our Employees and Tenants
Our primary objective during the COVID-19 pandemic has been to protect the health and safety of our employees as well as the tenants and service providers across our portfolio. We have reopened all of our offices across the globe. Prior to reopening any office, we strictly followed applicable laws in preparing and maintaining the space to be as safe as possible and providing an environment that encourages the following of social distancing guidelines, including, without limitation, adopting hybrid office and remote working schedules and staggering employees' schedules to ensure ample space is available between work spaces and occupied offices. We will continue to monitor and follow local laws and guidance to assess our ability to keep our offices open across the globe. Our IT infrastructure and communications are robust and we are focused on maintaining business continuity, while doing our share to support each community where we do business. The daily operations of our business are not materially directly dependent on a supply chain or production chain that may be disrupted due to the pandemic.
Impact to the Global Economy and Jurisdictions We Invest in
As a result of the unprecedented measures taken across the globe, the disruption and impact of the COVID-19 pandemic to the global economy and financial markets has been significant. We continue to closely monitor changes in applicable laws and COVID-19 guidance provided by local, state and federal regulators, or their equivalents, in the jurisdictions in which we operate. Nearly all the markets in which we operate continue to enforce some form of restriction and/or special procedures on the operations of businesses and international travel due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Although the United States, United Kingdom, Ireland and Spain have eased certain restrictions and have generally started to allow industries to open and operate, there are still measures and restrictions in place that may increase or decrease in response to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the continued and long-lasting economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic may lead to some of our multifamily tenants having difficulty in making rental payments on time.
In addition, substantial inflationary pressures could have a negative impact on certain real estate assets, including, without limitation, development projects that do not have guaranteed, or fixed price contracts and real estate assets with long-term leases that do not provide for short-term rent increases. However, we continue to seek investments in markets where we
see opportunities for stronger relative growth, including multifamily assets with leases that have an initial term of 12 months or less, and continue to work to manage cost overrun risks for our development and redevelopment projects with detailed architectural plans, guaranteed, or fixed price contracts and close supervision by expert Company executives and personnel. Please refer to Development and Redevelopment in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section for a more detailed discussion regarding our development initiatives.
Liquidity
Kennedy Wilson has a strong financial and capital position to help withstand the potential near-term cash flow impact caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2021, we had $524.8 million ($327.3 million of which is in foreign currencies of GBP or EUR) of cash on our consolidated balance sheet and have $425.0 million available to draw on our unsecured revolving credit facility.
As of December 31, 2021, we have 6.1 weighted average years to maturity on our debt obligations. We have limited debt maturities over 2022, which total $197.3 million which are secured by non-recourse property-level financings and represent only 2% of our total outstanding debt obligations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we closed the following bond offerings: (i) $600 million aggregate principal amount of 4.750% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 Notes”), (ii) $600 million aggregate principal amount of 4.750% senior notes due 2030 (the "2030 Notes") and (iii) $600 million aggregate principal amount of 5.000% senior notes due 2031 (the “2031 Notes,” and together with the 2029 Notes and 2030 Notes, the “Notes”). During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used the proceeds from these offerings, in addition to cash on hand, to fully redeem our existing 5.875% Senior Notes due 2024 (the "2024 Notes"), repay $438.5 million on our revolving line of credit and fully repay the KWE Bonds due 2022 ("KWE Bonds"). As discussed in further detail in "Liquidity and Capital Resources", our need to raise funds from time to time to meet our capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the success and pace of the implementation of our strategy for strategic and accretive growth where appropriate. Additionally, we may opportunistically seek to raise capital (equity or debt) when we believe market conditions are favorable and when consistent with our growth and financing strategies.
Investment portfolio and 2021 Rent Collections
Our investment portfolio is diverse both geographically and by product type. In the United States, our portfolio is focused in the western part of the country. In Europe, our portfolio is primarily located in Dublin, Ireland and the United Kingdom.
As of February 16, 2022, we have collected a total of 97% of our share of rents for the year ended December 31, 2021 from our properties in our global investment portfolio. Such collection rates may not be indicative of collections in any future period. As of December 31, 2021, 87% of our share of the total rents that we collect are generated from our global multifamily and office properties. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we identified $14.3 million of receivables and other lease-related assets that are no longer probable of being collected. Accordingly, the Company will account for these leases on a cash basis and recognize rental income to the extent the Company receives cash from the tenants. Of the $14.3 million identified, $12.9 million related to our Consolidated portfolio and was recorded as a reduction of rental income and $1.4 million related to our share of rental income on our Co-Investments portfolio investments and was recorded as a reduction of income from unconsolidated investments. We have, however, received $11.7 million in cash collections relating to previously uncollectible amounts during the year ended December 31, 2021, which we have recorded to rental income. Cash collections are from asset management teams working to collect outstanding receivables from tenants and the receipt of rental relief amounts from various government programs. We intend to continue to work with our tenants and utilize programs available to us to make further cash collections on previously reserved receivables. In addition to the $11.7 million we have collected above we have submitted $2.3 million of claims to rental relief programs that have not yet been approved and have $0.4 million that have been approved for payment but not yet been received. We will record additional rental income when we receive cash from these claims.
Global Multifamily Property Portfolio Rents and Leasing Updates
As of February 16, 2022, we have collected a total of 98% of our share of rents for the year ended December 31, 2021 from our properties in our global multifamily property portfolio. We have benefited from certain of our tenants participating in rent relief or assistance programs available pursuant to certain legislation passed in the United States and other jurisdictions where we hold multifamily assets. Our multifamily tenants typically pay through direct debit transactions, and tenants within our affordable unit portfolio generally receive some assistance from various government programs, which helps enhance our collection efforts. As the COVID-19 pandemic continues, however, some of our multifamily tenants may have difficulty in making rental payments on time, or at all.
Global Commercial Property Portfolio Rents and Leasing Update
As of February 16, 2022, we have collected 99% of our share of rents for the year ended December 31, 2021 from properties in our global office property portfolio, 85% of year ended December 31, 2021 rents from the properties in our global retail property portfolio and 98% of rents from our global industrial property portfolio. As of December 31, 2021, 11% of the total rents that we collect are generated from our global retail portfolio, 30% are generated from our global office portfolio and 1% from our global industrial portfolio.
Global Development and Hotel Update
In our development and redevelopment portfolio we have experienced delays on isolated projects, but we currently do not expect significant cost increases as we have guaranteed, or fixed-rate construction contracts on most of our projects that are currently under construction and for projects that are in early phases we have not had to halt activities because we are mainly in the pre-construction phase and are able to continue progress on projects. Ireland incurred two construction impact lockdowns, the first occurred during the second quarter of 2020 and lasted for six weeks the second lasted for the entirety of the first quarter of 2021, with phased reopening beginning on April 12, 2021. Construction activity was halted during these lockdowns. We expect that this will push out our timeline on development projects, which we were on site, by four to five months but we believe that any associated costs can be covered within our existing contingency plans on the assumption that there are no further extended national lockdowns. We have 65,000 square feet of office space and 89 multifamily units that we currently expect construction to be completed by the end of 2022. We also have three properties consisting of 188,000 square feet of commercial space that are undergoing lease up that we currently expect will be stabilized by the end of 2022. Our VHH portfolio also has 1,147 units that we expect will finish construction or complete lease up by the end of 2022. Please refer to Development and Redevelopment in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section for a more detailed discussion regarding our development initiatives.
The hospitality industry continues to be significantly impacted due to various travel restrictions in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We voluntarily closed the Shelbourne Hotel on March 15, 2020 and reopened the hotel on June 29, 2020 when we were permitted to do so under applicable laws and guidelines. Subsequent to the reopening, Ireland experienced multiple lockdowns and was in lockdown for the majority of the first half of 2021. The Shelbourne continues to remain open but we expect continued limited activity at the property due to travel restrictions, as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, among other factors. As restrictions have started to be lifted we have seen revenues at The Shelbourne Hotel for the year ended December 31, 2021 increase of 23% as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and Consolidated NOI is up due to increased revenues as well as a focus on controlling expenses in the current period.
Results of Operations
The following tables summarize the our results of operations by segment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and is intended to be helpful in understanding the year over year explanations following the tables.
Our results of operations for 2019 and 2020 compared to 2019 can be found under Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, which is incorporated by reference herein to our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021, and is available on the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov and our Investor Relations website at www.ir.kennedywilson.com.
Statement of Income Presentation
As the Co-Investment business has grown, the Company is updating the presentation of related items in the statements of income for all periods presented as this presentation reflects the prominence of this core part of our business and more closely represents how management evaluates results during an accounting period. The income from unconsolidated investments caption has been expanded to show principal co-investments and performance allocations. Principal co-investments consists of unrealized and realized gains on our Co-Investments including any fair value adjustments as the Company’s share of net income and losses from Co-Investments. Performance allocations relate to special allocations to co-investments the Company manages based on the cumulative performance of the fund or investment and are subject to preferred return thresholds of its limited partners. These captions have been moved above expenses as the Co-Investments business is a significant part of the Company’s business. As the Company has compensation expense and general and administrative expenses relating to the management of this business presenting these amounts before Expenses also provides a better understanding of the nature of those expenses. Based on the foregoing, we have concluded this change in presentation is justified by the circumstances thereby supporting presentation in a different position and in a different manner from our historical presentation.
The Company has reported significant gains on sale of real estate, net in each period presented. Previously, gains on sale of real estate were presented after expenses. These gains contribute to the Company’s compensation and related expenses and accordingly presentation of this significant, recurring component that is directly correlated to expenses should, in management’s view, precede those expenses on the statements of income. Furthermore, the Company accounts for gains on sale of real estate under ASC Subtopic 610-20, Other Income - Gains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets and we have determined that the updated presentation complies with that standard.
(1) See "Non-GAAP Measures and Certain Definitions" for definitions and discussion of Adjusted EBITDA.
(1) See "Non-GAAP Measures and Certain Definitions" for definitions and discussion of Adjusted EBITDA.
Kennedy Wilson Consolidated Financial Results: Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Financial Highlights
GAAP net income to common shareholders was $313.2 million and $92.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA was $927.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a 51% increase from $608.0 million for 2020. The increase in GAAP net income to common shareholders and Adjusted EBITDA is due to higher gains on sale of real estate and fair value increases on our Co-Investment assets offset by losses on early extinguishment of debt during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior period.
Operational Highlights
Same store property highlights for the year ended December 31, 2021 include:
•For our 12,770 same property multifamily units for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior period:
◦occupancy increased 1% to 95%
◦net operating income increased 5%
◦total revenues increased 4%
•For our 4.1 million square feet of same property office real estate for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior period:
◦occupancy remained flat at 95% from the same period in 2020
◦net operating income increased 6%
◦total revenues increased 6%
•Investment Transactions
◦acquired $2.9 billion of assets (our share of which was $1.4 billion) and sold $1.5 billion of assets (our share of which was $811.9 million)
◦originated $1.2 billion of loans (our share of which was $94.3 million) and had $253.1 million of loans that were repaid (our share of which was $35.1 million)
•Significant Transactions
•We recorded significant fair value gains and performance allocation accruals (aggregate of $331.4 million) in the current period primarily due to the increase in value of our United States multifamily portfolio and European industrial portfolio. We have recently observed material rental rate increases for new leases and renewals in our US multifamily portfolio which has increased the NOI at the properties. We have also observed (both from recent transactions that we have entered into and third party transactional market data) significant cap rate compression of US multifamily assets and industrial assets in our markets which also contributed to the fair value gains that we recorded during the period.
•On June 25, 2021, the Company and a global institutional investor partner launched a new joint venture with respect to core-plus multifamily properties located in the Western United States (the “JV”). The JV commenced with the partner purchasing a 49% ownership stake in nine multifamily assets (2,809 units) previously wholly-owned by us and valued at approximately $800 million (the “MF seed portfolio”). The sale of the 49% ownership interest in the seed portfolio to its partner generated cash to the Company of $167 million. We do not control the JV, which led to the deconsolidation of our retained 51% interest resulting in a gain on sale of real estate in accordance with U.S. GAAP of $332.0 million. The gain is due to the sale of the 49% interest to our partner and the recording of our retained 51% interest in the remaining unconsolidated investments at the fair value established by the transaction. We earn customary asset management fees from our equity partner and will treat our retained interest as a fair value unconsolidated investment going forward.
•During the year ended December 31, 2021, we also sold Friars Bridge Court a wholly-owned office property in the United Kingdom for a gain on sale of real estate of $73.9 million.
•We issued $1.8 billion in new senior notes and retired previous outstanding senior notes and KWE Bonds and repaid $438.5 million on our revolving line of credit. These transactions extended the weighted average maturity of our debt to 6.1 years and lowered our weighted average interest expense to 3.5% from 4.1 years
and 3.7% at December 31, 2020. We recognized a loss of $42.8 million due to the extinguishment of the 2024 Notes and KWE Bonds during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Foreign Exchange - Results of Operations
A significant portion of our investments are in foreign currencies. We typically do not hedge future operations or cash flows so changes in foreign currency rates will have an impact on our results of operations. We have included the table below to illustrate the impact these fluctuations have had on our revenues, net income and Adjusted EBITDA by applying the relevant exchange rates for the prior period. Please refer to the section titled "Currency Risk - Foreign Currencies" in Item 3 for a discussion of risks relating to foreign currency and our hedging strategy and the "Other Comprehensive Income" section below for a discussion of the balance sheet impact of foreign currency movements on our results of operations.
Rental income was $390.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $403.9 million for 2020. The $13.4 million decrease is primarily due to the deconsolidation of the MF seed portfolio in the second quarter 2021 which led to a $26.3 million decrease in rental income. We still own 51% of the MF seed portfolio but rental income amounts are now in principal co-investments within income from unconsolidated investments. We also had a $7.7 million write-off of lease related assets related to the termination of a lease at Friars Bridge Court prior to its sale as discussed above. These decreases were offset by multifamily acquisitions in the Mountain States and office acquisitions in the United Kingdom completed during the period. Additionally, we had a $12.9 million reduction to rental income for the year ended December 31, 2021 as we assessed the full collection of these rents as improbable. In the previous year, we had a $13.5 million reduction to rental income relating to improbable rent collections. Both periods were driven by the impact of COVID-19 pandemic. The reduction was offset by the cash collection of $11.7 million we received during the year ended December 31, 2021 on previously reserved receivables which increased rental income with no comparable activity in the prior period. The cash collections were primarily from governmental assistance programs for multifamily properties and collections of past due receivables at retail properties. We had 11% growth in rental income for our same store properties in the fourth quarter 2021 and expect this trend to continue into 2022 as tenants trade out apartments as COVID-19 restrictions and concerns start to abate.
Hotel income was $17.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $13.9 million for 2020. The $3.2 million increase is primarily due to improved operations of the Shelbourne Hotel during the year ended December 31, 2021 as Ireland COVID restrictions have eased.
Gain on sale of real estate, net was $412.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $338.0 million in the prior period. The gains recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to the sale of a 49% interest in and resulting deconsolidation of the assets that made up the MF seed portfolio and the sale of Friars Bridge Court, an office building in the United Kingdom. For the year ended December 31, 2020, gains on sale of real estate, net primarily relate to the sale of certain consolidated UK industrial assets to the European Industrial JV, the Club Palisades multifamily property in the Western United States, Baggot Plaza in Dublin, Ireland, Pioneer Point a multifamily property in the United Kingdom and certain other non-core assets in Europe. Included in the gains on sale of real estate, net for December 31, 2021 is an impairment loss of $20.9 million on two retail properties in the United Kingdom and a residential property in the Western United States. For the year ended December 31, 2020 an impairment loss of $15.6 million on five retail properties in the United Kingdom and a residential property in the Western United States was recorded in gains on the sale of real estate, net.
Rental expenses decreased to $132.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $135.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to the Company being a net seller of assets in the prior period which has led to a decrease in assets in the Consolidated portfolio and lower rental expenses.
Hotel expenses decreased to $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $13.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a focus on controlling costs in the current period due to periods of limited operations at The Shelbourne Hotel.
Compensation expense increased to $60.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $59.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to higher discretionary compensation expense.
General and administrative expenses decreased to $18.5 million for year the ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $20.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to there being fewer transactions in the Consolidated portfolio, resulting in lower overhead costs.
Depreciation and amortization decreased by $13.3 million. The decrease is primarily due to the Company being a net seller of consolidated assets in the prior year as discussed above. This decrease was offset by a $2.5 million increase relating to the write off of leasing commissions to depreciation expense from the termination of a lease with a tenant at Friars Bridge Court.
Interest expense was $192.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $201.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due to the decrease in consolidated property level debt resulting from the sale of assets and the payoff of the KWE Bonds.
Loss on early extinguishment of debt was $19.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $9.3 million in the same period in 2020. We incurred a $16.3 million loss associated with the redemption of the KWE Bonds and the remainder related to prepayment penalties on the refinance of three multifamily property level mortgages. We also incurred a loss associated with the partial tender offer and subsequent redemption of the total balance of the 2024 Notes during the year ended December 31, 2021 as explained in the description of the "Corporate" segment below. For the year ended December 31, 2020 we had loan prepayments on the sale of assets of $9.3 million.
Co-Investment Portfolio Segment
Investment Management
On our Co-Investment Portfolio assets, we receive asset management fees for managing assets on behalf of our partners. During the year ended December 31, 2021, fees recorded through revenues were $35.3 million as compared to $22.5 million for the same period in 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we had higher base management fees as a result of having more assets under management in our Co-Investment portfolio mainly from bringing in additional investors into our Europe Fund, new assets under management in our Europe Industrial JV and MF seed portfolio separate accounts and additional assets under management in our global real estate debt platform. Performance allocations are recorded as part of income from unconsolidated investments and discussed below.
Loans and other income increased to $8.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $3.1 million for the same period in 2020. These amounts represent interest income on our share of loans within our global real estate debt platform and the increase is due to the growth of the platform over the last year.
Expenses increased to $90.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $26.9 million primarily due to accrued performance allocation compensation to employees relating to an increase in performance allocations on Co-Investments and higher discretionary compensation expenses.
Co-investment operations
In addition to our management of investments in the Co-Investment Portfolio, we have ownership interests in the properties. The table below represents a breakout of the amounts within income from unconsolidated investments which represents our share of underlying property investments in the Co-Investment Portfolio assets and any performance allocations relating to our management of these properties for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the year ended December 31, 2020:
Our share of JV NOI (rental income net of rental operating expenses) increased in the current period due to new acquisitions as well as the sale of interests in previously consolidated properties into unconsolidated partnerships resulting in moving the recognition of income from these assets from our Consolidated portfolio to our Co-Investment portfolio as described above. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received a surrender premium, which is a breakage fee we received from a tenant in the United Kingdom related to the early extinguishment of its lease and we experienced an increase in NOI in our VHH portfolio. Increases in JV NOI were offset by an impairment loss recorded in the third quarter of 2020 included in the table above within loss on sale of real estate of $6.7 million relating to a property in a retail portfolio in the United Kingdom that was subsequently sold during 2020, we took an additional impairment loss of $4.2 million in the fourth quarter 2020 on this portfolio that brought the carrying value of this joint venture to zero.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had higher fair values primarily from increases in NOI as a result of significant increases in market rents and cap rate compression in our market rate fair value multifamily assets in the Western United States and industrial assets in Europe. The cap rate compression was supported by recent transactions entered into by the Company, appraisals, as well as third party transactional and market data. NOI increases and cap rate compression both led to the increase in fair values. We also had fair value gains due to resyndications and cap rate compression in our VHH portfolio and fair value increases in our retained unconsolidated investment interest in the Zonda business from Meyers Research after our sale of that business in 2018.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we had fair value gains on VHH primarily relating to conversions of development projects to operating properties as construction work was completed and lease up of the properties commenced. We also had fair value gains associated with the completion of Clancy Quay Phase 3 which is currently undergoing lease up and net foreign exchange gains relating to the strengthening of the euro against the U.S. dollar on our euro denominated fair value investments.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a net $117.9 million increase in the accrual for performance allocations relating to our commingled funds and separate account investments. The increase in the accrual is due to higher fair values on market rate multifamily properties as discussed above and European Industrial JV assets in commingled funds and separate account investments that we manage. We had $9.6 million of realized promote collected during the year ended December 31, 2021 from a separate account that held office properties in the Seattle area that fully disposed of all its assets in the third quarter 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded a net $2.6 million increase in the accrual for performance allocations. This was mainly due to increased values in the AXA joint venture primarily due to the completion of Clancy Quay Phase 3 as further discussed above and a portfolio of office buildings we manage in the Seattle area. These increases were offset by reductions in accrued performance allocations associated Fund V and VI due to lack of transactional activity for the period.
Corporate
Property services fees decreased to $2.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $10.6 million for December 31, 2020, due to the sale of the Property Services group in October 2020. The Company still maintains its estate sales and marketing business which generates certain real estate related services activity.
Expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $68.1 million as compared to $71.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 the decrease is due to lower general and administration expenses from the sale of the Property Services group in the prior period and lower share-based compensation expense in the current period. This amount includes any accrued amounts for grants made to our non-named executive officer employees under our Deferred Compensation Plan as discussed in this report.
Interest expense was $73.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $69.5 million for the same period in 2020. The increase is due to higher corporate debt balances for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily from the 2030 Notes issuance which a portion of was used to repay the KWE Notes. Interest expense associated with the KWE Notes was part of the Consolidated segment which had lower interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The $26.5 million loss on the early extinguishment of debt is due to the extinguishment of the 2024 Notes and resulting premium and write off of capitalized debt costs and debt discount with no comparable activity in the prior period.
Our provision for income taxes was $126.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to an income tax provision of $43.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax expense is primarily attributable to a $311.1 million increase in worldwide pre-tax book income in 2021 as compared to the same period in the prior year. Our effective tax rate for December 31, 2021 was 27.3% as compared to an effective tax rate of 28.8% in 2020. The effective tax rate for 2021 exceeds the statutory tax rate due to non-deductible executive compensation, certain foreign taxes which are not creditable in the United States, and disallowed interest deductions in the United Kingdom. The effective tax rate for 2020 exceeds the statutory tax rate due to non-deductible executive compensation, an increased in valuation allowances against deferred tax assets, and disallowed interest deductions in the United Kingdom.
Comprehensive Income
The two major components that drive the change in other comprehensive income are the changes in foreign currency rates and the gains or loss of any associated foreign currency hedges. Please refer to the section titled "Currency Risk - Foreign Currencies" in Item 3 for a discussion of our risks relating to foreign currency and our hedging strategy. Below is a table that details the activity for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The main currencies that the Company has exposure to are the euro and pound sterling. The table below represents the change in rates over the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as compared to the U.S. Dollar:
Comprehensive income, net of taxes and noncontrolling interests, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $317.3 million and $116.5 million, respectively. The Company experienced net unrealized losses on foreign currency through other comprehensive income for the period due to EUR and GBP weakening against the U.S. Dollar. Unrealized hedge gains were driven by hedges that KWE holds on its euro denominated investments and hedges that the Company has on its GBP denominated investments. The Company also has interest rate swap contracts to swap some of its variable rate loans to fixed rate terms which resulted in unrealized gains on interest rate swaps from the reversal of prior losses as the contracts get closer to their maturity date.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity and capital resources requirements include acquisitions of real estate and real estate related assets, funding development projects, capital expenditures for consolidated real estate and unconsolidated investments, working capital needs, interest and principal payments on our debt and dividends to our common and preferred shareholders. We finance these activities with internally generated funds through general operations including rental income, asset sales, borrowings under our revolving line of credit, sales of equity (common and preferred) and debt securities and cash out refinancings to the extent they are available and fit within our overall portfolio leverage strategy. Our investments in real estate are typically financed with equity from our balance sheet, third party equity and mortgage loans secured by that real estate. These mortgage loans are generally nonrecourse in that, in the event of default, recourse will be limited to the mortgaged property serving as collateral, subject to limited customary exceptions. In some cases, we guarantee a portion of the loan related to a consolidated property or an unconsolidated investment, usually until some condition, such as completion of construction or leasing or certain net operating income criteria, has been met. We do not expect these guarantees to materially affect liquidity or capital resources. Please refer to the section titled "Off Balance Sheet Arrangements" for further information.
Our short-term liquidity requirements primarily consist of operating expenses and other expenditures associated with our properties, dividend payments to our common and preferred shareholders, interest on our unsecured corporate debt, development, redevelopment and capital expenditures and, potentially, share repurchases and acquisitions. We currently expect to meet our short-term liquidity requirements through our existing cash and cash equivalents plus capital generated from our investments, and sales of real estate as well as availability on our current revolving lines of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we and our consolidated subsidiaries had approximately $524.8 million ($327.3 million of which is in foreign currencies of GBP or EUR) of consolidated cash (as shown on our consolidated balance sheet), our share of cash held at unconsolidated Co-Investment Portfolio assets was $103.7 million and we had $425.0 million of availability under lines of credit. As of December 31, 2021, we have $24.2 million of restricted cash, which is included in cash and cash equivalents, that primarily relates to lender reserves associated with consolidated mortgages that we hold on properties. These reserves typically relate to interest, tax, insurance and future capital expenditures at the properties.
Additionally, we are subject to withholding taxes to the extent we repatriate cash from certain of our foreign subsidiaries. Under the KWE Notes covenants, we have to maintain certain interest coverage and leverage ratios to remain in compliance (see "Indebtedness and Related Covenants" for more detail on KWE Notes). Due to these covenants, we evaluate the tax and covenant implications before we distribute cash, which could impact the availability of funds at the corporate level.
Our need to raise funds from time to time to meet our capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the success and pace of the implementation of our strategy for strategic and accretive growth where appropriate. Additionally, we may opportunistically seek to raise capital (equity or debt) when we believe market conditions are favorable and when consistent with our growth and financing strategies. We may also seek third party financing to the extent that we engage in additional strategic investments, including in order to raise capital necessary to execute potential development or redevelopment strategies or acquire real estate, note portfolios, or other real estate related companies or real estate related securities. Similarly, we may from time to time seek to refinance our existing indebtedness opportunistically in order to reduce our overall cost of debt capital or optimize the maturity schedule of our outstanding indebtedness, or for other strategic reasons. Please also see the section titled “COVID-19 Impact” above and Part I. Item 1A Risk Factors.
Development and redevelopment
Kennedy Wilson has a number of market rate development, redevelopment and entitlement projects that are underway or are in the planning stages. These initiatives, if completed, will result in market-rate income producing assets. As of December 31, 2021 we have 2,279 multifamily units, 0.5 million commercial rentable square feet and 150 hotel rooms we are actively developing. If these projects were brought to completion the estimated share of the Company's total cost would be approximately $1.2 billion, which we expect would be funded through our existing equity, third party equity, project sales and secured debt financing. As of December 31, 2021, we have incurred $550.0 million of costs to date and expect to spend an additional $669.0 million to develop to completion or complete the entitlement process on these projects. Of the $669.0 million of remaining costs to complete we currently expect $285.0 million of it to be funded through cash from us over the life of the projects. This represents total capital over the life of the projects and is not a representation of peak equity and does not take into account any distributions over the course of the investment. When development projects are completed they typically move into our unstabilized category as they undergo lease up post-completion.
In addition to the market rate development and redevelopment projects described above, we have 2,130 affordable and/or age-restricted multifamily units within our VHH platform that we are currently developing or in the process of stabilizing. We expect to have no cash equity basis in these projects at completion due to the use of property level debt and proceeds from the sale of tax credits. If these projects are brought to completion we expect to receive $24.6 million in cash from paid developer fees and proceeds from the sale of tax credits.
The figures described in the two preceding paragraphs and in the table below are budgeted costs and are subject to change. There is no certainty that the Company will develop or redevelop any or all of these potential projects and the Company and its equity partners are under no obligation to complete these projects and may dispose of any such assets after adding value through the entitlement process. These are budgeted figures and are subject to change (increase or decrease) due to a number of factors (some of which are beyond our control), including, that these projects are being developed under construction management contracts with the general contractors and therefore we and our equity partners could be called upon to contribute additional capital in the event that actual costs exceed budgeted costs. The scope of these projects may also change. The estimated costs and amounts of cash to complete projects reflected in the table below represent management's current expectations and the total costs incurred to date include the land costs of these projects.
The table below describes the market rate development or redevelopment projects that the Company is undergoing or considering, and excludes the affordable and/or age-restricted multifamily units that it is developing in its VHH platform and its residential investments ($ in millions).
(1) The actual completion date for projects is subject to several factors, many of which are not within our control. Accordingly, the projects identified may not be completed when expected, or at all.
(2) Figures shown in this column are an estimate of our remaining costs to develop to completion or to complete the entitlement process, as applicable, as of December 31, 2021. Total remaining costs may be financed with third-party cash contributions, proceeds from projected sales, and/or debt financing. We expect to fund $285 million of our share of remaining costs to complete with cash over the life of these projects. These figures are budgeted costs and are subject to change. There is no guarantee that we will be able to secure the project-level debt financing that is assumed in the figures above. If we are unable to secure such financing, the amount of capital we will have to invest to complete the projects above may significantly increase. Our cost to complete differs from our share total capitalization as the latter includes costs that have already been incurred to date while the former relates to future estimated costs
(3) Estimated foreign exchange rates are €0.88 = $1 USD and £0.74 = $1 USD, related to NOI.
(4) Includes land costs.
(5) Included in Consolidated Portfolio Segment
(6) Included in Co-Investment Portfolio Segment
Unstabilized and Value Add Capital Expenditure Programs
We currently have eight assets that comprise 0.9 million commercial square feet that are currently unstabilized and are undergoing various stages of lease-up, value-add or development. In order to stabilize these assets we project our share of costs to complete to be $44.1 million. The cost to complete this work and the time frame described is subject to many uncertainties that are beyond our control, and the actual costs may be significantly higher than the estimates shown below.
The table below describes assets that are currently unstabilized ($ in millions):
Note: The table above excludes minority-interest investments and four wholly-owned assets expected to sell, totaling 333 units, 1.4 million commercial sq. ft., and KW Gross Asset Value of $131.9 million.
(1) Figures shown in this column are an estimate of KW's remaining costs to develop to completion or to complete the entitlement process, as applicable, as of December 31, 2021. Total remaining costs may be financed with third-party cash contributions, proceeds from projected sales, and/or debt financing. These figures are budgeted costs and are subject to change. There is no guarantee that the Company will be able to secure the project-level debt financing that is assumed in the figures above. If the Company is unable to secure such financing, the amount of capital that the Company will have to invest to complete the projects above may significantly increase.
(2) Estimated foreign exchange rates are €0.88 = $1 USD and £0.74 = $1 USD, related to NOI.
In addition to our development, redevelopment and stabilization initiatives, we regularly implement a value-add approach to our consolidated and unconsolidated investments, which includes rehabbing properties and adding or updating property amenities. The capital required to implement these value-add initiatives is typically funded with capital calls, refinancing or supplemental financings at the property level. We are not required to make these investments, but they are a key driver in our ability to increase net operating income at our properties post acquisition.
Other Items
On March 20, 2018, our Board of Directors approved the repurchase of up to $250 million of the Company’s common stock. On November 3, 2020, the Company's board of directors authorized an expansion of its existing $250 million share repurchase plan to $500 million. Repurchases under the program may be made in the open market, in privately negotiated transactions, through the net settlement of the Company’s restricted stock grants or otherwise, with the amount and timing of repurchases dependent on market conditions and subject to the Company’s discretion. The program does not obligate the Company to repurchase any specific number of shares and, subject to compliance with applicable laws, may be suspended or terminated at any time without prior notice. As of December 31, 2021, we had $176.0 million remaining under the plan for stock repurchases. Please see the section titled "Purchases of Equity Securities by the Company" in Part II of this annual report on Form 10-K for additional information.
The Company maintains a deferred compensation program for certain employees of the Company (the “Deferred Compensation Program”). The named executive officers of the Company are not participants of the Deferred Compensation Program. The compensation committee of the Company’s board of directors approves an amount annually to be allocated to certain employees of the Company in the United States and in Europe. The amount allocated to each employee vests ratably over a three-year vesting period, subject to continued employment with the Company. Prior to 2022, half of the allocated amount was tied specifically to the performance and value of the Company’s common stock at the time of each vesting (“Bonus Units”). Beginning 2022, the entire amount allocated to each employee consisted of Bonus Units. Under the Deferred Compensation Program, at the time of each vesting, the employees receive an amount equal to either the dividend yield of the Company’s common stock or the actual amount of dividends paid on the Company common stock (in the case of Bonus Units) during the immediately preceding year on the amount that is subject to such vesting. During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 the Company recognized $11.7 million, $6.4 million and $3.6 million, respectively, under the Deferred Cash Bonus Program.
The Company also maintains a performance allocation sharing program for certain employees of the Company (the “Performance Allocation Sharing Program”). The named executive officers of the Company are not participants of the Performance Allocation Sharing Program. The compensation committee of the Company’s board of directors approved, reserved and authorized executive management to issue up to thirty-five percent (35%) of any performance allocations earned by certain commingled funds and separate account investments to be allocated to certain non-NEO employees of the Company. Sixty percent of the award to each employee vest ratably over four years and the remaining forty percent vest upon the consummation of a liquidity event of the investment whereby the Company actually receives cash performance allocations from its partner. The full performance allocation earned by the Company will be recorded to income from unconsolidated investments and the amount allocated to employees is recorded as performance allocation compensation.
The Company also recently implemented a global employee co-investment program (the “Co-Investment Program”). The named executive officers are not participants of the Co-Investment Program. Under the Co-Investment Program, certain employees are provided the opportunity to invest alongside the Company in its investments (in all future investments and certain recently acquired transactions). The amount of funds that the employees, as a group, can invest in the Company’s investments is capped at 1.5% of the Company’s equity. Participants in the Co-Investment Program will make commitments to the program every year. Generally (with limited exceptions), participants in the Co-Investment Program will invest in every investment made by the Company (investments that such employee has an active role in acquiring and managing) in the applicable year.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the cash provided by or used in our operating, investing and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Operating
Our cash flows from operating activities are primarily dependent upon operations from consolidated properties, the operating distributions and fees from our Co-Investment Platform, general and administrative costs, compensation and interest expense payments. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, cash flows used by operations were $30.3 million, $12.6 million and $19.5 million, respectively.
The increase in cash used in operations was primarily due to premiums paid on the early redemption of 2024 Notes and KWE Bonds, additional interest expense associated with higher corporate loan balances and a $19.0 million surrender premium we paid to terminate a lease at Friars Bridge Court in order to secure a new tenant for the building prior to its sale and the payment of discretionary bonuses. These were offset by higher operating distributions from our Co-Investment portfolio.
Investing
Our cash flows from investing activities are generally comprised of cash used to fund property acquisitions, investments in unconsolidated investments, capital expenditures, purchases of loans secured by real estate, as well as cash received from property sales and return of capital from our co-investments.
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Net cash used in investing activities totaled $1,038.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We received $486.4 million primarily from the sale of the MF seed portfolio and Friars Bridge Court an office building in the United Kingdom. We received $82.8 million in investing distributions from our co-investments primarily from the sale of assets within our comingled funds, refinancing and resyndications with our VHH portfolio and a partial redemption of a hedge fund investment. Our share of new loans issued as part of our debt platform were $83.4 million and we received $58.1 million of proceeds from the sale of a portion of existing loans to equity partners and repayments on loans issued. During the current period we acquired $1,131.8 million of consolidated real estate assets including Embassy Gardens an office building in London and multifamily properties in Pacific Northwest and Mountain West region. We spent $139.2 million on capital expenditures on consolidated assets, as well as continued investments in our development properties and value add on our operating properties. We also contributed $280.8 million to unconsolidated investments that were primarily used to fund our share of capital calls on Kona Village and new acquisitions made within our European Industrial JV platform and commingled funds. The settlement of
foreign currency derivatives was $30.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to the cross currency swap on the KWE Bonds.
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net cash provided by investing activities totaled $590.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we spent $70.1 million on acquisitions of consolidated real estate and $194.1 million on capital expenditures on consolidated assets, as well as continued investments in our development properties and value add properties. We received $827.8 million from the sale of industrial assets in the United Kingdom to the European Industrial JV, Baggot Plaza in Dublin, Club Palisades, a multifamily property in the Western United States, and non-core assets in Europe. Issuance of new loan investments were $88.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. We had $34.1 million of collections on loans primarily from the sale of a loan in Dublin secured by a multifamily property. We received $177.5 million in investing distributions from our co-investments primarily from the sale of an additional 30% interest of three multifamily properties to AXA as part of our separate account platform. We also contributed $111.6 million to unconsolidated investments that were primarily used to fund our share of capital calls on our commingled funds and investments undergoing development. The settlement of foreign currency derivatives netted $15.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing
Our net cash related to financing activities is generally impacted by capital-raising activities net of dividends and distributions paid to common and preferred shareholders and noncontrolling interests as well as financing activities for consolidated real estate investments.
Year Ended December 31, 2021
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $632.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Company received proceeds of $1,804.3 million from the issuance of 2029 notes, 2030 notes and 2031 notes and repaid $1,150.0 million of the 2024 notes. We drew $314.3 million on our revolving line of credit and repaid $438.5 million on our revolving line of credit during the year ended December 31, 2021. We incurred $35.6 million of debt issuance costs associated with the issuance of the 2029 notes, 2030 notes and 2031 notes. Kennedy Wilson received proceeds of $1,144.9 million from mortgage loans to finance and refinance consolidated property acquisitions. These proceeds were offset by the repayment of $268.2 million of mortgage debt and $504.4 million on our KWE Bonds. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we paid common dividends of $123.5 million and preferred dividends of $17.2 million and we repurchased $83.2 million of our common stock under our share repurchase plan.
Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net cash used in financing activities totaled $206.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We received proceeds of $296.4 million from mortgage loans to finance property acquisitions and to refinance existing investments, which were offset by the repayment of $487.1 million of investment debt mainly driven by repayment of mortgages on sold consolidated properties. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we borrowed $200.0 million on our credit facility. Distributions of $18.9 million were paid to noncontrolling interest holders primarily as a result of asset sales and cash received from financings. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we paid $126.1 million of dividends to our common stockholders and $13.6 million of dividends to our preferred shareholders. We also returned $57.4 million to shareholders through share repurchases as part of our share repurchase plan discussed above.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
At December 31, 2021, Kennedy Wilson's contractual cash obligations, including debt, lines of credit, operating leases and ground leases included the following:
(1)See Notes 7-9 of our Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. Figures do not include scheduled interest payments. Assuming each debt obligation is held until maturity, we estimate that we will make the following interest payments: Less than 1 year - $113.6 million; 1-3 years - $287.0 million; 4-5 years - $83.9 million; After 5 years - $67.2 million. The interest payments on variable rate debt have been calculated at the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2021.
(2) Excludes $2.5 million net unamortized debt premium on mortgage debt.
(3) Excludes $3.9 million unamortized debt discount on senior notes.
(4) Excludes $45.8 million of unamortized loan fees.
(5) Excludes $2.1 million net unamortized discount on KWE unsecured bonds.
(6) Kennedy Wilson's share of contractual obligations, (excluding amounts that are attributable to noncontrolling interests), including debt, lines of credit, operating leases and ground leases, consisted of the following: Less than 1 year - $18.2 million; 1-3 years - $2,024.2 million; 4-5 years - $722.2 million; After 5 years - $2,655.2 million.
(7) Table above excludes $113.7 million unfulfilled capital commitments to our unconsolidated investments.
(8) Ground leases on consolidated assets. Amounts are undiscounted and have leases that expire as far out as 2258.
Indebtedness and Related Covenants
The following describes certain indebtedness and related covenants.
Senior Notes Payable
On February 11, 2021, Kennedy-Wilson, Inc., issued $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.750% senior notes due 2029 (the “2029 notes”) and $500.0 million aggregate principal amount of 5.000% senior notes due 2031 (the “2031 notes” and, together with the 2029 notes, the “initial notes”). On March 15, 2021, Kennedy-Wilson, Inc. issued an additional $100 million aggregate principal of the 2029 notes and an additional $100 million of the 2031 notes. These additional notes were issued as "additional notes" under the indentures pursuant to which Kennedy Wilson previously issued 2029 notes and the 2031 notes. On August 23, 2021, Kennedy-Wilson, Inc. issued $600.0 million aggregate principal amount of 4.750% senior notes due 2030 (the "2030 notes" and, together with the 2029 notes, the 2031 notes and the additional notes, the "notes"). The notes are senior, unsecured obligations of Kennedy Wilson and are guaranteed by Kennedy-Wilson Holdings, Inc. and certain subsidiaries of Kennedy Wilson.
The notes accrue interest at a rate of 4.750% (in the case of the 2029 notes), 4.750% (in the case of the 2030 notes) and 5.000% (in the case of the 2031 notes) per annum, payable semi-annually in arrears on March 1 and September 1 of each year, beginning on September 1, 2021 for the 2029 notes and 2031 notes and March 1, 2022 for the 2030 notes. The notes will mature on March 1, 2029 (in the case of the 2029 notes), February 1, 2030 (in case of 2030 notes) and March 1, 2031 (in the case of the 2031 notes), in each case unless earlier repurchased or redeemed. At any time prior to March 1, 2024 (in the case of the 2029 notes), September 1, 2024 (in the case of the 2030 notes) or March 1, 2026 (in the case of the 2031 notes), Kennedy Wilson may redeem the notes of the applicable series, in whole or in part, at a redemption price equal to 100% of their principal amount, plus an applicable “make-whole” premium and accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. At any time and from time to time on or after March 1, 2024 (in the case of the 2029 notes), September 1, 2024 (in the case of the 2030 notes) or March 1, 2026 (in the case of the 2031 notes), Kennedy Wilson may redeem the notes of the applicable series, in
whole or in part, at specified redemption prices set forth in the indenture governing the notes of the applicable series, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to the redemption date. In addition, prior to March 1, 2024 (for 2029 notes and 2031 notes) and September 1, 2024 (for 2030 notes), Kennedy Wilson may redeem up to 40% of the notes of either series from the proceeds of certain equity offerings. No sinking fund will be provided for the notes. Upon the occurrence of certain change of control or termination of trading events, holders of the notes may require Kennedy Wilson to repurchase their notes for cash equal to 101% of the principal amount of the notes to be repurchased, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, to, but excluding, the applicable repurchase date. The total amount of the 2029 notes, 2030 notes and 2031 notes included in the Company's consolidated balance sheets was $1.8 billion at December 31, 2021.
KWE Senior Notes Payable
KWE has $625.4 million (based on December 31, 2021 rates) (€550 million) (the "KWE Notes"). The KWE Notes were issued at a discount and have a carrying value of $624.1 million, have an annual fixed coupon of 3.25%, and mature in 2025.
Borrowings Under Line of Credit
Kennedy-Wilson, Inc. (the “Borrower”), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Kennedy-Wilson Holdings, Inc. (the “Company”), KWH and certain subsidiaries of the Company (the “Subsidiary Guarantors”) on March 25, 2020 extended its existing $500 million revolving line of credit ("Second A&R Facility"). Loans under the Second A&R Facility bear interest at a rate equal to LIBOR plus between 1.75% and 2.50%, depending on the consolidated leverage ratio as of the applicable measurement date. The Second A&R Facility has a maturity date of March 25, 2024. Subject to certain conditions precedent and at Kennedy-Wilson, Inc.’s (the "Borrower") option, the maturity date of the Second A&R Facility may be extended by one year.
The Company has $75.0 million outstanding on the A&R Facility on December 31, 2021 with $425.0 million available to be drawn under the revolving credit facility.
Debt Covenants
The Second A&R Facility and the indentures governing the notes contain numerous restrictive covenants that, among other things, limit Kennedy Wilson's and certain of its subsidiaries' ability to incur additional indebtedness, pay dividends or make distributions to stockholders, repurchase capital stock or debt, make investments, sell assets or subsidiary stock, create or permit liens, engage in transactions with affiliates, enter into sale/leaseback transactions, issue subsidiary equity and enter into consolidations or mergers. The Second A&R Facility requires Kennedy Wilson to maintain a minimum consolidated tangible net worth and a specified amount of cash and cash equivalents.
The Second A&R Facility has certain covenants as defined within its Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of March 25, 2020 (the "Credit Agreement") that, among other things, limit the Company and certain of its subsidiaries’ ability to incur additional indebtedness, repurchase capital stock or debt, sell assets or subsidiary stock, create or permit liens, engage in transactions with affiliates, enter into sale/leaseback transactions, issue subsidiary equity and enter into consolidations or mergers. The Credit Agreement requires the Company to maintain (i) a maximum consolidated leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not greater than 65%, measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, (ii) a minimum fixed charge coverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not less than 1.70 to 1.00, measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter for the period of four full fiscal quarters then ended, (iii) a minimum consolidated tangible net worth equal to or greater than the sum of $1,700,000,000 plus an amount equal to fifty percent (50%) of net equity proceeds received by the Company after the date of the most recent financial statements that are available as of the March 25, 2020, measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, (iv) a maximum recourse leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not greater than an amount equal to consolidated tangible net worth as of the measurement date multiplied by 1.5, measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, (v) a maximum secured recourse leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not greater than an amount equal to 3.5% of consolidated total asset value (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and $299,000,000, (vi) a maximum adjusted secured leverage ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of not greater than 55%, measured as of the last day of each fiscal quarter, and (vii) liquidity (as defined in the Credit Agreement) of at least $75.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with these covenants. The obligations of the Borrower pursuant to the Credit Agreement are guaranteed by the Company and certain wholly-owned subsidiaries of the Company.
The indentures governing the notes limit Kennedy-Wilson, Inc.'s ability to incur additional indebtedness if, on the date of such incurrence and after giving effect to the new indebtedness, Kennedy-Wilson, Inc.'s maximum balance sheet leverage ratio (as defined in the indenture) is greater than 1.50 to 1.00. This ratio is measured at the time of incurrence of additional indebtedness.
The KWE Notes require KWE to maintain (i) consolidated net indebtedness (as defined in the trust deed for the notes) of no more than 60% of the total asset value; (ii) consolidated secured indebtedness (less cash and cash equivalents) of no more than 50% of total asset value; (iii) an interest coverage ratio of at least 1.5 to 1.0, and (iv) unencumbered assets of no less than
125% of the unsecured indebtedness (less cash & cash equivalents). The covenants associated with KWE Notes are not an obligation of KWH and these amounts are presented as a component of our investment debt as it is an unsecured obligation relating to an underlying investment of ours. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with these covenants.
In addition, loan agreements that govern the Company's property-level non-recourse financings that are secured by its properties may contain operational and financial covenants, including but not limited to, debt yield related covenants and debt service coverage ratio covenants and, with respect to mortgages secured by certain properties in Europe, loan-to-value ratio covenants. Property-level non-recourse financings with such loan-to-value covenants require that the underlying properties are valued on a periodic basis (at least annually). The failure by the Company to comply with such covenants and/or secure waivers from lenders could result in defaults under these instruments. In addition, if the Company defaults under a mortgage loan and/or such loan is accelerated by the lender, it may automatically be in default under any of its property and corporate unsecured loans that contain cross-default and/or cross-acceleration provisions. Please also see Part I. Item 1A Risk Factors. As of December 31, 2021, the Company received waivers on certain debt covenants on a loan agreement governing a total of $71.9 million or 2% of our consolidated mortgage balance. The mortgage is secured by a retail shopping center in the United Kingdom. The loan is non-recourse to the Company and the waiver is through February 28, 2022 and covers interest coverage and loan-to-value covenants. The Company expects to be in compliance with these covenants subsequent to December 31, 2021, or will seek additional waivers and/or extensions as, and if needed. In the event the Company is required to seek such additional waivers and/or extensions, the Company is currently confident that it will be able to secure the same. The Company is current on all payments (principal and interest) for its property-level mortgages including the loans discussed above.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company was in compliance with or had received waivers on property-level mortgages on all covenant calculations after taking into consideration the waivers discussed above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Guarantees
We have provided guarantees associated with loans secured by consolidated assets. At December 31, 2021, the maximum potential amount of future payments (undiscounted) we could be required to make under the guarantees was approximately $186.0 million at December 31, 2021. The guarantees expire through 2031 and our performance under the guarantees would be required to the extent there is a shortfall in liquidation between the principal amount of the loan and the net sale proceeds of the applicable properties. If we were to become obligated to perform on these guarantees, it could have an adverse effect on our financial condition.
As of December 31, 2021, we have unfulfilled capital commitments totaling $113.7 million to our unconsolidated investments and $21.6 million to our loan portfolio. In addition to the unfunded capital commitments on its joint venture investments, the Company has $140.3 million of equity commitments relating on consolidated and unconsolidated development projects. As we identify investment opportunities in the future, we may be called upon to contribute additional capital to unconsolidated investments in satisfaction of our capital commitment obligations.
Non-Recourse Carve Out Guarantees
Most of our real estate properties within our equity partnerships are encumbered by traditional non-recourse debt obligations. In connection with most of these loans, however, we entered into certain “non-recourse carve out” guarantees, which provide for the loans to become partially or fully recourse against us if certain triggering events occur. Although these events are different for each guarantee, some of the common events include:
•the special purpose property-owning subsidiary’s filing a voluntary petition for bankruptcy;
•the special purpose property-owning subsidiary’s failure to maintain its status as a special purpose entity; and
•subject to certain conditions, the special purpose property-owning subsidiary’s failure to obtain lender’s written consent prior to any subordinate financing or other voluntary lien encumbering the associated property.
In the event that any of these triggering events occur and the loans become partially or fully recourse against us, our business, financial condition, results of operations and common stock price could be materially adversely affected.
In addition, other items that are customarily recourse to a non-recourse carve out guarantor include, but are not limited to, the payment of real property taxes, liens which are senior to the mortgage loan and outstanding security deposits.
Impact of Inflation and Changing Prices
Inflation has not had a significant impact on the results of operations of our company in recent years.
Our exposure to market risk from changing prices consists primarily of fluctuations in rental rates of commercial and multifamily properties, market interest rates on investment mortgages and debt obligations and real estate property values. Rental rate increases are dependent upon market conditions and the competitive environments in the respective locations of the properties. To the extent that we engage in development activities, we may have exposure to changing prices in materials or cost of labor. The revenues of the investment management operations with respect to rental properties are highly dependent upon the aggregate rents of the properties managed, which are affected by rental rates and building occupancy rates. Employee compensation is the principal cost element of investment management.
Qualitative and Quantitative Disclosures about Market Risk
Our primary market risk exposure relates to changes in interest rates in connection with our short-term borrowings, some of which bear interest at variable rates based on the lender’s base rate, prime rate, EURIBOR, GBP LIBOR, or LIBOR plus an applicable borrowing margin. These borrowings do not give rise to a significant interest rate risk because they have short maturities. However, the amount of income or loss we recognize for unconsolidated joint ventures or consolidated interest expense from property level debt may be impacted by changes in interest rates. Our exposure to market risk also consists of foreign currency exchange rate fluctuations related to our international operations.
Interest Rate Risk
We have established an interest rate management policy, which attempts to minimize our overall cost of debt while taking into consideration the earnings implications associated with the volatility of short-term interest rates. As part of this policy, we have elected to maintain a combination of variable and fixed rate debt. As of December 31, 2021, 79% of our consolidated debt is fixed rate, 12% is floating rate with interest caps and 9% is floating rate without interest caps.
We hold variable rate debt on some of our consolidated properties that are subject to interest rate fluctuations. In order to mitigate some of the risk associated with increasing interest rates we have purchased interest rate caps that limit the amount that interest expense can increase with rate increases. However, some of our debt is uncapped and the mortgages that do have interest caps are subject to increased interest expense until rates hit the level of caps that have been purchased. If there was a 100-basis point increase or decrease, we would have a $7.4 million increase in interest expense or negligible interest expense savings during 2021 on our current consolidated mortgages. The weighted average strike price on caps and maturity of Kennedy Wilson’s variable rate mortgages is 1.65% and approximately 2.2 years, respectively, as of December 31, 2021.
The table below represents contractual balances of our financial instruments at the expected maturity dates as well as the fair value as of December 31, 2021. The weighted average interest rate for the various assets and liabilities presented are actual as of December 31, 2021. We closely monitor the fluctuation in interest rates, and if rates were to increase significantly, we believe that we would be able to either hedge the change in the interest rate or refinance the loans with fixed interest rate debt. All instruments included in this analysis are non-trading.
(1) Interest rate sensitive assets' weighted average interest rates are exclusive of non-performing receivables.
Currency Risk - Foreign Currencies
The financial statements of Kennedy Wilson's subsidiaries located outside the United States are measured using the local currency as this is their functional currency. The assets and liabilities of these subsidiaries are translated at the rates of exchange at the balance sheet date and income and expenses are translated at the average monthly rate. The foreign currencies include the euro and the British pound sterling. Cumulative translation adjustments, to the extent not included in cumulative net income, are included in the consolidated statement of equity as a component of accumulated other comprehensive income. Currency translation gains and losses and currency derivative gains and losses will remain in other comprehensive income unless and until the Company substantially liquidates underlying investments.
Approximately 44% of our investment account is invested through our foreign platforms in their local currencies. Investment level debt is generally incurred in local currencies and therefore we consider our equity investment as the appropriate exposure to evaluate for hedging purposes. Additionally, the costs to operate these businesses, such as compensation, overhead and interest expense are incurred in local currencies. We typically do not hedge future operations or cash flows of operations denominated in foreign currencies, which may have a significant impact on the results of our operations for both the Consolidated and Co-Invest segments. In order to manage the effect of these fluctuations, we generally hedge our book equity exposure to foreign currencies through currency forward contracts and options. As of December 31, 2021 we have hedged 89% of the gross asset carrying value of our euro denominated investments and 87% of the gross asset carrying value of our GBP denominated investments.
Our investment management businesses typically do not require much capital, so foreign currency translation and derivative activity primarily relates to the investments segment as that has greater balance sheet exposure to foreign currency fluctuations.
If there was a 5% increase or decrease in foreign exchange rates on the currencies we invest to the U.S. Dollar our net asset value would increase by $26.1 million or decrease by $26.3 million. If rates moved 10% we would have an increase of $52.0 million and a decrease of $52.6 million.
Financial Measures and Descriptions.
Rental - rental income is comprised of rental revenue earned by our consolidated real estate investments.
Hotel - hotel income is comprised of hotel revenue earned by our consolidated hotels.
Investment Management Fees - Investment management fees are primarily comprised of base asset management fees, and acquisition fees generated by our investment management division. Fees earned from consolidated investments are eliminated in consolidation with the amount relating to our equity partners being recognized through income attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Property Services - Property services fees are primarily comprised of property management fees, leasing fees and sales commissions generated by our property services division until its sale in the fourth quarter of 2020. Fees earned from consolidated investments are eliminated in consolidation with the amount relating to our equity partners being recognized through income attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Loans and other income - Interest income earned on consolidated loans
Income from unconsolidated investments - principal co-investments - Income from unconsolidated investments - principal co-investments consists of the Company’s share of income or loss earned on investments in which the Company can exercise significant influence but does not have control. Income from unconsolidated investments includes income or loss from ordinary course operations of the underlying investment, gains or losses, on sale, fair value gains and losses
Income from unconsolidated investments - performance allocations - Performance allocations relate to allocations to the general partner, special limited partner or asset manager of Kennedy Wilson's co-investments it manages based on the cumulative performance of the fund and are subject to preferred return thresholds of the limited partners.
Gain on sale of real estate, net - Gain on sale of real estate, net relates to the amount received over the carrying value of assets sold that met the definition of a business under U.S. GAAP.
Rental - rental expenses consists of the expenses of our consolidated real estate investments, including items such as property taxes, insurance, maintenance and repairs, utilities, supplies, salaries and management fees.
Hotel - hotel expenses consists of expenses of our consolidated hotel investments, including items such as property taxes, insurance, maintenance and repairs, utilities, supplies, salaries and management fees.
Compensation and related - employee compensation, comprising of salary, bonus, employer payroll taxes and benefits paid on behalf of employees
Share-based compensation - compensation associated with the grants of share-based awards.
Performance allocation compensation - compensation associated with up to thirty-five percent (35%) of any performance allocation earned by certain commingled funds and separate account investments to be allocated to certain non-NEO employees of the Company.
General and administrative - general and administrative expenses represent administrative costs necessary to run Kennedy Wilson's businesses and include items such as occupancy and equipment expenses, professional fees, public company costs, travel and related expenses, and communications and information services.
Depreciation and amortization - depreciation and amortization is comprised of depreciation expense which is recognized ratably over the useful life of an asset and amortization expense which primarily consist of the amortization of assets allocated to the value of in-place leases upon acquisition of a consolidated real estate asset.
Interest expense - Interest expense represents interest costs associated with our senior notes payable, revolving credit facility, mortgages on our consolidated real estate, and unsecured debt held by KWE.
Other income (loss) - Other income (loss) includes the realized foreign currency exchange income or loss relating to the settlement of foreign transactions during the year which arise due to changes in currency exchange rates, realized gains or losses related to the settlement of derivative instruments, the gain or loss on the sale of marketable securities, interest income on bank deposits, commission expenses on property services and transaction related expenses related to unsuccessful deals.
Income taxes - The Company’s services business operates globally as corporate entities subject to federal, state, and local income taxes and the investment business operates through various partnership structures to acquire wholly-owned or jointly-owned investments in multifamily, commercial, residential and development properties. The Company’s distributive share of income from its partnership investments will be subject to federal, state, and local taxes and the related tax provision attributable to the Company’s share of the income tax is reflected in the consolidated financial statements.
Noncontrolling Interests - Noncontrolling interests represents income or loss attributable to equity partners for their ownership in investments which the Company controls. Income or loss is attributed to noncontrolling interest partners based on their respective ownership interest in an investment.
Accumulated other comprehensive income - Accumulated other comprehensive income represents the Company's share of foreign currency movement on translating Kennedy Wilson's foreign subsidiaries from their functional currency into the Company's reporting currency. These amounts are offset by Kennedy Wilson's effective portion of currency related hedge instruments.
Non-GAAP Measures and Certain Definitions
“KWH,” "KW," “Kennedy Wilson,” the "Company," "we," "our," or "us" refers to Kennedy-Wilson Holdings, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. The consolidated financial statements of the Company include the results of the Company's consolidated subsidiaries.
“KWE” refers to Kennedy Wilson Europe Real Estate Limited.
“Adjusted EBITDA” represents net income before interest expense, loss on early extinguishment of debt, our share of interest expense included in unconsolidated investments, depreciation and amortization, our share of depreciation and amortization included in investments in unconsolidated investments, provision for (benefit from) income taxes, our share of taxes include in unconsolidated investments, share-based compensation and EBITDA attributable to noncontrolling interests. Please also see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Non-GAAP measures” for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income as reported under GAAP. Our management uses Adjusted EBITDA to analyze our business because it adjusts net income for items we believe do not accurately reflect the nature of our business going forward or that relate to non-cash compensation expense or noncontrolling interests. Such items may vary for different companies for reasons unrelated to overall operating performance. Additionally, we believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors to assist them in getting a more accurate picture of our results from operations. However, Adjusted EBITDA is not a recognized measurement under GAAP and when analyzing our operating performance, readers should use Adjusted EBITDA in addition to, and not as an alternative for, net income as determined in accordance with GAAP. Because not all companies use identical calculations, our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies. Furthermore, Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of free cash flow for our management’s discretionary use, as it does not remove all non-cash items (such as non-cash acquisition-related gains or expenses) or consider certain cash requirements such as tax and debt service payments. The amount shown for Adjusted EBITDA also differs from the amount calculated under similarly titled definitions in our debt instruments, which are further adjusted to reflect certain other cash and non-cash charges and are used to determine compliance with financial covenants and our ability to engage in certain activities, such as incurring additional debt and making certain restricted payments.
“Adjusted Net Income” represents net income before depreciation and amortization, our share of depreciation and amortization included in unconsolidated investments, share-based compensation, net income attributable to noncontrolling
interests, before depreciation and amortization, preferred dividends and accretion of preferred stock issuance costs and one-time tax remeasurement. Please also see "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Certain Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations" for a reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income to net income as reported under GAAP.
“Consolidated Portfolio NOI” refers to the NOI that is generated from the properties that we have an ownership interest in and are held in our Consolidated Properties business segment. Please also see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Certain Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of Consolidated Portfolio NOI to net income as reported under GAAP.
"Equity partners" refers to non-wholly-owned subsidiaries that we consolidate in our financial statements under U.S. GAAP and third-party equity providers.
"Fee Bearing Capital" represents total third-party committed or invested capital that we manage in our joint-ventures and commingled funds that entitle us to earn fees, including without limitation, asset management fees, construction management fees, acquisition and disposition fees and/or performance allocations, if applicable.
"Gross Asset Value” refers to the gross carrying value of assets, before debt, depreciation and amortization, and net of noncontrolling interests.
"Real Estate Assets under Management" ("AUM") generally refers to the properties and other assets with respect to which we provide (or participate in) oversight, investment management services and other advice, and which generally consist of real estate properties or loans, and investments in joint ventures. Our AUM is principally intended to reflect the extent of our presence in the real estate market, not the basis for determining our management fees. Our AUM consists of the total estimated fair value of the real estate properties and other real estate related assets either owned by third parties, wholly-owned by us or held by joint ventures and other entities in which our sponsored funds or investment vehicles and client accounts have invested. Committed (but unfunded) capital from investors in our sponsored funds is not included in our AUM. The estimated value of development properties is included at estimated completion cost.
“Co-Investment Portfolio NOI” refers to the NOI that is generated from the properties that we have an ownership interest in and are held in our Co-investment Properties business segment. Please also see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Certain Non-GAAP Measures and Reconciliations” for a reconciliation of Co-Investment Portfolio NOI to net income as reported under GAAP.
"Net operating income" or " NOI” is a non-GAAP measure representing the income produced by a property calculated by deducting certain property expenses from property revenues. Our management uses net operating income to assess and compare the performance of our properties and to estimate their fair value. Net operating income does not include the effects of depreciation or amortization or gains or losses from the sale of properties because the effects of those items do not necessarily represent the actual change in the value of our properties resulting from our value-add initiatives or changing market conditions. Our management believes that net operating income reflects the core revenues and costs of operating our properties and is better suited to evaluate trends in occupancy and lease rates.
"Noncontrolling interests" represents the portion of equity ownership in a consolidated subsidiary not attributable to Kennedy Wilson.
“Same property” refers to properties in which Kennedy Wilson has an ownership interest during the entire span of both periods being compared. The same property information presented throughout this report is shown on a cash basis and excludes non-recurring expenses. This analysis excludes properties that are either under development or undergoing lease up as part of our asset management strategy.
We use certain non-GAAP measures to analyze our business, including Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income. We use these metrics for evaluating the success of our company and believe that they enhance the understanding of our operating results. A reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income is presented below:
(1) (2) See "Non-GAAP Measures and Certain Definitions" for definitions and discussion of Adjusted EBITDA.
(1) (2) See "Non-GAAP Measures and Certain Definitions" for definitions and discussion of Adjusted Net Income.
(3) Recorded as a result of US federal tax legislation, commonly referred to as the "Tax Cuts and Jobs Act", signed into law on December 22, 2017.
Net Operating Income
Same property analysis
The same property analysis reflects, and is weighted by, Kennedy Wilson's ownership in each underlying property. Previously, the Company had presented this analysis without adjusting for Kennedy Wilson's ownership interest.
The table below is a reconciliation of Non-GAAP measures included within the Company's same property analysis, to their most comparable GAAP measures.
(1) Represents rental revenue and rental expenses and hotel revenue and hotel expenses attributable to non-controlling interests.
(2) Represents the Company’s share of unconsolidated investment rental revenues and rental expenses, as applicable, which are within the applicable same property population.
(3) Represents properties excluded from the same property population that were purchased or sold during the applicable period.
(4) Represents properties excluded from the same property population that were not stabilized during the applicable periods.
(5) Represents other properties excluded from the same property population that were not classified as either a commercial or multifamily property within the Company’s portfolio. Also includes immaterial adjustments for foreign exchange rates, changes in ownership percentages, and certain non-recurring income and expenses.
Critical Accounting Policies
A critical accounting policy is one that involves an estimate or assumption that is subjective and requires judgment on the part of management about the effect of a matter that is inherently uncertain and is material to an entity’s financial condition and results of operations. Estimates are prepared using management’s best judgment, after considering past and current
economic conditions and expectations for the future. Changes in estimates could affect our financial position and specific items in our results of operations that are used by stockholders, potential investors, industry analysts and lenders in their evaluation of our performance. Of the significant accounting policies discussed in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, those presented below have been identified by us as meeting the criteria to be considered critical accounting policies. Refer to Note 2 for more information on these critical accounting policies.
Performance Allocations
Performance allocations or carried interest are allocated to the general partner, special limited partner or asset manager of Kennedy Wilson's real estate funds and fair value option unconsolidated investments based on the cumulative performance of the fund and are subject to preferred return thresholds of the limited partners and participants. At the end of each reporting period, Kennedy Wilson calculates the performance allocation that would be due as if the fair value of the underlying investments were realized as of such date, irrespective of whether such amounts have been realized. As the fair value of underlying investments varies between reporting periods, it is necessary to make adjustments to amounts recorded as performance allocations to reflect either (a) positive performance resulting in an increase in the performance allocations to the general partner or asset manager or (b) negative performance that would cause the amount due to Kennedy Wilson to be less than the amount previously recognized, resulting in a negative adjustment to performance allocations to the general partner or asset manager.
Real Estate Acquisitions
The purchase price of acquired properties is recorded to land, buildings and building improvements and intangible lease value (value of above-market and below-market leases, acquired in-place lease values, and tenant relationships, if any). The ownership of the other interest holders in consolidated subsidiaries is reflected as noncontrolling interests. Real estate is recorded based on cumulative costs incurred and allocated based on relative fair value.
The valuations of real estate are based on management estimates of the real estate assets using income and market approaches. The indebtedness securing the real estate is valued, in part, based on third party valuations and management estimates also using an income approach.
The indebtedness securing the real estate are valued, in part, based on third party valuations and management estimates also using an income approach. The use of different assumptions to value the acquired properties and intangible assets and assumed liabilities could affect the future revenues and expenses we recognize over the estimated remaining useful life or lease term.
Fair Value Investments
Kennedy Wilson records its investments in certain commingled funds it manages and sponsors (the "Funds") that are investment companies under the Investment Companies ASC Subtopic 946-10, based upon the net assets that would be allocated to its interests in the Funds assuming the Funds were to liquidate their investments at fair value as of the reporting date. Thus, the Funds reflect their investments at fair value, with unrealized gains and losses resulting from changes in fair value reflected in their earnings. Kennedy Wilson has retained the specialized accounting for the Funds as discussed in ASC Subtopic 323-10 in recording its equity in joint venture income from the Funds.
Additionally, Kennedy Wilson elected the fair value option for 47 investments in unconsolidated investment entities. Due to the nature of these investments, Kennedy Wilson elected to record these investments at fair value in order to report the value in the underlying investments in the results of our current operations.
The use of different assumptions to fair value these investments could have material impact on the consolidated statements of income.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.