ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements reflecting our current expectations, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial trends that may affect our future operating results or financial position. Actual results and the timing of events may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements due to a number of factors, including those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Forward-Looking Statements” appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on July 27, 2020 and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Simultaneously with the consummation of the Public Offering, we consummated the private sale of an aggregate of 6,481,550 warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share (“Class A common stock”) at $11.50 per share, to Kingswood Global Sponsor LLC, our sponsor, and one of the Company’s directors at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of approximately $6,481,550 (the “Private Placement”). We intend to consummate an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering (the “Public Offering”) that closed on November 24, 2020 (the “Closing Date”) and the Private Placement, and from additional issuances of, if any, our equity and our debt, or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
At December 31, 2021, we held cash of $838,478, current liabilities of $759,762 and deferred underwriting compensation of $4,025,000. Further, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a loss from operations of $1,208,657, including legal and professional fees of $570,523, directors’ fee of $131,250, insurance expenses of $150,000 and other general operation expenses totaling $356,884. In addition to the loss from operations, we incurred other net income of $762,922 consisting of interest income of $11,906 from the Trust and operating bank accounts, $759,227 gain from a decrease in the fair value of the Company’s warrant liability, offset by $8,211 in offering costs. Through December 31, 2021, our efforts have been limited to organizational activities, activities relating to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates and activities relating to general corporate matters. We have not generated any income, other than interest income earned on the proceeds held in the Trust and operating bank accounts. Additionally, we recognize non-cash gains and losses within other income (expense) related to changes in recurring fair value measurement of our warrant liabilities at each reporting period.
For the period from July 27, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, we incurred a loss from operations of $198,780, including franchise tax of $77,311. Net loss for the Company of $792,587 included the loss from operations, changes in fair value of warrant liability of $369,286, and transaction costs of $225,763, partially offset by interest income from the Trust Account of $1,242.
At December 31, 2021, $117,861,531 was held in the Trust Account (including $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting discounts and commissions).
Except for the withdrawal of interest to pay our taxes and up to $100,000 to pay dissolution expenses, if any, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation (the “Charter”) provides that none of the funds held in trust will be released from the Trust Account (i) the completion of an initial business combination; (ii) the redemption of any of the shares of Class A common stock included in the units sold in the Public Offering (the “Units”) properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Charter to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to redeem 100% of the common stock included in the Units being sold in the Public Offering if the Company does Offering if the Company does not complete an initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering or with respect to any other material provisions relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold in the Public Offering if we are unable to complete a business combination within such 18 month period. Through December 31, 2020, we have not withdrawn any funds from interest earned on the trust proceeds. Other than the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions, no amounts are payable to the underwriters of the Public Offering in the event of a business combination.
We have also agreed to reimburse an affiliate of the sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month in the event that such space and/or services are utilized and we do not pay a third party directly for such services. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. For the period from July 27, 2020 (date of inception) through December 31, 2020, the Company accrued $13,667 under this agreement and paid $12,000. For the year ended December 31, 2021 no amounts for these administrative services were charged to the statement of operations or paid.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside our Trust Account of $838,478, available for working capital needs. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $117,861,531 consisting of mutual funds. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account to pay our taxes. All remaining cash was held in the Trust Account and is generally unavailable for our use, prior to an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $619,361. Net loss of $445,735 was primarily driven by a change in the fair value of the warrants of $759,227, interest earned on cash held in Trust Account of $11,786, transaction costs of $8,211 and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses and prepaid expenses of $589,176.
On November 24, 2020, the Company completed the sale of 10,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $100,000,000.
Simultaneous with the closing of the Public Offering, the Company completed the sale of 6,050,000 warrants (the “Private Warrants”), at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating gross proceeds of $6,050,000, and completed the issuance to Oppenheimer & Co. Inc. 104,000 units (“Underwriter Units”) in lieu of 0.9% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering.
In connection with the Public Offering, the underwriters were granted a 30-day option from the date of the prospectus for the Public Offering to purchase up to 1,500,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any. Simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, the underwriters elected to exercise their full 1,500,000 Public Units over-allotment option which, at $10.00 per Unit, generated gross proceeds of $15,000,000. The Company, in parallel, consummated the private placement of an additional 431,550 Private Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, which generated total additional gross proceeds of $431,550.
Following our Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $117,848,550 ($10.25 per Unit) was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $6,854,972 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $2,300,000 of underwriting fees ($1,260,000 in cash and $1,040,000 in the form of 104,000 Units at $10.00), $4,025,000 of deferred underwriting discount and $529,972 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2020, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $117,849,745 (including approximately $1,195 of interest income) consisting of mutual funds. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $410,236. Net loss of $792,587 was impacted by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $369,286, transaction costs related to our IPO of $225,763 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account and operating account totaled $1,242. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $211,456 of cash.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriters’ discount) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes and liquidation expenses if we are unsuccessful in completing a business combination. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, or converted upon consummation of a business combination into additional Private Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant. As of December 31, 2020, no Working Capital Loans have been issued.
If our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, in addition to the access to the Working Capital Loans, we may need to obtain other financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
We have until May 23, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance of the financial statements. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after May 23, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any non-financial agreements involving assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities other than an administrative agreement to reimburse our sponsor for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to members of the
Company’s management team by the sponsor, members of our sponsor, and the Company’s management team or their affiliates in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month in the event such space and/or services are utilized and the Company does not pay a third party directly for such services, from the date of closing of the Public Offering. Upon completion of a business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per units, or $4,025,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Registration Rights
The holders of (i) the Founder Shares, which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of the Public Offering, (ii) Private Warrants, which were issued in a private placement simultaneously with the closing of the Public Offering, and the common stock underlying such Private Warrants and (iii) Private Warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and the securities underlying such securities) have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that the Company register such securities for sale under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders will have “piggy-back” registration rights to include their securities in other registration statements filed by the Company, subject to certain limitations. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the condensed financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASC 815”), under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the Statement of Operations in the period of change.
Redeemable Shares of Class A Common Stock
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our redeemable Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of redeemable Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as redeemable Class A common stock and non-redeemable Class A and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of stock. The 15,184,550 potential common stock for outstanding warrants to purchase the Company’s stock were excluded from diluted earnings per share for the period from July 27, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2021 because the warrants are contingently exercisable,
and the contingencies have not yet been met. As a result, diluted net loss per common stock is the same as basic net loss per common stock for the periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that the ASU has on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.