ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) section discusses our results of operations, liquidity and financial condition and certain factors that may affect our future results. You should read this MD&A in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included elsewhere in this report.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our risk factors, financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Risk factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
INTRODUCTION
Management's Discussion and Analysis (“MD&A”) of our financial condition and results of operations is provided as a supplement to the accompanying financial statements and related notes to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, the changes in our financial condition and the results of operations.
Overview
KwikClick, Inc., a Delaware corporation was organized pursuant to the laws of the State of Delaware on November 16, 1993 under the name of CSL Lighting Manufacturing, Inc. On February 5, 2001, the Company amended its Certificate of Incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State to change its name to “TBDOne, Inc.” On November 14, 2012, the Company amended its Certificate of Incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State to change its name to “Fortecx, Inc.” to reflect the Company’s business of working with and acquiring and developing software platforms in the foreign exchange trading industry. The results were mixed, and management did not believe that the business line was likely to be successful. As a result, in approximately October 2016, the Company formally divested itself of foreign exchange related software and shifted its interest toward data centers with an intent to access to significant power sources and a focus on accommodating hardware such as central processing units (CPU), graphical processing units (GPU), field-programmable gate array (FPGA) processors, and application-specific integrated circuits (ASIC). The results were mixed, and management did not believe that the business line was likely to be successful. In 2020, the Company’s focus turned to its current KwikClick business.
Increase of Authorized Common Stock
On June 10, 2020, the Company amended its Certificate of Incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State to increase its authorized common stock to 5,000,000,000 shares from 150,000,000 shares.
Acquisition of 100% of KwikClick, LLC by KwikClick, Inc., Name change, Reduction of Authorized Stock, and 1-for-40 Reverse Stock Split.
On June 10, 2020, the Company entered into an Agreement and Plan of Exchange (“Exchange”) with KwikClick, LLC (“Kwiksub”). Pursuant to the Exchange, all of the 100,000 authorized, issued and outstanding units of KwikClick, LLC were transferred to the Company in exchange for 98,928,848 shares of Common Stock of the Company (at the time of the acquisition, prior to the 1-for-40 reverse stock split described below, the number of Company shares exchange were just under 4,000,000,000 in pre-reverse split shares). As a result of the Exchange, Kwiksub became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. At the time of the Exchange Fred W. Cooper was appointed CEO of the Company and has served as the principal manager of both the Company and Kwiksub since that time.
In connection with the acquisition of Kwiksub, on September 30, 2020, the Company amended its Certificate of Incorporation with the Delaware Secretary of State to change its name to KwikClick, Inc. and to decrease its authorized common stock to 250,000,000 shares from 5,000,000,000 shares in connection with a 1-for-40 reverse stock split. The 1-for-40 reverse stock split effectuated on November 12, 2020.
Revenues
As of the date of the December 31, 2021 financial statements, the Company is early revenue. The Company commenced revenue generation in September 2021 in connection with its software license with NewAge. Despite the license agreement being the source of the Company’s initial revenue related to its recent business pivot, revenues are anticipated to be primarily sourced from the Company taking a portion of revenue generated through the KwikClick platform. The platform is designed to allow sellers to make products or services available on the KwikClick platform and offer a self-determined discount on good(s) or service(s) or entire order(s) in exchange for exposure and substantially increased sales volume from KwikClick participants. This discount provided by third-party sellers of products is divided among the purchaser (0-10%), KwikClick (15-25%) and the balance is paid in the form of commissions to other participants on social media who introduce the product to contacts, friends, followers etc. that result in additional purchases.
Operating Expenses
Since KwikClick, LLC’s inception in 2020, the Company has spent considerable time and effort developing its intellectual property and business plan. Initially in 2020, the most significant costs were for legal counsel, including patent and trademark counsel. Our patent counsel has prepared and filed dozens of patent applications. Operating expenses for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021 were $2,545,691 as compared to $182,609 for the comparable prior year period, an increase of $2,363,082 or 1,294%. The increase is primarily a result of issuing 6,000,000 shares of common stock for services with a fair value of $120,000, issuing 400,000 stock options with fair value of $302,758 along with adding approximately 35 employees and consultants to our monthly expense outlays, including approximately a dozen full-time employees. The employees and consultants worked on design and coding of our website, applications and platform, marketing, legal, accounting and typical general and administrative expenses in connection with running the business. The expenses in connection with the Company’s primary revenue source is expected to mostly consists of Commission payments made to influencers/users of the KwikClick platform.
Liquidity and capital resources
Since the acquisition of the KwikClick subsidiary in June 2020, the Company has been primarily funded by loans and sales of stock to third-party investors. In 2020, we raised $1,129,432 by issuing debt and selling shares of common stock as follows: On August 31, 2020, we borrowed $500,000 from an investor in order to fund the development of the KwikClick business. A significant portion of the funds were used to pay for the drafting of a number of patent applications and the related patent filing fees. On October 23, 2020, the investor converted his $500,000 loan into 5,000,000 shares of the Company’s common stock (post 1-for-40 reverse split stock) at an exercise price of $0.10 per share. In addition, during 2020, we raised an additional $629,432 by selling 4,913,846 shares of our common stock at an average price of $0.128 (12.8 cents) per share. In 2021, we raised an additional $220,000 by selling 220,000 shares of common stock and also received $1,086,042 for stock that has yet to be issued.
In 2020 Fred Cooper loaned the Company $116,000 and was repaid $100,000. This increased the Note to Shareholder by $16,000 bring the balance $34,489 on December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $609,862 compared to $772,458 in cash on December 31, 2020. Most of the cash depletion in 2021 year to date has been payments to our legal counsel, in particular our patent counsel. We expect ongoing cost in connection with our patent applications but do expect them to relatively decrease in the coming 12 months. Based on currently available capital resources (cash), we estimate that we would be able to conduct our planned operations for one or two months. We have increased our “burn rate” to approximately $200,000 per month. We estimate that at our current cash “burn rate”, we cannot survive for more than a month or two unless we continue to receive revenues from New Age pursuant to the SL Agreement, increase commission revenues, and obtain at least another $1,000,000 to $2,000,000 in additional equity financing. There is no assurance that we can maintain revenues, increase revenues and/or obtain the necessary equity financing, much less on reasonable terms.
Our current liabilities as of December 31, 2021 totaled $2,038,398, compared to $47,945 on December 31, 2020. If the Company doesn’t begin to generate sufficient revenue or raise additional funds through financing, the Company may need to incur additional liabilities with certain related parties to sustain the Company’s existence. Currently, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise additional funds necessary to further develop or operate its business or that such funding can be at commercially reasonable terms.
We have historically been funded primary from private placements of stock and loans from Company affiliates and may continue to be so funded in for the foreseeable future. However, there is no assurance that we can obtain additional funds. We have generated limited revenue though we have developed much of our technology in order to initiate business in the online, social media marketing space. We have also been required to maintain our corporate existence and satisfy the requirements of being a public company since we have become a filer with the SEC. We will need to obtain capital to continue operations. There is no assurance that our Company will be able to secure such funding on acceptable (or any) terms. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we reported a net loss of $2,370,051 and had negative cash flows from operating activities totaling $1,026,829.
The revenues, if any, generated from our operations in the next 12 months may not be sufficient to fund our operations or planned growth. We may require additional capital to continue to operate our business, and to develop and expand our business. Sources of additional capital through various financing transactions or arrangements with third parties may include equity or debt financing, bank loans or revolving credit facilities. We may not be successful in locating suitable financing transactions in the time period required or at all, and we may not obtain the capital we require by other means.
We are obligated to file annual, quarterly and current reports with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”) and the rules subsequently implemented by the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board have imposed various requirements on public companies, including requiring changes in corporate governance practices. We expect these rules and regulations to increase our legal and financial compliance costs and to make some activities of ours more time- consuming and costly. To meet the needs to comply with the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act, we will need investment of capital.
Management has determined that additional capital will be required in the form of equity or debt securities. There is no assurance that management will be able to raise capital on terms acceptable to the Company. If we are unable to obtain enough additional capital, we may have to cease filing the required reports and cease operations completely. If we obtain additional funds by selling any of our equity securities or by issuing common stock to pay current or future obligations, the percentage ownership of our shareholders will be reduced, shareholders may experience additional dilution, or the equity securities may have rights preferences or privileges senior to the common stock.
Going Concern Risk
As reflected in the accompanying financial statements, the Company has a net loss of $2,370,051 for the year ended December 31, 2021. If the Company doesn’t begin to generate sufficient revenue or raise additional funds through financing, the Company may need to incur additional liabilities with certain related parties to sustain the Company’s
existence. There are currently no plans or agreements in place to provide such funding. The Company will require additional funding to finance the growth of its future operations as well as to achieve its strategic objectives. As a result of the Covid-19 crisis, the Company may experience difficulties in raising these funds due to economic impacts on funding sources. This raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on the Company’s ability to raise additional capital and generate revenue. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if the Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
The ability of the Company to continue its operations in the future is dependent on the plans of the Company’s management, which will include the raising of capital through debt and/or equity markets, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements. The Company may need to incur additional liabilities with certain related parties to sustain the Company’s existence. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to raise any additional capital.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that are material to investors.
Critical Accounting Policies
Critical accounting policies are discussed in Note 1 of the financial statements accompanying this annual report.