Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis
of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
As used in this Annual Report on Form 10-K (the “Report”), the terms “Quaker
Houghton,” the “Company,”
“we,” and “our”
refer to Quaker Chemical Corporation (doing business as Quaker
Houghton), its subsidiaries, and associated companies, unless the
context otherwise requires.
The term Legacy Quaker refers to the Company prior to the closing of its combination
with Houghton
International, Inc. (“Houghton”) (herein referred to as the “Combination”)
on August 1, 2019.
Throughout the Report, all figures
presented, unless otherwise stated, reflect the results of operations
of the combined company for the years ended December 31, 2020
and 2021; and for the year ended
December 31, 2019, the results of Legacy Quaker plus five months
of Houghton’s operations post-
closing of the Combination on August 1, 2019.
Executive Summary
Quaker Houghton is the global leader in industrial process fluids.
With a presence around the world, including
operations in over
25 countries, our customers include thousands of the world’s
most advanced and specialized steel, aluminum, automotive, aerospace,
offshore, can, mining, and metalworking companies.
Our high-performing, innovative and sustainable solutions are backed by best-
in-class technology,
deep process knowledge, and customized services.
Quaker Houghton is headquartered in Conshohocken,
Pennsylvania, located near Philadelphia in the U.S.
Overall, the Company’s 2021 performance
was highlighted by the continued recovery from the impacts of COVID-19 in
2020 as
well as the ongoing execution of integration activities and synergy
realization, which led to record net sales and adjusted EBITDA in
2021 despite the continued escalation in raw material cost headwinds
and global supply chain pressures.
Specifically, net sales of
$1,761.2 million in 2021
increased 24% compared to $1,417.7 million in 2020, primarily
due to higher volumes of approximately
13%, including additional net sales from acquisitions of 4%, increases from
selling price and product mix of approximately 8% and
the positive impact from foreign currency translation of 3%.
The increase in sales volumes
compared to 2020 was primarily a result
of continued new business wins and the year-over-year
improvement in end market conditions since the beginning of the COVID-19
pandemic in early 2020, partially offset by lower automotive
sales due to semiconductor shortages and delayed shipments due
to
supply chain challenges that occurred towards the end of 2021.
The increase in selling price and product mix is primarily the result of
the Company’s broad price
increases implemented during 2021 to help offset the unprecedented
increases in raw material costs as well
as global supply chain and logistics cost pressures the Company has experienced
throughout 2021.
The Company’s net income and
earnings per diluted share of $121.4 million and $6.77 in 2021, respectively,
increased compared
to $39.7 million and $2.22 per diluted share, respectively,
in 2020.
Excluding non-recurring items, including costs associated with the
Combination and other non-core items in each period, the Company’s
current year non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP earnings
per diluted share were $122.8 million and $6.85, respectively,
compared to $85.2 million and $4.78, respectively,
in 2020.
The
increase in the Company’s current
year earnings drove a 23% higher adjusted EBITDA to a full year record
of $274.1 million
compared to $222.0 million in 2020, primarily due to the significant increase
in net sales year-over-year as well as higher realized cost
synergies from the Combination, partially offset
by lower gross margins driven by higher raw material and input costs and the
impacts
of disruptions in the global supply chain experienced in 2021 as well as higher selling,
general and administrative expenses (“SG&A”)
including the impact of higher sales on direct selling expenses and additional
SG&A from recent acquisitions.
The Company’s 2021
operating performance in each of its four reportable segments: (i) Americas; (ii) EMEA;
(iii) Asia/Pacific;
and (iv) Global Specialty Businesses, reflect similar drivers to that of
its consolidated performance.
All four segments had higher net
sales compared to 2020 reflecting the continued rebound in 2021
from the negative impacts of COVID-19 on the Company’s
end
markets as well as continued success of winning new business in each of the
Company’s segments during 2021.
Each of the
Company’s geographic segments
benefited from higher organic sales volumes in 2021
while all of the Company’s segments also
benefitted from additional net sales from acquisitions, the positive impact
from foreign currency translation due to the strengthening of
most major currencies against the U.S. dollar,
and from increases in selling price and product mix.
As reported, each of the
Company’s reportable
segment operating earnings were higher compared to 2020 reflecting the increase
in net sales including the
benefits of acquisitions and other factors mentioned;
however, all of the Company’s
segment’s operating earnings were negatively
impacted by persistent raw material inflation, higher logistics, labor and manufacturing
costs, impacts of disruptions to the global
supply chain as well as higher SG&A which were a result of an increase
in direct selling expenses associated with year-over-year
inflation increases and increases due to the increase in net sales as well as the lower levels
of prior year SG&A as a result of
temporary cost saving measures implemented in response to COVID-19.
Additional details of each segment’s
operating performance
are further discussed in the Company’s
reportable segments review, in the
Operations section of this Item 7, below.
The Company generated net operating cash flow of $48.9 million in 2021
compared to $178.4 million in 2020.
The decrease in
net operating cash flow year-over-year
was primarily driven by a significant change in working capital compared
to the prior year,
mainly increases in accounts receivable, due to higher net sales and in inventory,
due to higher costs as well as building inventories in
response to global supply chain and logistics pressures.
The key drivers of the Company’s operating
cash flow and overall liquidity
are further discussed in the Company’s
Liquidity and Capital Resources section of this Item 7, below.
Overall, the Company’s 2021 results
were good and reflected the Company’s
ability to navigate through persistent raw material
cost pressures, supply chain challenges and automotive semiconductor
shortages.
Increases in net sales in all segments were driven by
the continued year-over-year improvement
in the Company’s end-markets and increased
customer demand from lower levels
experienced during 2020 as a result of COVID-19; however,
each segment was negatively impacted by the significant
escalation of
raw material costs as well as higher levels of SG&A compared to the prior
year which included certain temporary cost saving
measures adopted during the onset of COVID-19.
Continued strong customer demand in 2021 coupled with ongoing new business
wins and the execution of integration activities and synergy realization
helped to partially offset the negative impacts from the
continued escalation of raw material costs and continued supply chain pressures.
As the Company looks toward 2022, the business is well positioned to
continue to outpace market growth rates and deliver value-
added solutions and services to its customers.
Demand remains healthy across most of our end markets; however,
the Company
expects raw material cost pressures and supply chain disruptions to persist throughout
2022.
To mitigate these headwinds,
the
Company continues to implement further price actions and is actively
managing its cost structure.
The Company believes these
actions will begin to drive a recovery in margins as it progresses through
2022.
The Company remains committed to advancing its
customer intimate strategy and sustainability program and delivering
earnings growth in 2022 and beyond.
On-going impact of COVID-19
The global outbreak of COVID-19 has negatively impacted all locations where
the Company does business.
Although the
Company has now operated in this COVID-19 environment for almost
two years, the full extent of the outbreak and related business
impacts continue to remain uncertain and volatile, and therefore the
full extent to which COVID-19 may impact the Company’s
future
results of operations or financial condition is uncertain.
This outbreak has significantly disrupted the operations of the Company
and
those of its suppliers and customers.
During the pandemic, the Company initially experienced volume declines
and lower net sales as
compared to pre-COVID-19 levels, as further described in this section.
Management continues to monitor the impact that the
COVID-19 pandemic is having on the Company,
the overall specialty chemical industry and the economies and markets in which the
Company operates.
The prolonged pandemic and resurgences of the outbreak including as new
variants continue to emerge, and
continued restrictions on day-to-day life and business
operations as well as increased border controls or closures and transportation
disruptions may result in volume declines and lower net sales in future periods.
To the extent that the Company’s
customers and
suppliers continue to be significantly and adversely impacted by
COVID-19, this could reduce the availability,
or result in delays, of
materials or supplies to or from the Company,
which in turn could significantly interrupt the Company’s
business operations.
Given
this ongoing uncertainty,
the Company cautions that its future results of operations could be significantly adversely
impacted by
COVID-19.
Further, management continues to evaluate
how COVID-19-related circumstances, such as remote work arrangements,
illness or staffing shortages and travel restrictions have affected
financial reporting processes and systems, internal control over
financial reporting, and disclosure controls and procedures.
While the circumstances have presented and are expected to continue
to
present challenges, and have necessitated additional time and resources
to be deployed to sufficiently address the challenges brought
on by the pandemic, at this time, management does not believe that COVID-19
has had a material impact on financial reporting
processes, internal controls over financial reporting, or disclosure controls
and procedures.
The Company’s top priority,
especially during this pandemic, is to protect the health and safety of its employees
and customers,
while working to ensure business continuity to meet customers’ needs.
The Company continues to take steps to protect the health and
wellbeing of its people in affected areas through various
actions, including enabling work at home where needed and practicable, and
employing social distancing standards, implementing
travel restrictions where applicable, enhancing onsite hygiene practices, and
instituting visitation restrictions at the Company’s
facilities.
The Company has not and does not expect that it will incur material
expenses implementing these health and safety policies.
All of the Company’s more than 30 production
facilities worldwide are open
and operating and are deemed as essential businesses in the jurisdictions where
they are operating.
The Company believes that to date
it has been able to meet the needs of all its customers across the globe despite
the current economic challenges.
The Company’s fiscal
year 2021 showed year-over-year improvement
from the prior fiscal year and continued a trend of gradual volume improvement which
began in the second half of 2020.
The Company continues to expect that the impacts from COVID-19 will gradually
decline subject
to the effective containment of the virus and its variants and successful
distribution and acceptance of the available vaccines and
treatments.
However, the incidence of reported cases of COVID-19
or a variant in several geographies where the Company has
significant operations remains high and continues to evolve and it remains
highly uncertain as to how long the global pandemic and
related economic challenges will last and when our customers’ businesses will recover
to pre-COVID-19 levels.
The Company took
various actions to temporarily conserve cash and reduce costs since the onset of
the pandemic and these temporary initiatives were
designed and implemented so that the Company could successfully manage
through the challenging COVID-19 situation while
continuing to protect the health of its employees, meet customers’ needs,
maintain the Company’s long-term competitive
advantages
and above-market growth, and enable it to continue to effectively
integrate Houghton.
While the actions taken to date to protect our
workforce, to continue to serve our customers with excellence and to conserve
cash and reduce costs, have been effective thus far,
further actions to respond to the pandemic and its effects may
be necessary as conditions continue to evolve.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Quaker Houghton’s discussion
and analysis of its financial condition and results of operations are based
upon its consolidated
financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S.
GAAP”).
The preparation of these financial statements requires the Company
to make estimates and judgments that affect the
reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure
of contingent assets and liabilities.
On an
ongoing basis, the Company evaluates its estimates, including those related
to customer sales incentives, product returns, bad debts,
inventories, property,
plant and equipment (“PP&E”), investments, goodwill, intangible assets, income taxes,
business combinations,
restructuring, incentive compensation plans (including equity-based
compensation), pensions and other postretirement benefits,
contingencies and litigation.
Quaker Houghton bases its estimates on historical experience and on various
other assumptions that are
believed to be reasonable under such circumstances, the results of which
form the basis for making judgments about the carrying
values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
However, actual results may differ from
these
estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Quaker Houghton believes the following critical accounting policies describe
the more significant judgments and estimates used
in the preparation of its consolidated financial statements:
Accounts receivable and inventory exposures:
Quaker Houghton establishes allowances for doubtful accounts for estimated
losses resulting from the inability of its customers to make required
payments.
If the financial condition of the Company’s
customers
were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments,
additional allowances may be required.
As part of
our terms of trade, we may custom manufacture products for certain large
customers and/or may ship products on a consignment basis.
Further, a significant portion of our revenue
is derived from sales to customers in industries where companies have experienced
past
financial difficulties.
If a significant customer bankruptcy occurs, then we must judge the amount of proceeds,
if any, that may
ultimately be received through the bankruptcy or liquidation process.
These matters may increase the Company’s
exposure should a
bankruptcy occur, and may require
a write down or a disposal of certain inventory as well as the failure to collect receivables.
Reserves for customers filing for bankruptcy protection are established
based on a percentage of the amount of receivables outstanding
at the bankruptcy filing date.
However, initially establishing this reserve
and the amount thereof is dependent on the Company’s
evaluation of likely proceeds to be received from the bankruptcy process, which
could result in the Company recognizing minimal or
no reserve at the date of bankruptcy.
We generally reserve
for large and/or financially distressed customers on a specific review
basis,
while a general reserve is maintained for other customers based on
historical experience.
The Company’s consolidated
allowance for
doubtful accounts was $12.3 million and $13.1 million as of December 31,
and 2020, respectively.
The Company recorded
expense to increase its provision for doubtful accounts by $0.7 million,
$3.6 million and $1.9 million for the years ended December
31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Changing the amount of expense recorded to the Company’s
provisions by 10% would have
increased or decreased the Company’s
pre-tax earnings by $0.1 million, $0.4
million and $0.2 million for the years ended December
31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
See Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Environmental and litigation reserves:
Accruals
for environmental and litigation matters are recorded when
it is probable that a
liability has been incurred and the amount of the liability can be reasonably
estimated.
Environmental costs and remediation costs are
capitalized if the costs extend the life, increase the capacity or improve
the safety or efficiency of the property from the date acquired
or constructed, and/or mitigate or prevent contamination in the future.
Estimates for accruals for environmental matters are based on a
variety of potential technical solutions, governmental regulations and
other factors, and are subject to a wide range of potential costs
for remediation and other actions.
A considerable amount of judgment is required in determining the most likely
estimate within the
range of total costs, and the factors determining this judgment may vary
over time.
Similarly, reserves for litigation
and similar
matters are based on a range of potential outcomes and require considerable
judgment in determining the most probable outcome.
If
no amount within the range is considered more probable than any other
amount, the Company accrues the lowest amount in that range
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of
this Report.
Realizability of equity investments:
The Company holds equity investments in various foreign companies
where it has the
ability to influence, but not control, the operations of the entity
and its future results.
The Company would record an impairment
charge to an investment if it concluded that a decline in value that was other
than temporary occurred.
Adverse changes in market
conditions, poor operating results of underlying investments, devaluation
of foreign currencies or other events or circumstances could
result in losses or an inability to recover the carrying value of the investments,
potentially leading to an impairment charge in the
future.
The carrying amount of the Company’s
equity investments as of December 31, 2021
was $95.3
million, which included four
investments: $21.5 million for a 32% interest in Primex, Ltd. (Barbados);
$7.1 million for a 50% interest in Nippon Quaker Chemical,
Ltd. (Japan); $0.3 million for a 50% interest in Kelko Quaker Chemical, S.A.
(Panama); and $66.4 million for a 50% interest in Korea
Houghton Corporation (Korea).
The Company also has a 50% interest in a Venezuelan
affiliate, Kelko Quaker Chemical, S.A
(Venezuela).
Due to heightened foreign exchange controls, deteriorating economic circumstances
and other restrictions in Venezuela,
during 2018 the Company concluded that it no longer had significant
influence over this affiliate.
Prior to this determination, the
Company historically accounted for this affiliate under
the equity method.
As of December 31, 2021
and 2020, the Company had no
remaining carrying value for its investment in Venezuela.
See Note 17 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this
Report.
Tax
exposures, uncertain tax positions and valuation allowances:
Quaker Houghton records expenses and liabilities for taxes
based on estimates of amounts that will be determined as deductible in tax
returns filed in various jurisdictions.
The filed tax returns
are subject to audit, which often occur several years subsequent to
the date of the financial statements.
Disputes or disagreements may
arise during audits over the timing or validity of certain items or deductions,
which may not be resolved for extended periods of time.
The Company also evaluates uncertain tax positions on all income tax
positions taken on previously filed tax returns or expected to be
taken on a future tax return in accordance with FIN 48, which prescribes
the recognition threshold and measurement attributes for
financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken
or expected to be taken on a tax return and, also, whether the
benefits of tax positions are probable or if they will be more likely than not to be sustained upon
audit based upon the technical merits
of the tax position.
For tax positions that are determined to be more likely than not to be sustained upon audit, the
Company
recognizes the largest amount of benefit that is greater
than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement in the financial
statements.
For tax positions that are not determined to be more likely than not
sustained upon audit, the Company does not recognize
any portion of the benefit in its financial statements.
In addition, the Company’s
continuing practice is to recognize interest and/or
penalties related to income tax matters in income tax expense.
Also, the Company nets its liability for unrecognized tax benefits
against deferred tax assets related to net operating losses or other tax credit carryforward
on the basis that the uncertain tax position is
settled for the presumed amount at the balance sheet date.
Quaker Houghton also records valuation allowances when necessary
to reduce its deferred tax assets to the amount that is more
likely than not to be realized.
While the Company has considered future taxable income and assesses the need for
a valuation
allowance, in the event Quaker Houghton were to determine that it would
be able to realize its deferred tax assets in the future in
excess of its net recorded amount, an adjustment to the deferred
tax asset would increase income in the period such determination was
made.
Likewise, should the Company determine that it would not be able to realize all or part of
its net deferred tax assets in the
future, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset would be charged
to income in the period such determination was made.
Both
determinations could have a material impact on the Company’s
financial statements.
Pursuant to the Tax
Cuts and Jobs Act (“U.S. Tax
Reform”), the Company recorded a $15.5 million transition tax liability
for
U.S. income taxes on the undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries.
As of December 31, 2021, $7.0 million in installment have
been paid with the remaining $8.5 million to be paid through installments in future
years.
However, the Company may also be subject
to other taxes, such as withholding taxes and dividend distribution taxes,
if these undistributed earnings are ultimately remitted to the
U.S.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a deferred tax liability of
$8.4 million, which primarily represents the estimate of
the non-U.S. taxes the Company will incur to remit certain previously
taxed earnings to the U.S.
It is the Company’s current intention
to reinvest its future undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries to support
working capital needs and certain other growth
initiatives outside of the U.S.
The amount of such undistributed earnings at December 31, 2021
was approximately $377.4
million.
Any tax liability which might result from ultimate remittance of these earnings
is expected to be substantially offset by
foreign tax credits (subject to certain limitations).
It is currently impractical to estimate any such incremental tax expense.
See Note
10 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Goodwill and other intangible assets:
The Company accounts for business combinations under the acquisition
method of
accounting.
This method requires the recording of acquired assets, including separately identifiable
intangible assets, at their
acquisition date fair values.
Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair value of the identifiable
net assets acquired is
recorded as goodwill.
The determination of the estimated fair value of assets acquired requires management’s
judgment and often
involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including
assumptions with respect to future cash inflows and outflows,
discount rates, royalty rates, asset lives and market multiples, among other
items.
When necessary, the Company consults with
external advisors to help determine fair value.
For non-observable market values, the Company may determine fair value
using
acceptable valuation principles, including the excess earnings, relief
from royalty, lost profit or cost
methods.
The Company amortizes definite-lived intangible assets on a straight-line
basis over their useful lives.
Goodwill and intangible
assets that have indefinite lives are not amortized and are required to be assessed at least annually
for impairment.
The Company
completes its annual goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment
test during the fourth quarter of each year, or
more
frequently if triggering events indicate a possible impairment.
The Company’s consolidated
goodwill at both December 31, 2021 and
2020 was $631.2 million.
The Company completed its annual impairment assessment over goodwill during
the fourth quarter of 2021
by performing a qualitative assessment.
Based on the assessment performed, the Company concluded that there
was no evidence of
events or circumstances that would indicate a material change from
the Company’s prior year quantitative
assessment by reporting
unit and, therefore, no impairment charges were
warranted.
The Company’s consolidated indefinite
-lived intangible assets at
December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $196.9 million and $205.1 million,
respectively, which primarily
consists of Houghton and
Fluidcare
TM
trademarks and tradename.
The Company completed its annual indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment assessment
during the fourth quarter of 2021, and determined that no impairment
charge was warranted.
The determination of estimated fair
value of these indefinite-lived intangible assets is based on a relief from royalty
valuation method, which requires management’s
judgment and often involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions,
including assumptions with respect to royalty rates, as
well as revenue growth rates and terminal growth rates.
The Company’s impairment assessment
concluded that the carrying value of
acquired Houghton and Fluidcare
TM
trademarks and tradename intangible assets exceeded fair value by
approximately 61%.
See Note
16 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
As previously disclosed, as of March 31, 2020, the Company concluded that
the impact of COVID-19 did not represent a
triggering
event with regards to any of the Company’s
indefinite-lived and long-lived assets, except for the Company’s
Houghton and
Fluidcare
TM
trademarks and tradename indefinite-lived intangible assets.
In the first quarter of 2020, as a result of the impact of
COVID-19 driving a decrease in projected legacy Houghton net sales during
that year and the impact of the sales decline on projected
future legacy Houghton net sales as well as an increase in the weighted average
cost of capital assumption utilized in the quantitative
impairment assessment, the Company concluded that the estimated fair
values of the Houghton and Fluidcare
TM
trademarks and
tradename intangible assets were less than their carrying values.
As a result, an impairment charge of $38.0 million
was recorded
during the first quarter of 2020 to write down the carrying values of these intangible
assets to their estimated fair values.
Pension and Postretirement benefits:
The Company provides certain defined benefit pension and
other postretirement benefits
to current employees, former employees and retirees.
Independent actuaries, in accordance with U.S. GAAP,
perform the required
valuations to determine benefit expense and, if necessary,
non-cash charges to equity for additional minimum pension liabilities.
Critical assumptions used in the actuarial valuation include the weighted
average discount rate, which is based on applicable yield
curve data, including the use of a split discount rate (spot-rate approach)
for the U.S. plans and certain foreign plans, rates of increase
in compensation levels, and expected long-term rates of return
on assets.
If different assumptions were used, additional pension
expense or charges to equity might be required.
The following table highlights the potential impact on the Company’s
pre-tax earnings due to changes in assumptions with respect
to the Company’s defined benefit pension
and postretirement benefit plans, based on assets and liabilities as of December 31,
2021:
1/2 Percentage Point Increase
1/2 Percentage Point Decrease
(dollars in millions)
Foreign
U.S.
Total
Foreign
U.S.
Total
Discount rate (1)
$
(0.2)
$
0.2
$
0.0
$
0.3
$
(0.2)
$
0.1
Expected rate of return on plan
assets (2)
0.5
0.2
0.7
(0.5)
(0.2)
(0.7)
(1)
The weighted-average discount rate used to determine net periodic benefit
costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 was
1.4% for Foreign plans and 2.7% for U.S. plans.
(2)
The weighted average expected rate of return on plan assets used to determine
net periodic benefit costs for the year ended
December 31, 2021 was 2.1% for Foreign plans and 5.8% for U.S. plans.
Restructuring and other related liabilities:
A restructuring related program may consist of charges for
employee severance,
rationalization of manufacturing facilities and other related expenses.
To account for such, the
Company applies the Financial
Accounting Standards Board’s
guidance regarding exit or disposal cost obligations.
This guidance requires that a liability for a cost
associated with an exit or disposal activity be recognized when the liability
is incurred, is estimable, and payment is probable.
See
Note 7 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
See Note 3 of Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report
for a discussion regarding recently issued
accounting standards.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, the Company had cash, cash equivalents and
restricted cash of $165.2 million.
Total cash, cash
equivalents and restricted cash was $181.9 million at December
31, 2020.
The $16.7 million decrease in cash, cash equivalents and
restricted cash was the net result $49.1 million of cash used in investing
activities, $13.5 million of cash used in financing activities
and approximately $3.1 million of negative impacts due to the effect
of foreign currency translation on cash, partially offset by $48.9
million of cash provided by operating activities.
Net cash flows provided by operating activities were $48.9 million in
2021 compared to $178.4 million in 2020.
The Company’s
current year net operating cash flow decrease was primarily driven by
a significant change in working capital which more than offset
the Company’s higher earnings in 2021
.
The significant increase in current year net sales resulted in a large
increase in accounts
receivable in 2021 as compared to a significant decrease during
2020 as net sales and the associated accounts receivables significantly
declined in 2020
due to the negative impact from COVID-19.
In addition, the Company has experienced an increase in inventory in
2021 as a result of continued rising raw material costs as well as a build in
inventory to ensure the Company has appropriate stock to
meet customer demands in response to ongoing stress on the global supply
chain.
Net cash flows used in investing activities were $49.1 million in 2021
compared to $71.4 million in 2020.
This $22.3 million
decrease in cash outflows used in investing activities was due to lower cash payments
related to acquisitions during 2021 as a result of
the level of acquisition activity in each year and higher cash proceeds
from the disposition of assets, which includes the sale of certain
held-for-sale real property assets related to the Combination.
Capital expenditures also increased to $21.5 million in 2021 compared
to $17.9 million in 2020 due to the continued strategic and integration related
capital investments the Company has and continues to
make.
Net cash flows used in financing activities were $13.5 million in 2021
compared to $75.3 million in 2020.
The $61.8 million
decrease in net cash outflows from financing activities was primarily
driven by an increase in borrowings in the current year under the
Company’s revolving credit
facility compared to repayments in the prior year which was driven by significant
working capital
investment in the current year described above.
In addition, the Company paid $28.6 million of cash dividend during
2021, a $1.0
million or 4% increase in cash dividends compared to the prior year due to cash dividend
per share increases.
Finally, during 2020,
the Company used $1.0 million to purchase the remaining noncontrolling
interest in one of its South African affiliates.
Prior to this
buyout, this South African affiliate made a distribution
to the prior noncontrolling affiliate shareholder of approximately $0.8
million
in 2020.
There were no similar noncontrolling interest activities in 2021.
The Company’s primary credit facility
(the “Credit Facility”) is comprised of a $400.0 million multicurrency
revolver (the
“Revolver”), a $600.0 million term loan (the “U.S. Term
Loan”), each with the Company as borrower, and
a $150.0 million (as of
August 1, 2019) Euro equivalent term loan (the “Euro Term
Loan” and together with the “U.S. Term
Loan”, the “Term Loans”)
with
Quaker Chemical B.V.,
a Dutch subsidiary of the Company as borrower,
each with a five year term maturing in August 2024.
Subject
to the consent of the administrative agent and certain other conditions,
the Company may designate additional borrowers.
The
maximum amount available under the Credit Facility can be increased by
up to $300.0 million at the Company’s request
if there are
lenders who agree to accept additional commitments and the Company has
satisfied certain other conditions.
Borrowings under the
Credit Facility bear interest at a base rate or LIBOR plus an applicable margin
based upon the Company’s consolidated
net leverage
ratio.
On December 10, 2021, the Company amended the Credit Facility to include an update
to provide for the use of a non-USD
currency LIBOR successor rate.
The weighted average interest rate incurred on the outstanding borrowings
under the Credit Facility
during the year ended and as of December 31, 2021 was approximately
1.6%.
In addition to paying interest on outstanding principal
under the Credit Facility,
the Company is required to pay a commitment fee ranging from 0.2% to 0.3% depending
on the Company’s
consolidated net leverage ratio to the lenders under the Revolver in respect of
the unutilized commitments thereunder.
The Credit Facility is subject to certain financial and other covenants.
The Company’s initial consolidated net
debt to
consolidated adjusted EBITDA ratio could not exceed 4.25 to 1,
with step downs in the permitted ratio over the term of the Credit
Facility.
As of December 31, 2021, the consolidated net debt to consolidated
adjusted EBITDA ratio may not exceed 3.75 to 1.
The
Company’s consolidated
adjusted EBITDA to interest expense ratio may not be less than 3.0 to 1 over the
term of the agreement.
The
Credit Facility also prohibits the payment of cash dividends
if the Company is in default or if the amount of the dividends
paid
annually exceeds the greater of $50.0 million and 20% of consolidated adjusted
EBITDA unless the ratio of consolidated net debt to
consolidated adjusted EBITDA is less than 2.0 to 1, in which case there is no
such limitation on amount.
As of December 31, 2021
and 2020, the Company was in compliance with all of the Credit Facility covenants.
The Term Loans have quarterly
principal
amortization during their five year terms, with 5.0% amortization of
the principal balance due in years 1 and 2, 7.5% in year 3, and
10.0% in years 4 and 5, with the remaining principal amount due at maturity.
The Credit Facility is guaranteed by certain of the
Company’s domestic subsidiaries
and is secured by first-priority liens on substantially all of the assets of the
Company and the
domestic subsidiary guarantors, subject to certain customary exclusions.
The obligations of the Dutch borrower are guaranteed only
by certain foreign subsidiaries on an unsecured basis.
The Credit Facility required the Company to fix its variable interest rates on at least 20%
of its total Term Loans.
In order to
satisfy this requirement as well as to manage the Company’s
exposure to variable interest rate risk associated with the Credit Facility,
in November 2019, the Company entered into $170.0
million notional amounts of three year interest rate swaps at a base rate of 1.64%
plus an applicable margin as provided in the Credit Facility,
based on the Company’s consolidated
net leverage ratio.
At the time the
Company entered into the swaps, and as of December 31, 2021, the
aggregate interest rate on the swaps, including the fixed base rate
plus an applicable margin, was 3.1%.
The Company capitalized $23.7 million of certain third-party debt issuance
costs in connection with executing the Credit Facility.
Approximately $15.5 million of the capitalized costs were attributed to
the Term Loans and recorded
as a direct reduction of long-
term debt on the Company’s Consolidated
Balance Sheet.
Approximately $8.3 million of the capitalized costs were attributed
to the
Revolver and recorded within other assets on the Company’s
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
These capitalized costs are being
amortized into interest expense over the five year term of the Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had Credit Facility borrowings
outstanding of $889.6 million.
As of December 31, 2020,
the Company had Credit Facility borrowings outstanding of $887.1
million.
The Company has unused capacity under the Revolver of
approximately $184 million, net of bank letters of credit of approximately
$4 million, as of December 31, 2021.
The Company’s other
debt obligations are primarily industrial development bonds
,
bank lines of credit and municipality-related loans, which totaled $11.8
million and $12.1
million as of December 31, 2021
and 2020, respectively.
Total unused capacity under
these arrangements as of
December 31, 2021 was approximately $26 million.
The Company’s total net debt
as of December 31, 2021 was $736.2 million.
The Company estimates that it realized full year cost synergies related
to the Combination in 2021
of approximately $75 million
compared to $58 million in 2020.
The Company has fully achieved its annual target Combination cost synergies
of approximately $80
million going forward.
The Company incurred $18.6 million of total Combination, integration
and other acquisition-related expenses
in 2021, which includes $0.7 million of accelerated depreciation
and is net of a $5.4 million gain on the sale of certain held-for-sale
real property assets and $0.6 million of other income related to an indemnification
asset, described in the Non-GAAP Measures
section of this Item below.
The Company had aggregate net cash outflows of approximately $20.6 million
related to the Combination,
integration and other acquisition-related expenses during 2021.
Comparatively, in 2020, the
Company incurred $30.3 million of total
Combination, integration and other acquisition-related expenses, including
$0.8 million of accelerated depreciation, a $0.6 million loss
on the sale of held-for-sale assets, an $0.8 million of other income related to an indemnification
asset, and aggregate net cash outflows
related to these costs were approximately $29.4 million.
While the Company has incurred significant integration costs in 2019, 2020
and 2021, the Company expects to incur additional integration and operating
costs as well as higher capital expenditures to further
optimize its footprint, processes and other functions over the next several years.
Quaker Houghton’s management
approved, and the Company initiated, a global restructuring plan (the
“QH Program”) in the
third quarter of 2019 as part of its planned cost synergies associated
with the Combination and recorded $26.7 million in restructuring
and related charges in 2019.
The Company recognized an additional $1.4 million and $5.5 million
of restructuring and related charges
in 2021 and 2020, respectively,
as a result of the QH Program.
The QH Program includes restructuring and associated severance costs
to reduce total headcount by approximately 400 people globally and
plans for the closure of certain manufacturing and non-
manufacturing facilities.
In connection with the plans for closure of certain manufacturing and non-manufacturing
facilities, the
Company made a decision to make available for sale certain facilities during
the second quarter of 2020.
During the first quarter of
2021 and fourth quarter of 2020, certain of these facilities were sold
and the Company recognized a gain on disposal of $5.4 million
and a loss on disposal of $0.6 million, respectively,
included within other income (expense), net on the Consolidated Statement of
Income.
The exact timing and total costs associated with the QH Program will depend on a number of
factors and is subject to
change; however, reductions in headcount
and site closures have continued,
and the Company currently expects additional headcount
reductions and site closures to occur into 2022 and estimates that the anticipated
cost synergies realized under the QH Program will
approximate one-times restructuring costs incurred.
The Company made cash payments related to the settlement of restructuring
liabilities under the QH Program during 2021 of approximately $5.3 million
compared to $15.7 million in 2020.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company completed the termination
of the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan and funded the
plan on a termination basis with approximately $1.8 million, subject to final
true up adjustments.
In the third quarter of 2020, the
Company finalized the amount of liability and related annuity payments and
received a refund in premium of $1.6 million.
In
addition, the Company recorded a non-cash pension settlement charge
at plan termination of approximately $22.7 million in the first
quarter of 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s
gross liability for uncertain tax positions, including interest and penalties,
was $28.7
million.
The Company cannot determine a reliable estimate of the timing of cash flows
by period related to its uncertain tax position
liability.
However, should the entire liability be
paid, the amount of the payment may be reduced by up to $7.3 million as a result of
offsetting benefits in other tax jurisdictions.
During the year ended 2021, the Company recorded $13.1 million of non-income tax
credits for certain of its Brazilian subsidiaries.
The Company expects to utilize these credits to offset certain Brazilian
federal tax
payments over approximately two years, which began in the fourth quarter
of 2021.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
During the third quarter of 2021, two of the Company’s
locations suffered property damage as a result of flooding and fire.
The
Company maintains property insurance for all of its facilities globally.
The Company, its insurance
adjuster and insurance carrier are
actively managing the remediation and restoration activities associated
with both of these events and at this time the Company has
concluded, based on all available information and discussions with its insurance
adjuster and insurance carrier, that the losses incurred
during 2021 will be covered under the Company’s
property insurance coverage, net of an aggregate deductible of $2.0 million.
The
Company has received payments from its insurers of $2.1 million and has
recorded an insurance receivable associated with these
events of $0.7 million as of December 31, 2021.
The Company and its insurance carrier continue to review the impact on operations
as it relates to a potential business interruption insurance claim; however,
as of the date of this report, the Company cannot reasonably
estimate any probable amount of business interruption insurance
claim recoverable, therefore the Company has not recorded a gain
contingency for a possible business interruption insurance claim as of December
31, 2021.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
The Company believes that its existing cash, anticipated cash flows from
operations and available additional liquidity will be
sufficient to support its operating requirements and fund
its business objectives for at least the next twelve months and beyond,
including but not limited to, payments of dividends to shareholders, costs
related to the Combination and other acquisitions and as
well as ongoing integration and optimization,
pension plan contributions, capital expenditures, other business opportunities
(including
potential acquisitions),
implementing actions to achieve the Company’s
sustainability goals and other potential contingencies.
The
Company’s liquidity is affected
by many factors, some based on normal operations of our business and
others related to the impact of
the pandemic on our business and on global economic conditions as well as industry
uncertainties, which we cannot predict.
We also
cannot predict economic conditions and industry downturns or the
timing, strength or duration of recoveries.
We may seek,
as we
believe appropriate, additional debt or equity financing which would
provide capital for corporate purposes, working capital funding,
additional liquidity needs or to fund future growth opportunities, including
possible acquisitions and investments.
The timing and
amount of potential capital requirements cannot be determined at this time
and will depend on a number of factors, including the
actual and projected demand for our products, specialty chemical industry
conditions, competitive factors, and the condition of
financial markets, among others.
The following table summarizes the Company’s
contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, and the effect such
obligations
are expected to have on its liquidity and cash flows in future periods.
Pension and postretirement plan contributions beyond 2021 are
not determinable since the amount of any contribution is heavily dependent
on the future economic environment and investment
returns on pension trust assets.
The timing of payments related to other long-term liabilities which consists primarily
of deferred
compensation agreements and environmental reserves, also cannot
be readily determined due to their uncertainty.
Interest obligations
on the Company’s long-term
debt and capital leases assume the current debt levels will be outstanding for
the entire respective period
and apply the interest rates in effect as of December 31, 2021.
Payments due by period
(dollars in thousands)
2027 and
Contractual Obligations
Total
Beyond
Long-term debt
$
900,633
$
56,759
$
75,553
$
758,045
$
$
$
10,074
Interest obligations
39,975
14,287
13,184
10,751
Capital lease obligations
-
Operating leases
41,395
11,346
9,041
7,017
5,292
4,197
4,502
Purchase obligations
3,652
3,197
-
-
-
Transition tax
8,500
-
1,529
3,099
3,872
-
-
Pension and other postretirement plan
contributions
13,347
13,347
-
-
-
-
-
Other long-term liabilities (See Note 22 of
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements)
12,040
-
-
-
-
-
12,040
Total contractual
cash obligations
$
1,020,410
$
99,155
$
99,935
$
779,147
$
9,988
$
4,868
$
27,317
Non-GAAP Measures
The information in this Form 10-K filing includes non-GAAP (unaudited)
financial information that includes EBITDA, adjusted
EBITDA, adjusted EBITDA margin, non-GAAP operating
income, non-GAAP operating margin, non-GAAP net
income and non-
GAAP earnings per diluted share.
The Company believes these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful supplemental
information as they enhance a reader’s understanding
of the financial performance of the Company,
are indicative of future operating
performance of the Company,
and facilitate a comparison among fiscal periods, as the non-GAAP financial
measures exclude items
that are not indicative of future operating performance or not considered
core to the Company’s operations.
Non-GAAP results are
presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be
considered a substitute for the financial information
presented in accordance with GAAP.
The Company presents EBITDA which is calculated as net income attributable
to the Company before depreciation and
amortization, interest expense, net, and taxes on income before equity in net income
of associated companies.
The Company also
presents adjusted EBITDA which is calculated as EBITDA plus or minus
certain items that are not indicative of future operating
performance or not considered core to the Company’s
operations.
In addition, the Company presents non-GAAP operating income
which is calculated as operating income plus or minus certain items that are
not indicative of future operating performance or not
considered core to the Company’s
operations.
Adjusted EBITDA margin and non-GAAP operating margin
are calculated as the
percentage of adjusted EBITDA and non-GAAP operating income
to consolidated net sales, respectively.
The Company believes
these non-GAAP measures provide transparent and useful information and
are widely used by analysts, investors, and competitors in
our industry as well as by management in assessing the operating performance
of the Company on a consistent basis.
Additionally, the
Company presents non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP earnings per diluted share
as additional performance
measures.
Non-GAAP net income is calculated as adjusted EBITDA, defined above,
less depreciation and amortization, interest
expense, net, and taxes on income before equity in net income of associated
companies, in each case adjusted, as applicable, for any
depreciation, amortization, interest or tax impacts resulting from the non-core
items identified in the reconciliation of net income
attributable to the Company to adjusted EBITDA.
Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share is calculated as non-GAAP net income
per
diluted share as accounted for under the “two-class share method.”
The Company believes that non-GAAP net income and non-
GAAP earnings per diluted share provide transparent and useful information
and are widely used by analysts, investors, and
competitors in our industry as well as by management in assessing the operating
performance of the Company on a consistent basis.
The following tables reconcile the Company’s
non-GAAP financial measures (unaudited) to their most directly comparable
GAAP financial measures (dollars in thousands, unless otherwise noted,
except per share amounts):
Non-GAAP Operating Income and Margin Reconciliations
For the years ended December 31,
Operating income
$
150,466
$
59,360
$
46,134
Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses (a)
24,611
30,446
35,945
Restructuring and related charges (b)
1,433
5,541
26,678
Fair value step up of acquired inventory sold (c)
11,714
Executive transition costs (d)
2,986
-
-
Inactive subsidiary's non-operating litigation costs (e)
-
-
Customer bankruptcy costs (f)
-
1,073
Facility remediation costs, net (g)
1,509
-
-
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core equipment sale (h)
-
-
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (i)
-
38,000
-
Non-GAAP operating income
$
182,625
$
134,036
$
121,928
Non-GAAP operating margin (%) (r)
10.4%
9.5%
10.8%
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA Margin and
Non-GAAP Net Income Reconciliations
For the years ended December 31,
Net income attributable to Quaker Chemical Corporation
$
121,369
$
39,658
$
31,622
Depreciation and amortization (a)(p)
87,728
84,494
45,264
Interest expense, net (a)
22,326
26,603
16,976
Taxes on income before
equity in net income of associated companies (q)
34,939
(5,296)
2,084
EBITDA
266,362
145,459
95,946
Equity income in a captive insurance company (j)
(4,993)
(1,151)
(1,822)
Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses (a)
17,917
29,538
35,361
Restructuring and related charges (b)
1,433
5,541
26,678
Fair value step up of acquired inventory sold (c)
11,714
Executive transition costs (d)
2,986
-
-
Inactive subsidiary’s non
-operating litigation cost (e)
-
-
Customer bankruptcy costs (f)
-
1,073
Facility remediation costs, net (g)
2,066
-
-
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core equipment sale (h)
-
-
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment (i)
-
38,000
-
Pension and postretirement benefit (income) costs,
non-service components (k)
(759)
21,592
2,805
Gain on changes in insurance settlement restrictions of an inactive
subsidiary and related insurance insolvency recovery (l)
-
(18,144)
(60)
Brazilian non-income tax credits (m)
(13,087)
-
-
Currency conversion impacts of hyper-inflationary economies (n)
1,033
Adjusted EBITDA
$
274,109
$
221,974
$
173,112
Adjusted EBITDA margin (%) (r)
15.6%
15.7%
15.3%
Adjusted EBITDA
$
274,109
$
221,974
$
173,112
Less: Depreciation and amortization - adjusted (a)
87,002
83,732
44,680
Less: Interest expense, net - adjusted (a)
22,326
26,603
14,896
Less: Taxes on income
before equity in net income
of associated companies - adjusted (o)(q)
41,976
26,488
24,825
Non-GAAP net income
$
122,805
$
85,151
$
88,711
Non-GAAP Earnings per Diluted Share Reconciliations
For the years ending December 31,
GAAP earnings per diluted share attributable to
Quaker Chemical Corporation common shareholders
$
6.77
$
2.22
$
2.08
Equity income in a captive insurance company per diluted share (j)
(0.28)
(0.07)
(0.12)
Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses per diluted share (a)
0.79
1.31
2.05
Restructuring and related charges per diluted share (b)
0.07
0.23
1.34
Fair value step up of acquired inventory sold per diluted share (c)
0.03
0.01
0.58
Executive transition costs per diluted share (d)
0.13
-
-
Inactive subsidiary’s non
-operating litigation costs per diluted share (e)
0.04
-
-
Customer bankruptcy costs per diluted share (f)
-
0.02
0.05
Facility remediation costs, net per diluted share (g)
0.09
-
-
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core equipment
sale per diluted share (h)
-
-
0.02
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment per diluted share (i)
-
1.65
-
Pension and postretirement benefit costs, non-service
components per diluted share (k)
(0.04)
0.79
0.14
Gain on changes in insurance settlement restrictions of an inactive
subsidiary and related insurance insolvency recovery per diluted share (l)
-
(0.78)
0.00
Brazilian non-income tax credits per diluted share (m)
(0.46)
-
-
Currency conversion impacts of hyper-inflationary economies
per diluted share (n)
0.03
0.02
0.07
Impact of certain discrete tax items per diluted share (o)
(0.32)
(0.62)
(0.38)
Non-GAAP earnings per diluted share (s)
$
6.85
$
4.78
$
5.83
(a)
Houghton combination, integration and other acquisition-related
expenses include certain legal, financial, and other advisory and
consultant costs incurred in connection with post-closing integration
activities including internal control readiness and
remediation, as well as due diligence, regulatory approvals and closing
the Combination.
These costs are not indicative of the
future operating performance of the Company.
Approximately $0.6 million, $1.5 million and $9.4 million for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively,
of these pre-tax costs were considered non-deductible for the purpose of
determining the Company’s
effective tax rate, and, therefore, taxes on income before equity in
net income of associated
companies - adjusted reflects the impact of these items.
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the Company recorded $0.7 million, $0.8
million, and $0.6 million, respectively,
of accelerated depreciation related to certain of the Company’s
facilities, which is
included in the caption “Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses” in the reconciliation of
operating income to non-GAAP operating income and included in the
caption “Depreciation and amortization” in the
reconciliation of net income attributable to the Company to EBITDA, but
excluded from the caption “Depreciation and
amortization - adjusted” in the reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to
non-GAAP net income attributable to the Company.
During
2019, the Company incurred $2.1 million of ticking fees to maintain the bank
commitment related to the Combination.
These
interest costs are included in the caption “Interest expense, net” in the reconciliation
of net income attributable to the Company to
EBITDA, but are excluded from the caption “Interest expense, net
- adjusted” in the reconciliation of adjusted EBITDA to non-
GAAP net income.
During 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded $0.6 million and $0.8 million, respectively,
of other income
related to an indemnification asset.
During 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded a gain of $5.4 million
and a loss of $0.6
million, respectively,
on the sale of certain held-for-sale real property assets related to
the Combination.
Each of these items are
included in the caption “Houghton combination, integration and other
acquisition expenses” in the reconciliation of GAAP
earnings per diluted share attributable to Quaker Chemical Corporation
common shareholders to Non-GAAP earnings per diluted
share as well as the reconciliation of Net Income attributable to Quaker
Chemical Corporation to Adjusted EBITDA and Non-
GAAP net income See Note 2 and Note 9 of Notes to Consolidated Financial
Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(b)
Restructuring and related charges represent the
costs incurred by the Company associated with the QH restructuring program
which was initiated in the third quarter of 2019 as part of the Company’s
plan to realize cost synergies associated with the
Combination.
These costs are not indicative of the future operating performance of the Company.
See Note 7 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements,
which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(c)
Fair value step up of inventory sold relates to expense associated with selling
inventory of acquired businesses which was
adjusted to fair value as part of purchase accounting.
This increases to costs of goods sold (“COGS”) are not indicative of the
future operating performance of the Company.
(d)
Executive transition costs represent the costs related to the Company’s
search, hiring and transition to a new CEO in connection
with the executive transition that look place in 2021.
These expenses are not indicative of the future operating performance of the
Company.
(e)
Inactive subsidiary’s non
-operating litigation costs represents the charges incurred by
an inactive subsidiary of the Company and
are a result of the termination of restrictions on insurance settlement reserves.
These charges are not indicative of the future
operating performance of the Company.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears
in Item 8 of
this Report.
(f)
Customer bankruptcy costs represent the cost associated with a specific
reserve for trade accounts receivable related to a customer
who filed for bankruptcy protection.
These expenses are not indicative of the future operating performance
of the Company.
See
Note 13 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears
in Item 8 of this Report.
(g)
Facility remediation costs, net, presents the gross costs associated with remediation,
cleaning and subsequent restoration costs
associated with the property damage to certain of the Company’s
facilities, net of insurance recoveries received.
These charges
are non-recurring and are not indicative of the future operating performance
of the Company.
See Note 26 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(h)
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core equipment
sale represent the pre-tax charge related to a one-time, uncommon,
customer settlement associated with a prior sale of non-core equipment.
These charges are not indicative of the future operating
performance of the Company.
(i)
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment represents the non-cash
charge taken to write down the value of certain indefinite-
lived intangible assets associated with the Combination.
The Company has no prior history of goodwill or intangible asset
impairments and this charge is not indicative of the future operating
performance of the Company.
See Note 16 of Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(j)
Equity income in a captive insurance company represents the after-tax
income attributable to the Company’s
interest in Primex,
Ltd. (“Primex”), a captive insurance company.
The Company holds a 32% investment in and has significant influence over
Primex, and therefore accounts for this investment under the equity method of
accounting.
The income attributable to Primex is
not indicative of the future operating performance of the Company
and is not considered core to the Company’s operations.
(k)
Pension and postretirement benefit (income) costs, non-service components
represent the pre-tax, non-service components of the
Company’s pension and postretirement
net periodic benefit cost in each period.
These costs are not indicative of the future
operating performance of the Company.
The year ended December 31, 2020 includes a $22.7 million settlement charge
for the
Company’s termination
of the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan.
See Note 21 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements,
which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(l)
Gain on changes in insurance settlement restrictions of an inactive subsidiary
and related insurance insolvency recovery
represents income associated with the gain on the termination of restrictions
on insurance settlement reserves and the cash
receipts from an insolvent insurance carrier for previously submitted
claims by an inactive subsidiary of the Company.
This other
income is not indicative of the future operating performance of the Company.
See Notes 9 and 26 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(m)
Brazilian non-income tax credits represent indirect tax credits related to certain
of the Company’s Brazilian subsidiaries
prevailing in a legal claim as well as the Brazil Supreme Court ruling on these non
-income tax matters.
The non-income tax
credit is non-recurring and not indicative of the future operating performance
of the Company.
See Note 26 of Note to
Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(n)
Currency conversion impacts of hyper-inflationary economies represents
the foreign currency remeasurement impacts associated
with the Company’s affiliates
whose local economies are designated as hyper-inflationary under
U.S. GAAP.
An entity which
operates within an economy deemed to be hyper-inflationary
under U.S. GAAP is required to remeasure its monetary assets and
liabilities to the applicable published exchange rates and record the
associated gains or losses resulting from the remeasurement
directly to the Consolidated Statements of Income.
Venezuela’s
economy has been considered hyper-inflationary under
U.S.
GAAP since 2010, while Argentina’s
economy has been considered hyper-inflationary beginning
July 1, 2018.
In addition, the
Company’s Argentine
Houghton subsidiary also applies hyper-inflationary accounting.
During 2021, 2020 and 2019, the
Company incurred non-deductible, pre-tax charges
related to the Company’s Argentine
affiliates.
The charges incurred related to
the immediate recognition of foreign currency remeasurement in the
Consolidated Statements of Income associated with these
entities are not indicative of the future operating performance of the Company.
See Notes 1, 9 and 17 of Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements, which appears in Item 8 of this Report.
(o)
The impacts of certain discrete tax items includes
the impact of changes in certain valuation allowances
recorded on certain of the
Company’s foreign
tax credits, tax law changes in foreign jurisdictions, changes in withholding tax rates, the
tax impacts of non-
income tax credits associated with certain of the Company’s
Brazilian subsidiaries and the associated impact on previously
accrued for distributions at certain of the Company’s
Asia/Pacific subsidiaries, the one-time deferred tax benefit recorded on the
transfer of intangible assets between the Company’s
subsidiaries as well as the offsetting impact and amortization
of a deferred
tax benefit the Company recorded during 2020 and 2019 related to
similar intercompany intangible asset transfers.
Additionally,
the 2019 amounts include certain transition tax adjustments related to adjustments
to adopt U.S. Tax Reform.
See Note 10 of
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, which appears in Item
8 of this Report.
(p)
Depreciation and amortization for the years ended December 31, 2021,
2020 and 2019 includes $1.2 million, $1.2 million and
$0.4 million, respectively,
of amortization expense recorded within equity in net income of associated
companies in the
Company’s Consolidated
Statements of Income, which is attributable to the amortization of the fair value step up for
the
Company’s 50% interest Korea Houghton
Corporation as a result of required purchase accounting.
(q)
Taxes on income
before equity in net income of associated companies - adjusted presents the impact
of any current and deferred
income tax expense (benefit), as applicable, of the reconciling items presented
in the reconciliation of net income attributable to
Quaker Chemical Corporation to adjusted EBITDA, and was determined
utilizing the applicable rates in the taxing jurisdictions in
which these adjustments occurred, subject to deductibility.
Houghton combination, integration and other acquisition-related
expenses described in (a) resulted in incremental taxes of $4.2 million
for 2021, $6.9 million for 2020, and $6.7 million for 2019.
Restructuring and related charges described in (b)
resulted in incremental taxes of $0.3 million for 2021, $1.4 million for 2020
and $6.2 million for 2019.
Fair value step up of inventory sold described in (c) resulted in incremental taxes of $0.2 million,
less
than $0.1 million and $2.9 million for 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Executive transition expenses described in (d) resulted
in incremental taxes of $0.7 million for 2021.
Inactive subsidiary non-operating litigation costs described in (e) resulted in
incremental taxes of $0.2
million for 2021.
Customer bankruptcy costs described in (f) resulted in incremental taxes of $0.1
million in 2020 and $0.3 million in 2019.
Facility remediation costs, net described in (g) results in incremental taxes of $0.5
million for 2021.
Charges related to the settlement of a non-core equipment
sale described in (h) resulted in incremental taxes of
$0.1 million for 2019.
Indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment described in (i) resulted in
incremental taxes of $8.7 million
for 2020.
Pension and postretirement benefit (income) costs, non-service components
described in (k) resulted in a reduction of
taxes of $0.1 million for 2021 and incremental taxes of $7.5 million for 2020,
and $0.7 million for 2019.
Gain on changes in
insurance settlement restrictions of an inactive subsidiary
and related insurance insolvency recovery described in (l) resulted in a
reduction of taxes of $4.2 million in 2020 and less than $0.1 million in
2019.
Brazilian non-income tax credits described in (m)
resulted in a reduction of taxes of $4.8 million for 2021.
The impact of certain discrete items described in (o) resulted in a tax
benefit of $5.8 million for 2021, incremental taxes of $11.2
million for 2020, and a reduction of taxes of $5.7 million in 2019.
(r)
The Company calculates adjusted EBITDA margin
and non-GAAP operating margin as the percentage of adjusted EBITDA
and
non-GAAP operating income to consolidated net sales.
(s)
The Company calculates non-GAAP earnings per diluted share as non
-GAAP net income attributable to the Company per
weighted average diluted shares outstanding using the “two-class share method”
to calculate such in each given period.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company had no material off-balance sheet commitments or
obligations as of December 31, 2021.
The Company’s only off-
balance sheet commitments or obligations outstanding as of December 31,
2021 represented approximately $6 million of total bank
letters of credit and guarantees.
The bank letters of credit and guarantees are not significant to the Company’s
liquidity or capital
resources.
See Note 20 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report.
Operations
Consolidated Operations Review - Comparison of 2021 with 2020
Net sales were $1,761.2 million in 2021 compared to $1,417.7 million
in 2020.
The net sales increase of approximately $343.5
million or 24% year-over-year was primarily due to higher sales volumes of
13%, which includes additional net sales from recent
acquisitions of 4%, increases from selling price and product mix of 8% and
the positive impact of foreign currency translation of 3%.
The increase in organic sales volumes compared to 2020
was primarily the result of the continued year-over-year
improvement in end
market conditions from the prior year impacts of COVID-19 and continued
market share gains.
Sales from acquisitions is primarily
driven by the Company’s acquisition
of Coral Chemical Company (“Coral”) in December 2020 and
the tin-plating solutions business
acquired in February 2021.
The increase from selling price and product mix includes the impact of current
year selling price increases
implemented in response to the increases in raw material costs experienced
in 2021.
The positive impact from foreign currency
translation is primarily the result of the strengthening of the Chinese renminbi,
euro, Mexican peso, the Canadian dollar and the
British pound against the U.S. dollar year-over-year.
COGS were $1,166.5 million in 2021 compared to $904.2 million in 2020.
The increase in COGS of 29% was driven by the
associated COGS on the increase in net sales described above, and
continued increases in the Company’s global
raw material costs
compared to the prior year and the impacts of supply constraints in the current year.
Gross profit in 2021 of $594.6 million increased $81.2 million or approximately
16% from 2020, due primarily to the increase in
net sales noted above.
The Company’s reported gross margin
in 2021 was 33.8% compared to 36.2% in 2020.
The lower current year
gross margin is primarily attributable to increased raw materials and
other costs that began in the fourth quarter of 2020 and have
continued throughout 2021 and the impacts of constraints on the world’s
global supply chain partially offset by the Company’s
ongoing pricing initiatives.
SG&A in 2021 increased $38.1 million compared to 2020 due primarily to
the impact of sales increases on direct selling costs,
year-over-year inflation increases, additional
SG&A from recent acquisitions and higher SG&A due to foreign currency
translation,
partially offset by lower incentive compensation year-over
-year as well as the benefits of additional realized cost synergies associated
with the Combination year-over-year.
In addition, SG&A was lower in the prior year period as a result of temporary
cost saving
measures the Company implemented in response to COVID-19.
While the Company continues to manage costs during the on-going
pandemic, it has incurred higher SG&A year-over-year
as the global economy continues to gradually rebound.
During 2021 and 2020, the Company incurred $23.9 million and $29.8
million, respectively, of
Combination, integration and
other acquisition-related expenses primarily for professional fees related
to Houghton integration and other acquisition-related
activities.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
The Company initiated a restructuring program during 2019 as part of
its global plan to realize cost synergies associated with the
Combination.
The Company incurred restructuring and related charges for reductions
in headcount and site closures under this
program, net of adjustments to initial estimates for severance, of
an expense of $1.4 million and $5.5 million during 2021 and 2020,
respectively.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Operating income in 2021 was $150.5 million compared to $59.4 million
in 2020.
Excluding Combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses, restructuring and related charges and
other non-core items, the Company’s
current year non-GAAP
operating income of $182.6 million increased compared to $134.0
million in the prior year, primarily due
to the increase in net sales
described above and the benefits from cost savings related to the Combination
offset by an increase in SG&A as well as the significant
increases in raw material costs year-over-year.
The Company estimates that it realized cost synergies associated with the
Combination
of approximately $75 million during 2021 compared to approximately
$58 million during 2020.
The Company had other income, net, of $18.9 million in 2021 compared
to other expense, net, of $5.6 million in 2020.
The year-
over-year change was primarily a result of other income related to certain
non-income tax credits recorded by the Company’s
Brazilian subsidiaries, the gain on the sale of certain held-for-sale real property assets and lower
foreign currency transaction losses in
2021 as compared to the prior year.
The Company had non-service components of pension and postretirement
benefit income in the
current year compared to an expense in the prior year as a result of the $22.7
million pension settlement charge directly related to the
termination of the Legacy Quaker U.S. pension plan partially offset
by a $18.1 million gain related to the lapse of restrictions over
certain cash that was previously designated solely for the settlement of
asbestos claims at an inactive subsidiary,
all of which are
described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Interest expense, net, decreased $4.3 million compared to 2020 driven
by lower current year average borrowings outstanding as a
result of the additional revolver borrowings drawn during part of 2020
at the onset of the pandemic to add additional liquidity,
coupled
with a decline in overall interest rates year-over-year,
as the weighted average interest rate incurred on borrowings under the
Company’s credit facility was approximately
1.6% during 2021 compared to approximately 2.2% during 2020.
The Company’s effective
tax rates for 2021 and 2020 were an expense of 23.8% and benefit of 19.5%, respectively.
The
Company’s higher current year
effective tax rate is driven by a higher level of pre-tax earnings and
mix of earnings, as well as
deferred tax expense related to the planned repatriation of non-U.S.
earnings.
In addition, the rate was impacted by certain one-time
charges and benefits related to an intercompany intangible
asset transfer and related royalty income recognition offset
by changes in
the valuation allowance for foreign tax credits.
Comparatively, the prior
year effective tax rate was impacted by the tax effect of
certain one-time tax charges and benefits related to a 2020 intercompany
intangible asset transfer, additional charges
for uncertain tax
positions relating to certain foreign tax audits, and the tax impact of the Company’s
termination of its Legacy Quaker U.S. pension
plan.
Excluding the impact of these items as well as all other non-core items in
each year, described in the Non-GAAP Measures
section of this Item, above, the Company estimates that the 2021 and 2020
effective tax rates would have been approximately 26%
and 25%, respectively.
The higher estimated current year tax rate was primarily driven by a higher level of pre
-tax earnings and the
impact of changes in mix of earnings,
deferred taxes related to the planned repatriation of non-U.S. earnings, and provision
to return
adjustments in the prior period.
The Company may experience continued volatility in its effective tax
rates due to several factors,
including the timing of tax audits and the expiration of applicable statutes of
limitations as they relate to uncertain tax positions, the
unpredictability of the timing and amount of certain incentives in various
tax jurisdictions, the treatment of certain acquisition-related
costs and the timing and amount of certain share-based compensation-related
tax benefits, among other factors.
In addition, the
foreign tax credit valuation allowance, or absence thereof, is based on
a number of variables, including forecasted earnings, which
may vary.
Equity in net income of associated companies increased $2.0 million in
2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to higher current
year income from the Company’s interest
in a captive insurance company partially offset by lower earnings
from the Company’s 50%
interest in a joint venture in Korea compared to the prior year.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest was less than $0.1 million
in 2021 compared to $0.1 million in 2020
primarily a
result of the first quarter of 2020 acquisition of the remaining ownership
interest in one of the Company’s South
African affiliates
.
Foreign exchange positively impacted the Company’s
yearly results by approximately 6% driven by the positive impact from
foreign currency translation on earnings as well as lower foreign exchange
transaction losses in the current year as compared to the
prior year.
Consolidated Operations Review - Comparison of 2020 with 2019
Net sales were $1,417.7 million in 2020 compared to $1,133.5 million
in 2019.
The net sales increase of 25% year-over-year
includes additional net sales from acquisitions, primarily Houghton
and Norman Hay, of $408.6 million.
Excluding net sales related
to acquisitions, the Company’s prior
year net sales would have declined approximately 11%
which reflects a decrease in sales volumes
of 9%, a negative impact from foreign currency translation of 1% and
a decrease from selling price and product mix of 1%.
The
primary driver of the volume decline in the prior year was the negative
impact of COVID-19 on global production levels.
COGS were $904.2 million in 2020 compared to $741.4 million in
2019.
The increase in COGS of 22% was primarily due to the
inclusion of a full year of Houghton and Norman Hay COGS and $0.8 million of
accelerated depreciation charges in 2020, partially
offset by lower prior year COGS on the decline in net sales due
to COVID-19 and 2019 charges of $11.7
million to increase acquired
inventory to its fair value, described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item
above.
Gross profit in 2020 increased $121.3 million or 31% from 2019 due primarily
to additional gross profit from Houghton and
Norman Hay.
The Company’s reported gross
margin in 2020 was 36.2% compared to 34.6% in 2019, which included
the inventory
fair value step up described above.
Excluding one-time increases to COGS in both periods, the Company
estimates that its gross
margins for 2020 and 2019 would have been 36.3% and 35.7%,
respectively.
The estimated increase in gross margin year-over-year
was primarily due to lower COGS as a result of the Company’s
progress on Combination-related logistics, procurement and
manufacturing cost savings initiatives, partially offset
by the lower sales volumes on certain fixed manufacturing costs.
SG&A in 2020 increased $96.9 million compared to 2019 due primarily to
additional SG&A from Houghton and Norman Hay,
partially offset by the impact of COVID-19 cost savings
actions, including lower travel expenses, and the benefits of realized costs
savings associated with the Combination.
During 2020, the Company incurred $29.8 million of Combination,
integration and other acquisition-related expenses, primarily
for professional fees related to Houghton integration and other acquisition
-related activities.
Comparatively,
the Company incurred
$35.5 million of similar expenses in 2019,
primarily due to various professional fees related to integration planning
and regulatory
approval as well as professional fees associated with closing the Combination.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item,
above.
The Company initiated a restructuring program during the third quarter
of 2019 as part of its global plan to realize cost synergies
associated with the Combination.
The Company recorded additional restructuring and related charges
of $5.5 million during 2020
compared
to $26.7 million during 2019 under this program.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
During the first quarter of 2020, the Company recorded a $38.0 million
non-cash impairment charge to write down the value of
certain indefinite-lived intangible assets associated with the Combination.
This non-cash impairment charge is related to certain
acquired Houghton trademarks and tradenames and is primarily the
result of the negative impacts of COVID-19 on their estimated fair
values.
There were no additional impairment charges in the remainder of
2020 or in 2019.
See the Critical Accounting Policies and
Estimates section as well as the Non-GAAP Measures section, of this Item, above.
Operating income in 2020 was $59.4 million compared to $46.1 million
in 2019.
Excluding Combination, integration and other
acquisition-related expenses, restructuring and related charges, the
non-cash indefinite-lived intangible asset impairment charge,
and
other expenses that are not indicative of the Company’s
future operating performance, the Company’s
non-GAAP operating income
during 2020 of $134.0 million increased compared to $121.9 million
in 2019, primarily due to additional operating income from
Houghton and Norman Hay and the benefits from costs savings initiatives related
to the Combination, partially offset by the current
year negative impact due to COVID-19.
The Company’s other
expense, net, was $5.6 million in 2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019.
The year-over-year increase in
other expense, net was primarily due to the first quarter of 2020 non-cash
settlement charge of $22.7 million associated with the
termination of the Legacy Quaker U.S. Pension Plan, partially offset
by a fourth quarter of 2020 gain of $18.1 million related to the
lapsing of restrictions over certain cash that was previously designated
solely for the settlement of asbestos claims at an inactive
subsidiary of the Company,
which are both described in the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Additionally, the
increase year-over-year in other expense,
net, includes higher foreign currency transaction losses in 2020.
Interest expense, net, increased $9.6 million in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily
due to a full year of borrowings under the
Company’s Credit Facility to
finance the closing of the Combination on August 1, 2019, partially offset
by lower overall interest rates
in the 2020.
The Company’s effective
tax rates for 2020 and 2019 were a benefit of 19.5% and an expense of 7.2%, respectively.
The
Company’s 2020 effective
tax rate was impacted by the tax effect of certain one-time
tax charges and benefits, including deferred tax
benefits related to an intercompany intangible asset transfer,
as well as changes in the valuation allowance for foreign tax credits,
additional charges for uncertain tax positions relating to
certain foreign tax audits, and the tax impact of the Company’s
termination of
its Legacy Quaker U.S. pension plan.
Comparatively, the 2019 effectiv
e
tax rate was primarily impacted by certain non-deductible
costs associated with the Combination as well as a deferred tax benefit related
to a separate intercompany intangible asset transfer.
Excluding the impact of all non-core items in each year,
described in the Non-GAAP measures section of this Item, above, the
Company estimates that its effective tax rates for 2020
and 2019 were approximately 25% and 22%, respectively.
The year-over-year
increase is driven primarily by higher U.S. income taxes resulting from a
change in certain deductions and the taxability of foreign
earnings in the U.S., partially offset by a change in the mix of earnings.
Equity in net income of associated companies increased $2.3 million in
2020 compared to 2019, primarily due to additional
earnings from our 50% interest in a joint venture in Korea partially offset
by lower earnings from the Company’s
interest in a captive
insurance company.
See the Non-GAAP Measures section of this Item, above.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest was $0.1 million in
2020 compared to $0.3 million in 2019 primarily a result of
the first quarter of 2020 acquisition of the remaining ownership interest
in one of the Company’s South African
affiliates.
Foreign exchange negatively impacted the Company’s
2020 results by approximately $0.38 per diluted share, primarily due
to
higher foreign exchange transaction losses year-over-year and, to
a lesser extent, an aggregate negative impact from foreign currency
translation on earnings.
Reportable Segments Review - Comparison of 2021 with 2020
The Company’s reportable
segments reflect the structure of the Company’s
internal organization, the method by which the
Company’s resources are allocated
and the manner by which the chief operating decision maker of the Company
assesses its
performance.
The Company has four reportable segments: (i) Americas; (ii) EMEA; (iii)
Asia/Pacific; and (iv) Global Specialty
Businesses.
The three geographic segments are composed of the net sales and operations
in each respective region, excluding net
sales and operations managed globally by the Global Specialty Businesses
segment, which includes the Company’s
container, metal
finishing, mining, offshore, specialty coatings, specialty grease and
Norman Hay businesses.
Segment operating earnings for the Company’s
reportable segments are comprised of net sales less COGS and SG&A directly
related to the respective segment’s product
sales.
Operating expenses not directly attributable to the net sales of each respective
segment, such as certain corporate and administrative costs, Combination,
integration and other acquisition-related expenses,
Restructuring and related charges, and COGS related
to acquired inventory sold, which is adjusted to fair value as part of purchase
accounting, are not included in segment operating earnings.
Other items not specifically identified with the Company’s
reportable
segments include interest expense, net, and other income (expense),
net.
Americas
Americas represented approximately 33% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2021.
The segment’s net sales were $572.6
million, an increase of $122.5 million or 27% compared to 2020.
The increase in net sales was driven by a benefit in selling price and
product mix of 11%, increases in organic
volumes of approximately 10%, additional net sales from acquisitions of 5%, and the
positive impact of foreign currency translation of 1%.
The current year organic volume increase was driven by the continued
improvement in end market conditions compared to the prior year which
was impacted by COVID-19.
The increase in selling price
and product mix is primarily driven by price increases implemented
to help offset the significant increases in raw material and other
input costs incurred during 2021.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily driven by the strengthening of
the Mexican peso against
the U.S. dollar, as this exchange rate averaged
20.27 in 2021 compared to 21.34 during 2020.
This segment’s operating earnings were
$124.9 million, an increase of $28.5 million or 30% compared to 2020.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the higher
net sales, described above, partially offset by lower gross
margins driven by the continued raw material cost increases and
global
supply chain and logistics pressures coupled with higher SG&A including
an increase in direct selling costs associated with higher net
sales, SG&A from acquisitions and an increase in SG&A as the prior year
included temporary cost savings measures implemented in
response to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
EMEA
EMEA represented approximately 27% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2021.
The segment’s net sales were $480.1
million, an increase of $96.9 million or 25% compared to 2020.
The increase in net sales was driven by a benefit from selling price
and product mix of 10%, increases in organic volumes of
approximately 9%, the positive impact of foreign currency translation of 4%,
and additional net sales from acquisitions of 2%.
The increase in selling price and product mix is primarily driven by price increases
implemented to offset the significant increase in raw
material and other input costs incurred during 2021.
The current year volume
increase was driven by the continued improvement in end market conditions
compared to the prior year which was heavily impacted
by COVID-19.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily driven by the strengthening
of the euro against the U.S. dollar as this
exchange rate averaged 1.18 in 2021 compared to 1.14 in 2020.
This segment’s operating earnings were
$85.2 million, an increase of
$16.0 million or 23% compared to 2020.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the higher net sales described
above,
partially offset by lower current year gross margins
driven by the continued raw material cost increases and global supply chain and
logistics pressures as well as higher SG&A including increases in direct selling
costs associated with higher net sales as well as
increases as the prior year included temporary cost savings measures implemented
in response to the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic.
Asia/Pacific
Asia/Pacific represented approximately 22% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2021.
The segment’s net sales were
$388.2 million, an increase of approximately $72.9 million or 23%
compared to 2020.
The increase in net sales year-over-year was
driven by increases in volumes of approximately 15%, the positive impact
of foreign currency translation of 5%, increases from
selling price and product mix of 2% and additional net sales from
acquisitions of 1%.
The current year volume increase was driven by
the continued improvement in end market conditions compared to the prior
year which was impacted by COVID-19.
The foreign
exchange impact was primarily due to the strengthening of the Chinese renminbi
against the U.S. dollar as this exchange rate averaged
6.45 in 2021 compared to 6.90 in 2020.
This segment’s operating earnings were
$96.3 million, an increase of $8.0 million or 9%
compared to 2020.
The increase in segment operating earnings was driven by the higher net sales described above,
partially offset by
lower gross margins driven by the continued raw material cost increases
and global supply chain and logistics pressures as well as
higher direct selling costs associated with higher net sales and an increase
in SG&A as the prior year included temporary cost savings
measures implemented in response to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic
.
Global Specialty Businesses
Global Specialty Businesses represented approximately 18% of the
Company’s consolidated net sales in
2021.
The segment’s net
sales were $320.2 million, an increase of $51.2 million or 19% compared
to 2020.
The increase in net sales was driven by increases in
selling price and product mix, including Norman Hay,
of 14%, additional net sales from acquisitions of 8%, and the positive impact
of
foreign currency translation of 2% partially offset by volume declines
of approximately 5%.
Both the changes in selling price and
product mix and sales volumes were primarily driven by higher amounts of
shipments of a lower priced product in the Company’s
mining business in the prior year.
The foreign exchange impact was a result of similar strengthening of certain
currencies in EMEA
and Americas as described above.
This segment’s
operating earnings were $90.6 million, an increase of $10.9 million or 14%
compared to 2020.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the higher net sales, described
above, partially offset by lower
gross margins in the current year coupled with higher SG&A, including
an increase in direct selling costs associated with higher net
sales, SG&A from acquisitions and an increase in SG&A as the prior year
included temporary cost savings measures implemented in
response to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Reportable Segments Review - Comparison of 2020 with 2019
Americas
Americas represented approximately 32% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2020.
The segment’s net sales were $450.2
million, an increase of $58.0 million or 15% compared to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects additional net sales from
acquisitions of $120.4 million, primarily a result of the inclusion of
seven additional months of Houghton net sales, as the
Combination closed on August 1, 2019.
Excluding net sales from acquisitions, the segment’s
net sales decreased by approximately
16% due to lower volumes of 12% and a negative impact of foreign
currency translation of 4%.
The volume decline was driven by
the economic slowdown that began in late March and continued throughout
2020 due to the impacts of COVID-19.
The foreign
exchange impact was primarily due to the weakening of the Brazilian real
and the Mexican peso against the U.S. dollar,
as these
exchange rates averaged 5.10 and 21.34, respectively,
in 2020 compared to 3.94 and 19.24, respectively in 2019.
This segment’s
operating earnings were $96.4 million, an increase of $18.1 million or
23% compared to 2019.
The increase in segment operating
earnings reflects the inclusion of a full year of Houghton net sales, noted,
above, and the impacts on gross margins and SG&A due to
the Combination’s cost synergies
and costs savings actions related to COVID-19 year-over-year,
partially offset by the impact of
COVID-19 on sales volumes and higher COGS and SG&A due to seven additional
months of Houghton in 2020.
EMEA
EMEA represented approximately 27% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2020.
The segment’s net sales were $383.2
million, an increase of $97.6 million or 34% compared to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects additional net sales from
acquisitions of $117.9 million, primarily
a result of the inclusion of seven additional months of Houghton net sales, as the
Combination closed on August 1, 2019.
Excluding net sales from acquisitions, the segment’s
net sales decreased year-over-year by
approximately 7% due to lower volumes of 10%, partially offset by
a positive impact of foreign currency translation of 2% and
increases in selling price and product mix of 1%.
The current year volume decline was driven by the economic slowdown that began
in late March and continued throughout 2020 due to the impacts of COVID-19.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due to the
strengthening of the euro against the U.S. dollar as this exchange rate averaged
1.14 in 2020 compared to 1.12 in 2019.
This
segment’s operating earnings were
$69.2 million, an increase of $22.1 million or 47% compared to 2019.
The increase in segment
operating earnings reflects the inclusion of a full year of Houghton net sales,
noted, above, and the impacts on gross margins and
SG&A due to the Combination’s cost synergies
and costs savings actions related to COVID-19 year-over-year,
partially offset by the
impact of COVID-19 on sales volumes and higher COGS and SG&A due
to seven additional months of Houghton in 2020.
Asia/Pacific
Asia/Pacific represented approximately 22% of the Company’s
consolidated net sales in 2020.
The segment’s net sales were
$315.3 million, an increase of $67.5 million or 27% compared to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of seven
additional months of Houghton net sales of $79.7 million, as the Combination
closed on August 1, 2019.
Excluding Houghton net
sales, the segment’s net sales decreased
by approximately 5% year-over-year was due
to lower volumes of 3% and decreases in selling
price and product mix of 3% partially offset by the positive
impact of foreign currency translation of 1%.
The current year volume
decline was driven by the economic slowdown that began in the first quarter
of 2020 in China and in late March throughout the rest of
the region due to the impacts of COVID-19.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due to the strengthening of the Chinese
renminbi against the U.S. dollar.
While this exchange rate averaged 6.90 in each of 2020 and 2019, respectively,
post the closing of
the Combination, this exchange rate strengthened in the last 5 months of 2020
to average 6.72 compared to 7.06 in the last 5 months of
2019, partially offset by the weakening of the Indian rupee against the
U.S. dollar as this exchange rate averaged 73.95 in 2020
compared to 70.35 in 2019.
This segment’s operating earnings were
$88.4 million, an increase of $20.8 million or 31% compared to
2019.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the inclusion of incremental
Houghton net sales, noted, above, and the
impacts on gross margins and SG&A due to the Combination’s
cost synergies and costs savings actions related to COVID-19 year-
over-year, partially offset
by the impact of COVID-19 on sales volumes and higher COGS and SG&A due
to seven additional months
of Houghton in 2020.
Global Specialty Businesses
Global Specialty Businesses represented approximately 19% of the
Company’s consolidated net sales in
2020.
The segment’s net
sales were $269.0 million, an increase of $61.1 million or 29% compared
to 2019.
The increase in net sales reflects the inclusion of
seven additional months of Houghton net sales and nine additional months
of Norman Hay net sales, totaling $90.6 million, as the
Combination closed on August 1, 2019 and the Norman Hay acquisition
closed on October 1, 2019.
Excluding Houghton and
Norman Hay net sales, the segment’s
net sales decreased by approximately 14% year-over-year
due to lower volumes of 7%,
decreases in selling price and product mix of 5% and a negative impact from foreign
currency translation of 2%.
The current year
volume decline was primarily due to a decrease in the Company’s
specialty coatings business driven by Boeing’s
decision to
temporarily stop production of the 737 Max aircraft and volume declines
due to the economic slowdown resulting from COVID-19.
Partially offsetting these volume declines, and
contributing to the decrease in selling price and product mix, were higher shipments of
a lower priced product in the Company’s
mining business compared to 2019.
The foreign exchange impact was primarily due to the
weakening of the Brazilian real against the U.S. dollar described
in the Americas section, above.
This segment’s operating earnings
were $79.7 million, an increase of $20.8 million or 35% compared
to 2019.
The increase in segment operating earnings reflects the
inclusion of incremental Houghton and Norman Hay net sales, noted
above, coupled with an increase in gross margin due to the
Company’s progress on Combination
-related logistics, procurement and manufacturing cost savings initiatives, partially
offset by
higher SG&A, including seven additional months of Houghton
and nine additional months of Norman Hay SG&A in 2020.
Environmental Clean-up Activities
The Company is involved in environmental clean-up activities in connection
with an existing plant location and former waste
disposal sites.
This includes certain soil and groundwater contamination the
Company identified in 1992 at AC Products, Inc.
(“ACP”), a wholly owned subsidiary.
In voluntary coordination with the Santa Ana California Regional Water
Quality Board, ACP
has been remediating the contamination.
In 2007, ACP agreed to operate two groundwater treatment systems, so as to hydraulically
contain groundwater contamination emanating from ACP’s
site until such time as the concentrations of contaminants are below
the
current Federal maximum contaminant level for four consecutive
quarterly sampling events.
In 2014, ACP ceased operation at one of
its two groundwater treatment systems, as it had met the above condition
for closure.
In 2020, the Santa Ana Regional Water
Quality
Control Board asked that ACP conduct some additional indoor
and outdoor soil vapor testing on and near the ACP site to confirm that
ACP continues to meet the applicable local standards and ACP has begun the
testing program.
Such testing began in 2020 and
continued into 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, ACP believes it is close to meeting the conditions for closure
of the remaining
groundwater treatment system but continues to operate this system while in
discussions with the relevant authorities.
As of December
31, 2021, the Company believes that the range of potential-known
liabilities associated with the balance of the ACP water remediation
program is approximately $0.1 million to $1.0 million.
The low and high ends of the range are based on the length of operation of the
treatment system as determined by groundwater modeling.
The Company is party to environmental matters related to certain domestic
and foreign properties.
The Company’s Sao Paulo,
Brazil site was required under Brazilian environmental, health and
safety regulations to perform an environmental assessment as part
of a permit renewal process.
Initial investigations identified soil and ground water contamination in
select areas of the site.
The site
has conducted a multi-year soil and groundwater investigation and
corresponding risk assessments based on the result of the
investigations.
In 2017, the site had to submit a new 5-year permit renewal request and was asked to
complete additional
investigations to further delineate the site based on review of the technical
data by the local regulatory agency,
Companhia Ambiental
do Estado de São Paulo (“CETESB”).
Based on review of the updated investigation data, CETESB issued a Technical
Opinion
regarding the investigation and remedial actions taken to date.
The site developed an action plan and submitted it to CETESB in 2018
based on CETESB requirements.
The site intervention plan primarily requires the site, among other actions,
to conduct periodic
monitoring for methane in soil vapors, source zone delineation, groundwater
plume delineation, bedrock aquifer assessment, update
the human health risk assessment, develop a current site conceptual model
and conduct a remedial feasibility study and provide a
revised intervention plan.
In 2019, the site submitted a report on the activities completed including the revised
site conceptual model
and results of the remedial feasibility study and recommended remedial
strategy for the site.
Other environmental matters include
participation in certain payments in connection with four currently
active environmental consent orders related to certain hazardous
waste cleanup activities under the U.S. Federal Superfund statute.
The Company has been designated a potentially responsible party
(“PRP”) by the Environmental Protection Agency along with other
PRPs depending on the site, and has other obligations to perform
cleanup activities at certain other foreign subsidiaries.
These environmental matters primarily require the Company to perform
long-
term monitoring as well as operating and maintenance at each of the applicable
sites.
The Company continually evaluates its obligations related to such matters,
and based on historical costs incurred and projected
costs to be incurred over the next 27 years, has estimated the present value range
of costs for these environmental matters, on a
discounted basis, to be between approximately $5.0 million and $6.0
million as of December 31, 2021, for which $5.6 million is
accrued within other accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities on
the Company’s Consolidated
Balance Sheet as of
December 31, 2021.
Comparatively, as of
December 31, 2020, the Company had $6.0 million accrued with respect
to these matters.
The Company believes, although there can be no assurance regarding the
outcome of other unrelated environmental matters, that
it has made adequate accruals for costs associated with other environmental
problems of which it is aware.
Approximately $0.4
million and $0.1 million were accrued as of December 31, 2021
and 2020, respectively, to provide for
such anticipated future
environmental assessments and remediation costs.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company cannot be certain that
future liabilities in the form of remediation expenses and
damages will not exceed amounts reserved.
See Note 26 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Report
General
See