Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We have not selected any business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. Our efforts to identify a prospective target business will not be limited to a particular industry or geographic location. However, our Charter provides that we shall not undertake our initial business combination with any entity that is based in, located in or with its principal business operations in China (including Hong Kong and Macau). We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of this offering and the sale of the private units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
Our sponsor is Keyarch Global Sponsor Limited, a Cayman Islands Limited Liability Company. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes, divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from April 23, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate the Initial Public Offering (“IPO”), described below. Following our IPO, we do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after the IPO. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $11,632 which consists of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash amounting to $9,168 and working capital deficit of approximately $142,060. Until the consummation of our IPO, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the Founder Shares, and unsecured loans of $150,000 from our sponsor.
On January 27, 2022, we consummated our IPO of 10,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the shares of common stock included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $100,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of our IPO, we consummated the sale of 500,000 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement to the Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital, Inc., generating total gross proceeds of $5,000,000.
On February 8, 2022, the underwriters in our IPO purchased an additional 1,500,000 Units to exercise its over-allotment option in full at a purchase price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $15,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the fully exercise of the over-allotment option, we completed the private sale of an aggregate of 45,000 Private Placement Units to the Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital, Inc., at a purchase price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit, generating gross proceeds of $450,000. Transaction costs amounted to $3,471,734 consisting of $2,300,000 of underwriting discount and $1,171,734 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of our IPO and the sale of over-allotment units, an aggregate of $116,150,000 ($10.10 per Unit) from the net proceeds and the sale of the Private Placement Units was held in a Trust Account (“Trust Account”),
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. Any such loans would be on an interest-free basis and would be repaid only from funds held outside the trust account or from funds released to us upon completion of our initial business combination. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. These units would be identical to the private units issued to our sponsor. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the trust account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
The net proceeds of this offering and the sale of the private units held in the trust account will be invested in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds investing solely in U.S. Treasuries and meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act. Due to the short-term nature of these investments, we believe there will be no associated material exposure to interest rate risk.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
In July 2021, our sponsor paid $25,000, or $0.009 per share, to cover certain offering and formation costs of our company in exchange for 2,875,000 founder shares. The initial shareholders agreed to forfeit up to 375,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option was not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20.0% of our issued and outstanding shares after the IPO (excluding the private shares and EBC founder shares). The underwriter exercised its over-allotment option in full on February 8, 2022; thus, these 375,000 shares of Class B common shares were no longer subject to forfeiture.
Our sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsor, officers, directors or our or any of their affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on our behalf.
EBC Founder Shares
On August 12, 2021, the Company issued to EarlyBirdCapital and/or its designees 200,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares (the “EBC Founder Shares”) at a price of $0.0001 per share. The Company estimated the fair value of the EBC founder shares to be $1,800 based upon the price of the founder shares issued to the Sponsor. The holders of the EBC founder shares have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any such shares until the completion of a Business Combination. In addition, the holders have agreed (i) to waive their conversion rights (or right to participate in any tender offer) with respect to such shares in connection with the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) to waive their rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such shares if the Company fails to complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
The EBC founder shares have been deemed compensation by FINRA and are therefore subject to a lock-up for a period of 180 days immediately following the effective date of the registration statement related to the IPO pursuant to FINRA Rule 5110(e)(1). Pursuant to FINRA Rule 5110(e)(1), these securities will not be the subject of any hedging, short sale, derivative, put or call transaction that would result in the economic disposition of the securities by any person for a period of 180 days immediately following the effective date of the registration statements related to the IPO, nor may they be sold, transferred, assigned, pledged or hypothecated for a period of 180 days immediately following the effective date of the registration statements related to the IPO except to any underwriter and selected dealer participating in the IPO and their officers or partners, associated persons or affiliates.
Related Party Loans
Our sponsor has agreed to loan us up to $150,000 under an unsecured promissory note to be used for a portion of the expenses of this offering. These loans are non-interest bearing, unsecured and are due at the earlier of March 31, 2022, or the closing of this offering. On October 4, 2021, the sponsor funded $150,000 to us pursuant to the promissory note executed by the company on June 16, 2021 and the company repaid it in full on January 27, 2022.
Further, during the month of September 2021, the Sponsor transferred the outstanding sponsor line of credit of $15,625 to Keywise Capital Management (HK) Limited (the “Affiliate”). Prior to July 6, 2021, the Sponsor had an arrangement with the Affiliate regarding payment to be made by the Affiliate for certain costs of the Company on behalf of the Sponsor which will be adjusted with the Note. However, once the bank account of the Sponsor and the Company was open, the Affiliate agreed with the Sponsor and the Company that such amount will be paid directly to them. During the period up to December 31, 2021, the Affiliate paid for the offering costs and other general and administration expenses of $368,227. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $383,852 outstanding as Due to Affiliate.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans.
Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into units of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. As of December 31, 2021, no Working Capital Loans were outstanding.
Private Placement Units
On January 27, 2022, our sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital purchased an aggregate of 500,000 private units (including 450,000 private units purchased by our sponsor and 50,000 private units purchased by EarlyBirdCapital) at a price of $10.00 per unit, for a purchase price of $5,000,000 in the aggregate.
On February 8, 2022, our sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital purchased an aggregate of 45,000 private units (including 40,500 private units purchased by our sponsor and 4,500 private units purchased by EarlyBirdCapital) at a price of $10.00 per unit, for a purchase price of $450,000 in the aggregate. Each whole private warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share.
Administrative Services Agreement
We entered into an agreement that provides, commencing on the effective date of the registration statement for the IPO and through the earlier of consummation of the initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we agree to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for administrative and support services.
Other Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares and any underlying ordinary shares, EBC founder shares, private units (and their component parts and securities underlying those component parts) and any units that may be issued on conversion of working capital loans (and their component parts and securities underlying those component parts) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the consummation of this offering requiring us to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, EarlyBirdCapital, Inc. may only make a demand on one occasion and only during the 5-year period beginning on the effective date of the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of our initial business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act; provided, however, that EarlyBirdCapital, Inc. may participate in a “piggy-back” registration only during the 7-year period beginning on the effective date of the registration statement of which this prospectus forms a part. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of IPO to purchase up to 1,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. The underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full on February 8, 2022.
EarlyBirdCapital were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per Unit, or $2 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the IPO. Additionally, we have engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with our initial business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of this offering. In addition, we may engage EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with introducing a target business to us. If we engage EarlyBirdCapital and it introduces us to the target business with whom we complete our initial business combination, EarlyBirdCapital will receive a cash fee equal to 1% of the total consideration payable in the initial business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Deferred Offering Costs
Deferred offering costs consist of underwriting, legal, accounting, and other expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to our initial public offering and that were charged to shareholders’ equity upon the completion of our initial public offering on January 27,2022. As of December 31, 2021, offering costs aggregated to $933,978.