Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors.”
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biotechnology company, discovering and developing novel small molecule therapeutics to treat unmet needs in immune-mediated diseases and cancer. We believe therapies that inhibit multiple drivers of disease by targeting fundamental upstream control processes within the cell have the potential for profound therapeutic benefit in a number of difficult-to-treat diseases. To that end, we are advancing two drug development programs that harness different master regulators of cellular function: the first targets the immunoproteasome which is responsible for protein degradation in cells of the immune system and drives many key aspects of immune cell function, and the second targets the Sec61 translocon, which is located on the endoplasmic reticulum and represents the beginning of the protein secretion pathway. Targeting these fundamental regulators of cellular function offers an attractive approach to treating many diseases.
Our lead product candidate, KZR-616, is a first-in-class selective immunoproteasome inhibitor that has completed Phase 1a testing in healthy volunteers and a Phase 1b trial in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus, or SLE. We are now leveraging its broad therapeutic potential in two Phase 2 clinical trials, MISSION and PRESIDIO, treating patients with severe autoimmune diseases of high unmet medical need. The Phase 2 portion of our MISSION clinical trial is evaluating KZR-616 in patients with lupus nephritis, or LN. The PRESIDIO Phase 2 clinical trial is evaluating KZR-616 in dermatomyositis, or DM, and polymyositis, or PM, indications for which KZR-616 have been granted orphan drug designation, or ODD, by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA. Based on Phase 1 clinical data generated to date with KZR-616, as well as preclinical data with selective immunoproteasome inhibitors, we believe that KZR-616 has the potential to address multiple chronic immune-mediated diseases.
We believe that the immunoproteasome is a validated target for the treatment of a wide variety of immune-mediated diseases given its ability to regulate multiple drivers of the inflammatory disease process. Many inflammatory disorders are currently treated one cytokine or cell type at a time, but the immunoproteasome affects a broad spectrum of immune regulators. We have seen encouraging clinical activity and biomarker data in the SLE and LN patients who received KZR-616 in the MISSION trial to date. The safety and tolerability profile of KZR-616 has been favorable and consistent with needs for a long-term therapy.
Our oncology product candidate, KZR-261, is being studied in an open-label Phase 1 clinical trial designed to evaluate safety and tolerability, pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics, as well to explore preliminary anti-tumor activity. This study will be conducted in two parts: dose escalation in subjects with locally advanced or metastatic solid malignancies, and dose expansion in subjects with selected tumor types. KZR-261 is the first clinical candidate from our novel research platform targeting the Sec61 translocon and the protein secretion pathway for the discovery and development of small molecule therapeutics for oncology and autoimmune indications. KZR-261 has demonstrated broad anti-tumor activity in preclinical models of both solid and hematologic malignancies by targeting multiple pathways driving tumor growth and survival. We believe this discovery platform has the potential to yield additional small molecule product candidates with this ability to inhibit multiple pathways as a single agent, as well as compounds designed to selectively inhibit a single secreted or transmembrane protein of interest. If successfully developed and approved, these small molecules could serve as alternatives to currently marketed biologic therapeutics to act as cytotoxic anti-cancer agents or to block the secretion of novel targets of interest in immuno-oncology or inflammation.
Since the commencement of our operations in 2015, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to performing research and development activities in support of our product development efforts, hiring personnel, raising capital to support and expand such activities and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations to date primarily from the issuance and sale of convertible preferred stock, from public offerings of common stock and pre-funded warrants to purchase common stock as described below, and debt. We acquired exclusive worldwide rights to KZR-616 and an accompanying library of similar molecules pursuant to a license agreement, or the Onyx License Agreement, with Onyx Therapeutics, Inc., or Onyx, a wholly owned subsidiary of Amgen, Inc. in June 2015. Patent coverage for KZR-616 extends to at least 2034.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our current or future product candidates and programs. Our net losses were $54.6 million, $41.7 million and $35.1 million for the years ended
December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and we expect to continue to incur significant losses for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $180.7 million. We anticipate that a substantial portion of our capital resources and efforts in the foreseeable future will be focused on discovering, completing the necessary development, obtaining regulatory approval and preparing for potential commercialization of our product candidates.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from period to period, depending on the timing of our planned clinical trials and expenditures on other research and development activities. We expect our expenses will increase substantially over time as we:
•continue the ongoing and planned development of KZR-616 and KZR-261;
•seek to discover and develop additional product candidates, including preclinical studies and clinical trials for such product candidates;
•maintain, protect and expand our portfolio of intellectual property rights, including patents, trade secrets and know-how;
•seek marketing approvals for KZR-616, KZR-261 and any future product candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•establish a sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution infrastructure to commercialize any product candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval;
•continue to build a portfolio of product candidates through the acquisition or in-license of drugs, product candidates or technologies;
•implement operational, financial, management and compliance systems; and
•attract, hire and retain additional administrative, clinical, regulatory and scientific personnel; and
•incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses associate with operating as a public company.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
We define our critical accounting policies as those accounting principles that require us to make subjective estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain and are likely to have a material impact on our financial condition and results of operations, as well as the specific manner in which we apply those principles. Our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements located elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have listed below our critical accounting policies and estimates that we believe to have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Historically, our assumptions, judgments and estimates relative to our critical accounting estimates have not differed materially from actual results and no significant assumptions used have a high degree of subjectivity.
Accrued Research and Development Costs
We record accrued expenses for estimated costs of our research and development activities conducted by third-party service providers, which include the conduct of clinical studies, contract manufacturing activities and preclinical studies. We record the estimated costs of research and development activities based upon the estimated amount of services provided but not yet invoiced and include these costs in accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets and within research and development expense in the consolidated statements of operations. These costs are a significant component of our research and development expenses. We record accrued expenses for these costs based on factors such as estimates of the work completed and in accordance with agreements established with these third-party service providers. Any payments made in advance of services provided are recorded as prepaid assets, which are expensed as the contracted services are performed.
We estimate the amount of work completed through discussions with internal personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of the services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services. We make significant judgments and estimates in determining the accrued balance in each reporting period. As actual costs become known, we adjust our accrued estimates. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed, the number of patients enrolled and the rate of patient enrollment may vary from our estimates and could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. Our accrued expenses are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from clinical research organizations and other third-party service providers. For the periods presented, we have experienced no material differences between our accrued expenses and actual expenses.
Financial Operations Overview
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of our product candidates, which include:
•employee-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation;
•fees paid to consultants for services directly related to our product development and regulatory effort;
•expenses incurred under agreements with third-party contract organizations, investigative clinical trial sites and consultants that conduct research and development activities on our behalf;
•costs associated with preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•costs associated with technology and intellectual property licenses;
•the costs related to production of clinical supplies; and
•facilities and other allocated expenses, which include expenses for rent and other facility related costs and other supplies.
We expense all research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. Costs for certain development activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information and data provided to us by our vendors, collaborators and third-party service providers.
We are eligible under the AusIndustry Research and Tax Development Tax Incentive Program to obtain a cash amount from the Australian Taxation Office. The tax incentive is available to us on the basis of specific criteria with which we must comply related to research and development expenditures in Australia. These research and development tax incentives are recognized as contra research and development expense when the right to receive the tax incentive has been attained and funds are considered to be collectible. The amounts are determined based on a cost-reimbursement basis, and the incentive is related to our research and development expenditures and is due to us regardless of whether any Australian tax is owed. Amounts related to the AusIndustry Research and Development Tax Incentive Program are recognized when there is reasonable assurance that the incentive will be received, the relevant expenditure has been incurred by our Australian subsidiary, Kezar Life Sciences Australia Pty Ltd, a proprietary company limited by shares, and the amount of the consideration can be reliably measured.
The following table summarizes our research and development expenses for the years ended:
We expect our research and development expenses to increase substantially for the foreseeable future as our product candidates advance into later stages of development. The process of conducting the necessary clinical research to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time-consuming, and the successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As a result, we are unable to determine the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects or when and to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, allocated facilities costs and fees for outside consulting and professional services, including legal, human resource, information technology and audit services. Personnel expenses consist of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation. We will incur additional expenses as we increase the size of our administrative function to support the growth of our business.
Interest Income
Our interest income consists of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Our interest expense consists of interest expense related to our debt facility. A portion of the interest expense is non-cash expense relating to the accretion of the final payment fees and amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs associated with the Loan Agreement.
Results of Operations
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 11, 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $7.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $2.3 million in clinical trial related costs for KZR-616, an increase of $2.2 million in personnel related expenses due to an increase in headcount, an increase of $1.6 million in clinical trial related start-up costs for KZR-261, an increase of $1.4 million in drug manufacturing expenses for KZR-616, an increase of $0.9 million in stock-based compensation, an increase of $0.7 million in research expenses related to the protein secretion program, an increase of $0.7 million in consulting fees driven by increased clinical development and regulatory activities, and an increase of $0.4 million in facility-related expenses, offset by a decrease of $2.3 million in preclinical expenses related to the IND enabling studies for KZR-261.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $3.8 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $1.8 million in stock-based compensation, an increase of $1.2 million in personnel expenses due to an increase in headcount and salaries, an increase of $0.3 million in consulting and professional service fees, an increase of $0.2 million in directors and officers liability insurance, and an increase of $0.3 million in facility-related expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $1.0 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily attributable to lower interest rates on our marketable securities.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $0.2 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The interest expense was comprised of the contractual coupon interest expense, the amortization of the debt discount and issuance costs and the accretion of the final payment fee associated with the Loan Agreement with Oxford Finance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
As of December 31, 2021, we had $62.9 million in cash and cash equivalents and $145.5 million of marketable securities invested in a U.S. Treasury money market fund, U.S. Treasury securities, U.S. agency bonds, commercial paper and corporate debt securities. As of December 31, 2021, our cash equivalents and marketable securities had an average maturity of approximately five months and the longest maturity was eleven months.
We have incurred operating losses and experienced negative operating cash flows since our inception and anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the foreseeable future. Our net loss was $54.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and we had an accumulated deficit of $180.7 million as of December 31, 2021.
We believe that our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements through at least the next 12 months from the date the financial statements were issued. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
At-the-Market Offering Programs
During 2021, we sold an aggregate of 9,352,359 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $104.1 million at a weighted average purchase price of $11.13 per share pursuant to the at-the-market offering programs described below.
In December 2021, we entered into a Sales Agreement (the “December 2021 ATM Agreement”) with Cowen and Company, LLC, or Cowen, pursuant to which we can offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion through Cowen, as our sales agent, shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $200.0 million. Any shares of common stock sold will be issued pursuant to our automatic shelf registration statement on Form S-3ASR (File No. 333-261774). We will pay Cowen a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of any shares of common stock sold through Cowen under the December 2021 ATM Agreement and also have provided Cowen with indemnification and contribution rights. As of December 31, 2021, we have sold an aggregate of 74,304 shares of our common stock for gross proceeds of approximately $1.2 million at a weighted average purchase price of $16.10 per share pursuant to the December 2021 ATM Agreement. As of March 15, 2022, an additional of 424,043 shares of our common stock were sold pursuant to the December 2021 ATM Agreement for gross proceeds of approximately $6.4 million at a weighted average purchase price of $15.04 per share. Approximately $192.4 million remains available under the automatic shelf registration statement.
We previously entered into a Sales Agreement with Cowen in November 2021 (the “November 2021 ATM Agreement”) and a Sales Agreement with Cowen in September 2020 (the “September 2020 ATM Agreement”), pursuant to which we could offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion through Cowen, as our sales agent, shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100.0 million and $50.0 million, respectively. Shares of common stock sold under the November 2021 ATM Agreement and September 2020 ATM Agreement (the “Prior ATM Agreements”) were issued and sold pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-248752). We paid Cowen a commission equal to 3.0% of the gross sales proceeds of shares of common stock sold under the Prior ATM Agreements. The November 2021 ATM Agreement was terminated as of December 20, 2021, and the September 2020 ATM Agreement was terminated as of November 19, 2021. Following termination, we will not sell any additional shares of common stock pursuant to the Prior ATM Agreements.
Debt Facility
In November 2021, we entered into a loan and security agreement, or the Loan Agreement, with Oxford Finance LLC, or Oxford Finance, which provides up to $50.0 million in borrowing capacity across five potential tranches. The initial tranche of $10.0 million was funded at the closing of the Loan Agreement, and an additional $10.0 million will be available at our election from July 1, 2022 to December 30, 2022. Subsequent tranches of up to $20.0 million each would become available upon achieving milestones related to our MISSION Phase 2 clinical trial, our PRESIDIO Phase 2 clinical trial and our KZR-261 Phase 1 clinical trial, up to the aggregate maximum amount of $50.0 million. The Loan Agreement bears interest at a floating per annum rate (based on the actual number of days elapsed divided by a year of 360 days) equal to the sum of (a) the greater of (i) the 30-day U.S. LIBOR rate reported in The Wall Street Journal on the last business day of the month that immediately precedes the month in which the interest will accrue and (ii) 0.08%, plus (b) 7.87%. We are required to make monthly interest-only payments prior to the amortization date of January 1, 2025, subject to a potential one-year extension upon satisfaction of certain conditions. The loan facility is secured by all assets except intellectual property, which is subject to a negative pledge, and will mature on November 1, 2026. There are no warrants or financial covenants associated with the Loan Agreement.
Funding Requirements
We believe that our available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments and continued access to our term loan are sufficient to fund existing and planned cash requirements. Our primary uses of capital are, and we expect will continue to be, compensation and related expenses, third-party clinical research and development services, clinical costs, legal and other regulatory expenses and general overhead costs. We have based our estimates on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
•the progress, timing, scope, results and costs of our clinical trials and preclinical studies for our product candidates, including the ability to enroll patients in a timely manner for our clinical trials;
•the costs of obtaining clinical and commercial supplies for KZR-616, KZR-261 and any other product candidates we may identify and develop;
•the cost, timing and outcomes of regulatory approvals;
•the extent to which we may acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•the cost of attracting, hiring and retaining qualified personnel;
•our ability to successfully commercialize any product candidates for which we obtain regulatory approval; and
•the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights.
Further, our operating plan may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements for clinical trials and other research and development expenditures. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and commercialization of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our current and anticipated clinical studies.
Our material cash requirements also include the following contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in millions). For additional information, see our consolidated financial statements.
(1) Debt obligations include principal, future interest payments and the final payment fee due on maturity. Interest payments include interests on variable rate debt based on the outstanding balances and the applicable initial rates at the closing of the Loan Agreement with Oxford Finance. Refer to Note 7 of our audited financial statements for payments due under the term loans.
(2) Amounts in the table represent the operating lease obligations of office and laboratory space at 4000 Shoreline Court, South San Francisco, California. The minimum lease payments above do not include common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
Except as disclosed in the table above, we have no long-term debt or capital leases and no material non-cancelable purchase commitments with service providers, as we have generally contracted on a cancelable, purchase order basis.
The above table does not include any potential contingent payments upon the achievement by us of clinical, regulatory and commercial events, as applicable, or royalty payments that we may be required to make under license agreements we have entered into or may enter into with various entities pursuant to which we have in-licensed certain intellectual property, including our Onyx License Agreement. Under the Onyx License Agreement, we are obligated to pay Onyx milestone payments of up to $172.5 million in the aggregate upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and sales milestones. We excluded the contingent payments given that the timing and amount (if any) of any such payments cannot be reasonably estimated at this time. See the section titled “Business-License Agreement with Onyx” for additional information.
We will require additional financing to fund working capital and pay our obligations. We may pursue financing opportunities through the issuance of debt or equity. There can be no assurance that we will be successful in acquiring additional funding at levels sufficient to fund our operations or on terms favorable to us or at all. Funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. The COVID-19 pandemic and the Russian incursion into the Ukraine have already resulted in significant disruption of global financial markets. If such a disruption occurs, we could experience an inability to access additional capital, which could in the future negatively affect our operations. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our preclinical studies, clinical trials, research and development programs or commercialization efforts. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations and other licensing arrangements. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
Cash Flows
Discussion of our cash flow activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 is included in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” included in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 11, 2021.
The following summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $42.4 million, which consisted of a net loss of $54.6 million and a net change of $1.2 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, and adjusted by non-cash charges of $11.0 million. The non-cash charges consisted of $1.5 million for depreciation and amortization, $7.6 million for stock-based compensation expense, $1.8 million of amortization of premium and discounts on marketable securities, and $0.1 million of non-cash interest expense. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to a decrease of $1.1 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and an increase of $1.2 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of payments and increased clinical and manufacturing expenditures, offset by a decrease of $1.0 million in operating lease liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $36.9 million, which consisted of a net loss of $41.7 million and a net change of $2.0 million in our net operating assets and liabilities, and adjusted by non-cash charges of $6.8 million. The non-cash charges consisted of $1.5 million for depreciation and amortization and $4.9 million for stock-based compensation expense, $0.3 million of amortization of premium and discounts on marketable securities. The change in our net operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to an increase of $1.4 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a decrease of $0.9 million in operating lease liabilities, offset by an increase of $0.3 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses due to timing of payments and increased clinical and manufacturing expenditures.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $28.4 million primarily relating to the purchases of marketable securities exceeding maturities of such marketable securities. Payments for the purchases of property and equipment was $0.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $56.5 million primarily relating to the purchases of marketable securities exceeding maturities of such marketable securities. Payments for the purchases of property and equipment was $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $112.6 million, consisting of $101.0 million of net proceeds received from the at-the-market offering programs described above, $9.5 million of net proceeds received under the Loan Agreement with Oxford Finance, and $2.1 million from the issuance of common stock pursuant to our employee equity plans.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities was $99.6 million, consisting of $99.2 million of net proceeds received from the underwritten public offering and $0.4 million from the issuance of common stock pursuant to our employee equity plans.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption from new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if as an “emerging growth company” we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until December 31, 2023 or until we no longer meet the requirements of being an emerging growth company, whichever is earlier.