ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following summary together with the more detailed business information and consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this Form 10-K and in the documents that we incorporate by reference into this Form 10-K. This document may contain certain “forward-looking” information within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. This information involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. In this Form 10-K, (a) “FY” means fiscal year; thus for example, FY22 refers to the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022 and (b) “Q” refers to a quarter; thus, for example, Q4 FY22 refers to the fourth quarter of the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022.
Revision of Prior Period Financial Statements
In connection with the preparation of the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended January 31, 2022, the Company identified errors in its previously filed annual consolidated financial statements and unaudited quarterly consolidated financial statements. The errors were not material to any individual prior quarterly or annual period. For further details, refer to Note 1. Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: Restatement For Correction of Immaterial Errors in Previously Issued Consolidated Financial Statements in our consolidated financial statements included in Part II. Item 8. of this Form 10-K. Accordingly, we have revised prior period financial results contained in this Form 10-K to correct the effect of these errors for the corresponding periods. Management’s discussion and analysis included herein is based on the revised financial results for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Overview
We manufacture and sell a comprehensive line of industrial protective clothing and accessories for the industrial and public protective clothing market. Our products are sold globally by our in-house sales teams, our customer service group, and authorized independent sales representatives to a network of over 1,600 global safety and industrial supply distributors. Our authorized distributors supply end users, such as integrated oil, chemical/petrochemical, automobile, steel, glass, construction, smelting, cleanroom, janitorial, pharmaceutical, and high technology electronics manufacturers, as well as scientific, medical laboratories and the utilities industry. In addition, we supply federal, state and local governmental agencies and departments, such as fire and law enforcement, airport crash rescue units, the Department of Defense, the Department of Homeland Security and the Centers for Disease Control. Internationally, we sell to a mixture of end users directly, and to industrial distributors depending on the particular country and market. In addition to the United States, sales are made to more than 50 foreign countries, the majority of which were into China, countries within the European Economic Community (“EEC”), Canada, Chile, Argentina, Russia, Kazakhstan, Colombia, Mexico, Ecuador, India and countries within Southeast Asia.
We are continually monitoring the potential financial impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine on our operations. For FY22, sales in Russia were approximately 2.5% of our consolidated sales and sales into Ukraine were not significant.
We had net sales of $118.4 million in FY22 and $159.0 million in FY21.
We have operated facilities in Mexico since 1995 and in China since 1996. Beginning in 1995, we moved the labor intensive sewing operation for our limited use/disposable protective clothing lines to these facilities. Our facilities and capabilities in China and Mexico allow access to a less expensive labor pool than is available in the United States and permit us to purchase certain raw materials at a lower cost than they are available domestically. We added manufacturing operations in Vietnam and India in fiscal 2019, to offset increasing manufacturing costs in China and further diversify our manufacturing capabilities. Our China operations will continue primarily manufacturing for the Chinese market and other markets where duty advantages exist. Manufacturing expansion is not only necessary to control rising costs, it is also necessary for Lakeland to achieve its growth objectives.
Our net sales attributable to customers outside the United States were $70.8 million and $88.4 million for the fiscal years ended January 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Response to COVID-19 Outbreak
Our strategy for responding to the COVID-19 outbreak evolved from prior “black swan” events. These events have been disruptive for the users of our products and contributed little in terms of sustainable business improvement or growth for the suppliers. Any business gains attributable to these events were limited to short-term increases in sales volume and price increases associated with capacity expansion and expedited deliveries. In responding to COVID-19 Lakeland sought a new approach. Throughout COVID-19 we focused our attention on our existing business, adding new customers, and increasing market penetration by prioritizing service to our existing industrial end users and seeking new customers who were experiencing supply shortages. We sought to service the COVID-19 market to the extent that Lakeland had excess capacity after servicing existing and new industrial customers. We believe that focusing on the industrial market first and the pandemic market second, is a sound strategy for increasing market penetration in a post COVID-19 environment. Even though we were successful in selling to more than 500 new distributors and end users, 75% of whom were outside of the U.S. market, excess pipeline inventory and freight delays have proven a significant headwind. We anticipate that excess inventory will decline steadily as intermittent surges in COVID-19 cases continue and that industrial growth will continue to improve internationally as we transition from an emergency COVID-19 response to a business environment where COVID-19 is a diminished, but persistent component of sales.
Our manufacturing flexibility allows us to rapidly shift capacity between product lines and alter our product offering so that we can maximize throughput of critical products. In the case of COVID-19 we shifted our sewing capacity heavily to disposable and chemical garments; increased daily working hours; and ran a 7-day work week until market supply caught up with demand. We rationalized our product offerings and eliminated SKUs that did not meet our profitability goals, did not create a competitive advantage or were detrimental to manufacturing efficiencies due to changes over time. Because we own our manufacturing facilities, Lakeland was able to make these changes within the first couple of months of the pandemic.
The last two weeks of FY20 and all of FY21 and FY22, were impacted by our COVID-19 response strategy. As the pandemic progressed in FY21, we saw reductions in industrial activity due to lockdowns and work restrictions that resulted in diminished sales into petrochemicals, the utility sector, and industrial segments like automotive and airlines. Our second and third quarters of FY21 were the peak quarters for Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) pandemic sales. In Q4 FY21 we began to see a softening in demand for COVID-19 related sales, and a return of general industrial demand that continued into Q4 FY22. As the COVID-19 pandemic wanes, demand for associated PPE is falling, but the decline is being offset in part by an increase in industrial activity and associated industrial demand for PPE. COVID-19 related demand was estimated to be approximately 30% to 35% of FY21 revenue and accounted for an estimated 15% of FY22 sales.
While we saw, and noted, an initial recovery in the industrial markets in the U.S. in FY22, we now believe that the strength of the recovery was magnified by freight delays extending order leadtimes leading distributors and end users to place more orders as industrial activity surged. As these delayed shipments arrived throughout FY22, an excess of inventory was created in U.S. distribution channels. As stated earlier, we believe that intermittent surges in COVID-19 cases and the subsequent high rates of hospitalizations in the U.S. will draw down this inventory as freight delays continue. We believe that industrial activity in developed regions of the world is likely to continue to increase as vaccination levels increase and therapeutics improve, lessening reliance on shutdowns or lockdowns to control virus spread. As stated previously, we believe that developing regions of the world that are less prepared and have less robust medical care, will be slower in industrial recovery. We do not anticipate a slower industrial recovery in developing regions to negatively impact our growth potential primarily because the regional dispersion of our sales favors the developed regions of the world by a significant margin.
As noted above, as freight delayed orders arrived through late Q1 and the remainder of FY22, PPE manufacturing has caught up to current COVID-19 demand. Raw materials and finished goods pricing have declined from their pandemic-inflated levels, but increased freight costs and lack of availability of some precursors threaten to limit if not reverse the downward trend. Our future sales would be affected should there be an industry-wide shortage of necessary raw materials in the event of another rise or surge in COVID-19 cases, including any surges due to COVID-19 variants such as the delta or omicron variants. As previously noted, we did experience significant price increases for fabric during FY21 and managed our available manufacturing capacity to lower costs, and increased prices, to meet customer demand.
In FY22 we did not experience any significant manufacturing shutdowns or closures of any of our facilities due to COVID-19. Employee absence due to potential exposure or quarantine of the neighborhood in which they live is a persistent problem, but has not resulted in the shutdown of any facilities. We have not experienced any manufacturing capacity issues due to inability to source raw materials, government quarantine, or shelter-in-place orders, or due to COVID-19 outbreaks in any of our factories, however there can be no assurance that this will continue to be the case. In addition, we cannot predict any potential incremental cost that may be associated with any federal, state or local vaccine mandates or related testing protocol. While current economic indicators and industry data indicate an industrial market recovery, potential headwinds to revenue as we emerge from pandemic sales include the possibility of a recession and consumer stockpiled inventories that may temper demand within our regular markets in FY23.
While we have not experienced any raw materials shortages in our Asian manufacturing operations, we are experiencing some issues with U.S. sourced raw materials due to labor and precursor shortages affecting our higher margin product lines. In both Asia and the U.S., increasing labor and freight costs, as well as inflationary pressures threaten to drive raw material costs up and may negatively impact our gross margins. Where we can, we will seek to recover increased costs with corresponding price increases.
Additionally, we have experienced, along with most other companies across many industries, the macro-economic impact of a challenging employment environment related to hiring and retaining employees and wage inflation. We expect that these hiring, retention, and wage inflation challenges, as well as challenges related to maintaining our current workforce, will continue into FY23. These hiring, retention, and cost challenges may negatively affect our ability to grow our business and keep our best employees or increase our cost of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Revenue Recognition. Substantially all the Company’s revenue is derived from product sales, which consist of sales of the Company’s personal protective wear products to distributors. The Company considers purchase orders to be a contract with a customer. Contracts with customers are considered to be short-term when the time between order confirmation and satisfaction of the performance obligations is equal to or less than one year, and virtually all of the Company’s contracts are short-term. The Company recognizes revenue for the transfer of promised goods to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods. The Company typically satisfies its performance obligations in contracts with customers upon shipment of the goods. Generally, payment is due from customers within 30 to 90 days of the invoice date, and the contracts do not have significant financing components. The Company elected to account for shipping and handling activities as a fulfillment cost rather than a separate performance obligation. Shipping and handling costs associated with outbound freight are included in operating expenses, and for the years ended in FY22 and FY21 aggregated approximately $2.9 million and $3.9 million, respectively. Taxes collected from customers relating to product sales and remitted to governmental authorities are excluded from revenue.
The transaction price includes estimates of variable consideration, related to rebates, allowances, and discounts that are reductions in revenue. All estimates are based on the Company’s historical experience, anticipated performance, and the Company’s best judgment at the time the estimate is made. Estimates for variable consideration are reassessed each reporting period and are included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur upon resolution of uncertainty associated with the variable consideration. All the Company’s contracts have a single performance obligation satisfied at a point in time and the transaction price is stated in the contract, usually as quantity times price per unit.
Inventories. Inventories include freight-in, materials, labor and overhead costs and are stated at the lower of cost (on a first-in, first-out or moving average basis) or net realizable value. Allowances are recorded for slow-moving, obsolete or unusable inventory. We assess our inventory for estimated obsolescence or unmarketable inventory and write down the difference between the cost of inventory and the estimated net realizable value based upon assumptions about future sales and supply on-hand, if necessary. If actual market conditions are less favorable than those projected by management, additional inventory write-downs may be required. In FY22 and FY21, we recorded approximately $0.6 million in write-downs of inventory and $0.1 million in inventory adjustments in FY21.
Income Taxes. The Company is required to estimate its income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which it operates as part of preparing the consolidated financial statements. This involves estimating the actual current tax in addition to assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatments for tax and financial accounting purposes. These differences, together with net operating loss carryforwards and tax credits, are recorded as deferred tax assets or liabilities on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. A judgment must then be made of the likelihood that any deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. A valuation allowance may be required to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. In the event the Company determines that it may not be able to realize all or part of its deferred tax asset in the future, or that new estimates indicate that a previously recorded valuation allowance is no longer required, an adjustment to the deferred tax asset is charged or credited to income in the period of such determination. In FY22 and FY21, we recorded a valuation allowance of approximately $0.8 million and $1.0 million, respectively.
The Company recognizes tax positions that meet a “more likely than not” minimum recognition threshold. If necessary, the Company recognizes interest and penalties associated with tax matters as part of the income tax provision and would include accrued interest and penalties with the related tax liability in the consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income Per Share.Basic net income per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding without consideration of common stock equivalents. Diluted net income per share is based on the weighted average number of common shares and common stock equivalents. The diluted net income per share calculation takes into account unvested restricted shares and the shares that may be issued upon exercise of stock options and warrants, reduced by shares that may be repurchased with the funds received from the exercise, based on the average price during the fiscal year.
Significant Balance Sheet Fluctuation January 31, 2022, as Compared to January 31, 2021
Cash increased by $0.1 million, primarily as a result of $12.8 million of cash generated from operations offset by $9.2 million in share repurchases, $2.8 million in equity investment and $0.8 million in capital improvements. Operating cashflow changes were driven by a decline in accounts receivable of $6.7 million due to collections and reduced revenue in FY22. Inventory increased $4.4 million driven by investment in inventory to reduce the impact on our supply chain of a global slowdown in freight deliveries. Accounts payable, accrued compensation, and other accrued expenses decreased $5.0 million due to a decrease in purchasing activity and lower variable compensation caused by lower sales and profitability in FY22.
On October 18, 2021, the Company made a strategic investment of $2.8 million in Inova Design Solutions Ltd. (doing business as Bodytrak®) as a groundbreaking step toward entering the Connected Worker Market for “Smart PPE.” Bodytrak’s unique ear-based sensor platform uses precise physiological measurements and cloud-based analytics to automate health, safety and performance monitoring, making it an ideal complement to Lakeland’s portfolio of industrial protective solutions.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our external sales by our product lines, and geographic regions and our historical results of continuing operations as a percentage of our net sales from operations, for the years and three-months ended January 31, 2022 and 2021.
Net Sales. Net sales decreased to $118.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $159.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, a decrease of $40.6 million. Sales in the US decreased $23.0 million or 32.6% primarily due to decreases in the number of direct container shipments in the US, and lower sales driven by COVID-19 demand. Sales to the Asian market decreased by $1.4 million or 4.5% due to lower COVID-19 demand. Sales to the European market decreased by $6.5 million or 38.7% driven by reduced COVID-19 demand and inventory overhang at our customers. Canada sales decreased by $5.4 million or 39.7% due to lower direct container shipments. Latin America sales decreased $0.8 million or 6.6% due to lower COVID-19 demand. Sales into the Mexican market decreased $1.6 million or 28.1% driven by lower COVID-19 demand. Our other foreign markets accounted for $1.9 million of decreased sales or 21.1% due to lower COVID-19 demand. Sales of our disposable and chemical product line were impacted due to a reduction in direct container sales driven by COVID-19 demand and continued softness in demand from our industrial markets. Other product lines such as fire, high performance, and wovens, increased by $2.0 million due to strengthening demand in those markets. Sales were affected by customers over-ordering in prior periods, resulting in excess channel inventories, and shipping delays with ocean freight carriers.
Gross Profit. Gross profit decreased $28.4 million, or 35.8%, to $50.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, from $79.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. Gross profit as a percentage of net sales decreased to 43.0% for the year ended January 31, 2022 from 49.9% for the year ended January 31, 2021. Gross profit performance in FY 21 benefited from higher volumes including direct container shipments, related factory utilization and an improving product mix with pricing power. Major factors driving the decline in gross margins in FY22, were:
·
Lower level of direct container sales in the current period.
·
Return to competitive pricing pressures as COVID-19 demand decreases.
·
Increases in transportation costs.
Operating Expense. Operating expenses decreased 1.4% from $35.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 to $34.9 million for the year ended January 31, 2022. Operating expenses as a percentage of net sales was 29.5% for the year ended January 31, 2022, as compared to 22.3% for the year ended January 31, 2021. Operating expenses were down primarily due to reductions in sales compensation due to lower sales freight out expenses, and currency translation offset by increases in administrative salaries for new staff and technology expenses..
Operating Profit. Operating profit decreased to $16.0 million for the year ended January 31, 2022, from $43.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, due to the impacts detailed above. Operating margin decreased to 13.6% for the year ended January 31, 2022, compared to 27.6% for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Interest Expense. Interest expenses was less than $0.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 compared to $0.1 million for the year ended January 31, 2021. The Company did not drawdown any of its available line of credit during FY22.
Income Tax Expense. Income tax expense consists of federal, state and foreign income taxes. Income tax expense was $4.8 million and included $0.7 million associated with the GILTI component of the Tax Act of 2017 for the year ended January 31, 2022, as compared to an income tax expense of $8.5 million, including $1.9 million associated with the GILTI component, for the year ended January 31, 2021. All international subsidiaries impacted the GILTI component of income tax expense.
Net Income. Net income decreased to $11.4 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 from $35.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2021.
Fourth Quarter Results
Net sales and net income were $26.8 million and $0.5 million, respectively, for Q4 FY22, as compared to $36.9 million and $7.7 million, respectively, for Q4 FY21.
Factors affecting Q4 FY22 results of operations included:
·
Decreased sales due to COVID-19 demand in the U.S. and Asia.
·
Margins were impacted by lower sales and increased freight costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At January 31, 2022, cash and cash equivalents were approximately $52.7 million and working capital was approximately $108.9 million. Cash and cash equivalents increased $0.1 million and working capital increased $1.7 million from January 31, 2021 reflecting positive earnings and the Company’s focus on working capital efficiencies.
Of the Company’s total cash and cash equivalents of $52.7 million as of January 31, 2022, cash held in Latin America of $1.9 million, cash held in Hong Kong of $2.1 million, cash held in the UK of $1.0 million, cash held in Vietnam of $1.1 million, cash held in India of $0.9 million and cash held in Canada of $1.4 million would not be subject to additional US tax in the event such cash was repatriated due to the change in the US tax law as a result of the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “Tax Act”). In the event the Company repatriated cash from China, of the $30.0 million balance at January 31, 2022 there would be an additional 10% withholding tax incurred in that country. The Company strategically employs a dividend plan subject to subsidiary profitability, cash requirements and withholding taxes. During FY22 the Company’s subsidiaries in Canada, Uruguay and Hong Kong declared and paid dividends of $2.6 million, $1.0 million and $4.4 million. Withholding taxes totaling $0.2 million are included in income tax expense. No dividends were proposed by management or declared by our Board of Directors for our China subsidiary in FY22 or FY21.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $12.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 was primarily due to net income of $11.4 million, non-cash expenses of $4.3 million for deferred taxes, depreciation and amortization, and stock compensation, and decrease in accounts receivable due to lower sales activity of $6.7 million offset by increase in net inventories of $4.4 million and a decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $5.2 million due to lower sales volume. Net cash used in investing activities of $3.6 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 reflects the Company’s $2.8 million investment in Bodytrak®) as a groundbreaking step toward entering the Connected Worker Market for “Smart PPE.” Purchases in property and equipment were $0.8 million as the Company optimized capital expenditures in the year for the ERP project, leasehold improvements for our new corporate headquarters, and equipment purchases in Mexico and China. Net cash used in financing activities was $9.8 million for the year ended January 31, 2022 due to the purchase of $9.2 million of our common stock.
Net cash provided by operating activities of $40.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 was primarily due to net income of $35.3 million, non-cash expenses of $6.8 million for deferred taxes, depreciation and amortization, and stock compensation, decrease in net inventories of $0.8 million and an increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities of $3.5 million, offset in part by a $4.0 million increase to accounts receivable due to a higher sales volumes in the fourth quarter as compared to prior year and an increase in other current assets of $1.7 million due to an increase in amounts due from HSBC under the UK factoring agreement. Net cash used in investing activities of $1.7 million for the year ended January 31, 2021 reflects purchases in property and equipment as the Company optimized capital expenditures in the year for the ERP project, the set-up of manufacturing facilities in Vietnam and India, the enhancement of IT infrastructure, and equipment purchases in Mexico and China. Net cash used in financing activities was $1.3 million for the year ended January 31, 2021, primarily due to the repayment of $1.2 million term loan with SunTrust Bank as part of the transition to the new Loan Agreement with Bank of America.
On June 25, 2020, we entered into a Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with Bank of America (“Lender”). The Loan Agreement provides the Company with a secured $12.5 million revolving credit facility, which includes a $5.0 million letter of credit sub-facility. The Company may request from time to time an increase in the revolving credit loan commitment of up to $5.0 million (for a total commitment of up to $17.5 million). Borrowing pursuant to the revolving credit facility is subject to a borrowing base amount calculated as (a) 80% of eligible accounts receivable, as defined, plus (b) 50% of the value of acceptable inventory, as defined, minus (c) certain reserves as the Lender may establish for the amount of estimated exposure, as reasonably determined by the Lender from time to time, under certain interest rate swap contracts. The borrowing base limitation only applies during periods when the Company’s quarterly funded debt to EBITDA ratio, as defined, exceeds 2.00 to 1.00. The credit facility will mature on June 25, 2025. Borrowings under the revolving credit facility bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the sum of the LIBOR Daily Floating Rate (“LIBOR”), plus 125 basis points. LIBOR is subject to a floor of 100 basis points. All outstanding principal and unpaid accrued interest under the revolving credit facility is due and payable on the maturity date. On a one-time basis, and subject to there not existing an event of default, the Company may elect to convert up to $5.0 million of the then outstanding principal of the revolving credit facility to a term loan facility with an assumed amortization of 15 years and the same interest rate and maturity date as the revolving credit facility. The Loan Agreement provides for an annual unused line of credit commitment fee, payable quarterly, of 0.25%, based on the difference between the total credit line commitment and the average daily amount of credit outstanding under the facility during the preceding quarter.
On June 18, 2021, the Company entered into an Amendment No. 1 to Loan Agreement (the “Amendment”) with the Lender, which modifies certain terms of the Company’s existing Loan Agreement with the Lender. The Amendment increases the credit limit under the Loan Agreement’s senior secured revolving credit facility from $12.5 million to $25.0 million. The Amendment also amends the covenant in the Loan Agreement that restricts acquisitions by the Company or its subsidiaries in order to allow, without the prior consent of the Lender, acquisitions of a business or its assets if there is no default under the Loan Agreement and the aggregate consideration does not exceed $7.5 million for any individual acquisition or $15.0 million on a cumulative basis for all such acquisitions.
The Loan Agreement requires the Company to maintain a Funded Debt to EBITDA (as each such term is defined in the Loan Agreement) ratio of 3.0 to 1.0 or less and a Basic Fixed Charge Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Loan Agreement) of at least 1.15 to 1.0. The Loan Agreement also contains customary covenants, including covenants that, among other things, limit or restrict the Company’s and/or the Company’s subsidiaries ability, subject to certain exceptions and qualifications, to incur liens or indebtedness, or merge, consolidate or sell or otherwise transfer assets. The Company was in compliance with all of its debt covenants as of January 31, 2022. As of January 31, 2022, the Company had no borrowings under the Loan Agreement, and there was $25 million of additional available credit under the Loan Agreement.
We believe that our current cash, cash equivalents, borrowing capacity under our Loan Agreement and the cash to be generated from expected product sales will be sufficient to meet our projected operating and investing requirements for at least the next twelve months. However, our liquidity assumptions may prove to be incorrect, and we could utilize our available financial resources sooner than we currently expect.
Stock Repurchase Program. On February 17, 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program under which the Company may repurchase up to $5 million of its outstanding common stock. On July 6, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized an increase in the Company’s current stock repurchase program under which the Company may repurchase up to an additional $5 million of its outstanding common stock (the “Existing Share Repurchase Program”). Shares repurchased in FY22 totaled 430,463 shares at a cost of $9.2 million leaving $0.8 million remaining under the Existing Share Repurcahse Program at January 31, 2022.
On April 7, 2022, the Board of Directors authorized a new stock repurchase program under which the Company may repurchase up to $5 million of its outstanding common stock (the “New Share Repurchase Program”). The New Share Repurchase Program will become effective upon the completion of the Existing Share Repurchase Program, which has approximately $800,000 remaining for repurchases as of April 21, 2022. The New Share Repurchase Program has no expiration date but may be terminated by the Board of Directors at any time.
Capital Expenditures. Our capital expenditures for FY22 of $0.8 million principally relate to capital purchases for our manufacturing facilities in Vietnam and India, the enhancement of IT infrastructure, and equipment purchases in Mexico and the US. We anticipate FY23 capital expenditures to be approximately $3.0 million as we continue to deploy our ERP solution globally, invest in strategic capacity expansion, and replace existing equipment in the normal course of operations. We expect to fund the capital expenditures from our cash flow from operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 - Business and Significant Accounting Policies of the consolidated financial statements in Part II Item 8 of this Form 10-K.