ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
General
The following discussion and analysis of the results of operations and financial condition of the Company for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes and the description of our business and properties included elsewhere herein.
Overview
Laser Photonics is a vertically integrated manufacturing company for photonics based industrial products and solutions, primarily disruptive laser technologies, mainly premier Laser Blasting equipment. Our vertically integrated operations allow us to reduce development and advanced laser equipment manufacturing time, offer better prices, control quality and protect our proprietary knowhow and technology compared to other laser cleaning companies and companies with competing technologies.
We intend to continue to stay ahead of the technology curve by researching and developing cutting edge products and technologies for both large and small businesses. We view the small companies as an attractive market opportunity since they were previously unable to take advantage of laser processing equipment due to high prices, significant operating costs and the technical complexities of the laser equipment. As a result, we are developing a group of standardized laser cleaning equipment that we have named the CleanTech™ laser blaster family of equipment that we believe represents a new generation of high power laser cleaning and rust removal systems that will be affordable to more than a million small and mid- size companies.
Our vertically integrated operations allow us to reduce manufacturing costs, control quality, rapidly develop and integrate advanced products and protect our proprietary technology.
COVID-19
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus originating in Wuhan, China (the “COVID-19 outbreak”) and the risks to the international community as the virus spreads globally beyond its point of origin. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally.
The full impact of the COVID-19 outbreak continues to evolve as of the date of this Form 10-K. As such, it is uncertain as to the full magnitude that the pandemic will have on our financial condition, liquidity, and future results of operations. Management is actively monitoring the global situation on its financial condition, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. Given the daily evolution of the COVID-19 outbreak and the global responses to curb its spread, we are not able to estimate the effects of the COVID-19 outbreak on our results of operations, financial condition, or liquidity for fiscal year 2020.
Some of our suppliers from China are likely to decrease production due to factory closures or reduced operating hours in those facilities. While these disruptions may be temporary, continued disruption in the supply chain may lead to our delayed receipt of necessary raw materials, component inventory, and negatively impact sales in fiscal year 2020 and our overall liquidity.
We are dependent on our workforce to deliver our products. Developments such as social distancing and shelter-in-place directives will impact our ability to deploy our workforce effectively. While expected to be temporary, prolonged workforce disruptions may negatively impact sales in fiscal year 2020 and our overall liquidity.
The adverse economic effects of the COVID-19 outbreak are expected not to materially decrease demand for our products based on the restrictions in place by governments trying to curb the outbreak and changes in consumer behavior. However, this may lead to our not achieving our sales goals in fiscal year 2020 and our overall liquidity.
The Covid 19 outbreak could have a continued material adverse impact on economic and market conditions and trigger a period of global economic slowdown, which is expected to depress our asset values, including long-lived assets, intangible assets, etc.
Although we cannot estimate the length or gravity of the impact of the COVID-19 outbreak at this time, if the pandemic continues, it may have a material adverse effect on our results of future operations, financial position, and liquidity in fiscal year 2020.
Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act
On March 27, 2020, the U.S. Government enacted the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). The CARES Act includes various income and payroll tax provisions. The Company has analyzed the tax provisions of the CARES Act and determined they could have a significant financial impact on our financial statements. On April 27, 2020, the Company received a loan from Axiom Bank, N.A., headquartered in Central Florida in the aggregate amount of $198,750 pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under the CARES Act. Under the terms of the PPP, PPP loans and accrued interest are forgivable after eight weeks as long as the borrower uses the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintains its payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if the borrower terminates employees or reduces salaries during the eight-week period. The Company has repaid the loan.
Description of Our Gross Sales, Costs and Expenses
Gross sales. We derive net sales primarily from the growth was driven by increasing demand for our products, partially offset by declines in average sales prices, the introduction of new products, including laser blasting systems and the development of new applications for our products.
We develop our products to standard specifications and use a common set of components within our product architectures. Our major products are based upon a common technology platform. We continually enhance these and other products by improving their components and developing new product designs. Sales of our products are generally recognized upon shipment, provided that no obligations remain and collection of the receivable is reasonably assured.
Our sales typically are made on a purchase order basis rather than through long-term purchase commitments. We entered into laser equipment sales agreements with customers for specific equipment based on purchase orders and our standard terms and conditions of sale. All revenues are reported net of any sales discounts or taxes. Under our customer contracts or/and purchase orders, we transfer title and risk of loss to the customer and recognize revenue upon shipment. Our customers do not have extended payment terms or rights of return under these contracts.
Cost of Goods Sold. Our cost of goods sold includes the cost of raw materials and components for manufacturing laser systems and consists of different electronic and optical components such as optical generators, scan heads, connector assemblies and wires, edge seal and adhesives, junction boxes, and other items, such as raw aluminum and aluminum extrusions, steel for tilt brackets and frames, subassemblies, miscellaneous materials, chemicals, support and low cost common parts and components, like tie wraps, insulating tape, shrink wraps, terminals, etc. We are vertically integrated and currently manufacture all critical components for our products as well as assemble finished products. Our cost of goods sold dose not includes direct labor for the manufacturing, and manufacturing overhead such as engineering, equipment maintenance, quality and production control, and procurement costs. Cost of goods sold dose not includes depreciation of manufacturing plant and equipment and facility-related expenses. In addition, we accrue warranty costs to our cost of sales.
Overall, we expect our cost of goods sold to continue to decrease over the next several years due to an increase in worldwide capacity in fiber laser parts and components, and availability of optical generators, an increase in unit output per production line, and more efficient absorption of fixed costs driven by economies of scale. This expected decrease in cost for laser technology would be partially offset during periods in which we underutilize manufacturing capacity.
Sales and marketing. Our sales and marketing expense consists primarily of costs related to compensation, trade shows, professional and technical conferences, travel, facilities, depreciation of equipment used for demonstration purposes and other marketing costs.
Selling, General and administrative Expenses. Our general and administrative expense consists primarily of compensation and associated costs for executive management, finance, legal, human resources, information technology and other administrative personnel, outside legal and professional fees, insurance premiums and fees, allocated facilities costs and other corporate expenses such as charges and benefits related to the change in allowance for doubtful debt. Our business has certain of its own dedicated administrative key functions, such as accounting, legal, finance, project finance, human resources, procurement, and marketing. Costs for such functions are recorded and included within selling, general and administrative costs.
Gross margin. Our total gross margin in any period can be significantly affected by total net sales in any period, by competitive factors, by product mix, and by other factors such as changes in foreign exchange rates relative to the U.S. Dollar, some of which are not under our control. Gross margin is affected by numerous factors, including our module average selling prices, foreign exchange rates, the existence and effectiveness of subsidies and other economic incentives, competitive pressures, market demand, market mix, our manufacturing costs, product development costs, the effective utilization of our production facilities, and the ramp of production on new products.
Research and development expenses. Our research and development expense consists primarily of compensation, development expenses related to the design of our products and certain components, the cost of materials and components to build prototype devices for testing and facilities costs. Costs related to product development are recorded as research and development expenses in the period in which they are incurred. We acquire equipment for general use in further process developments and record the depreciation of this equipment as research and development expense.
We plan to continue to invest in research and development to improve our existing products and develop new systems and applications technology. We maintain a number of programs and activities to improve our technology and processes in order to enhance the performance and reduce the costs of our laser cleaning modules.
Interest Expense, Net. Interest expense, net of amounts capitalized, is incurred on various debt financings. We capitalize interest expense into our property, plant and equipment, project assets, and deferred project costs when such costs qualify for interest capitalization.
Factors and Trends That Affect Our Operations and Financial Results
In reading our financial statements, you should be aware of the following factors and trends that our management believes are important in understanding our financial performance.
COVID-19 Update. Economic indicators show some improvement from the severe contraction experienced earlier in 2020, which has led to an improvement in the recent demand environment in the United States. Currently, our Orlando, FL production facility in the United States remains open and is operating normally. We have implemented employee safety and sanitization protocols that have impacted productivity and efficiency. Our vertically integrated operations allow us to reduce development and advanced laser equipment manufacturing time, offer better prices, control quality and protect our proprietary knowhow and technology compared to other laser cleaning companies and companies with competing technologies.
Net sales. Net sales generated in 2021 showed an increase quarter to quarter driven by the demand for our products in spite of the COVID-19 pandemic that extended and deepened the weak macroeconomic environment prevailing at the end of 2020. In addition to these factors, sales were not affected by declines in average sales prices by competitors due to our offering lower prices, quality control and proprietary knowhow and technology compared to other laser cleaning companies with competing technologies.
Gross margin. Our total gross margin in any period can be significantly affected by total net sales in any period, by competitive factors such as product mix, and by other factors, some of which are not under our control. For instance, the gross margin for certain specialty products may be higher because there are fewer or sometimes no equivalent competing products. Further, we expect that some new technologies, products and systems will have returns above our cost of capital but may have gross margins below our corporate average.
Selling and general and administrative expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, professional fees, insurance costs, travel expenses and other selling expenses. We expect selling expenses to increase in the near term to support the planned growth of our business as we expand our sales and marketing efforts.
Research and development expenses. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel-related costs, the cost of products, materials, and outside services used in our process and product research and development activities. We acquire equipment for general use in further process developments and record the depreciation of this equipment as research and development expense. We maintain a number of programs and activities to improve our technology and processes to enhance the performance and reduce the costs of our cleaning laser modules. We intend to establish a separate accounting for R&D expenses in the near future.
Goodwill and long-lived assets impairments. Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. Impairment is measured by comparing the carrying value of the long-lived assets to the estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from use of the assets and their ultimate disposition. In instances where impairment is determined to exist, the Company will writes down the asset to its fair value based on the present value of estimated future cash flows.
Major customers. While we would expect to depend on current customers for a large percentage of our annual net sales, the composition of this group can change from year to year. Net sales derived from our current customers as a percentage of our annual net sales were 65% in 2021. Our new customers accounted for 35 --% of our net sales in 2021. We seek to add new customers and to expand our relationships with existing customers.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP") requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net sales and expenses
Our financial statements and accompanying notes have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods.
We regularly evaluate the accounting policies and estimates that we use to prepare our financial statements. In general, management’s estimates are based on historical experience, and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the facts and circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates made by management. These estimates are based on management’s historical industry experience and not the company’s historical experience.
Revenue Recognition- Under Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of Topic 606, the entity performs the following five steps: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer; (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect the consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer. At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we assess the goods or services promised within each contract and determine those that are performance obligations, and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct. We then recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) the performance obligation is satisfied. Refunds and returns, which are minimal, are recorded as a reduction of revenue. Payments received by customers prior to our satisfying the above criteria are recorded as unearned income in the combined balance sheets. All revenues were reported net of any sales discounts or taxes.
Inventory - Inventory is stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or market value. Inventory includes parts and components that may be specialized in nature and subject to rapid obsolescence. We maintain a reserve for excess or obsolete inventory items. Inventories are written off and charged to cost of goods sold when identified as excess or obsolete. If future sales differ from these forecasts, the valuation of excess and obsolete inventory may change and additional inventory provisions may be required. Because of our vertical integration, a significant or sudden decrease in sales could result in a significant change in the estimates of excess or obsolete inventory valuation. On December 31, 2021, we recorded $292,268 in Inventory Obsolescence.
Warranty - We maintain an accrual for warranty claims for units sold that are subject to warranty.
Income Taxes and Deferred Taxes - Our annual tax rate is based on our income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available to us in the various jurisdictions in which we operate.
Goodwill and Long-lived assets impairments. We review our intangible assets and property, plant and equipment for impairment when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not be recoverable. Goodwill is required to be tested for impairment at least annually. We perform our annual goodwill impairment review as of the first day of our fourth quarter, or more frequently if events or circumstances indicate it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth selected statement of operations data for the periods indicated in dollar amounts and expressed as a percentage of net sales:
We reported gross sales of $5,290,176 and generated revenues of $4,190,709 for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we reported cost of goods sold of $1,542,657, general and administrative expenses of $356,580, depreciation expense of $160,117, amortization expenses of $236,130, payroll expenses of $1,095,524 and rent of $173,968. As a result, we reported a net income before provision for income tax of $584,394.
Statement of Income
Liquidity and Capital Resources
For the year ended December 31, 2021, our liquidity needs were met through the financing and operating activity
The following is a summary of the Company’s cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities:
As of December 31, 2021, we had $2,494.066 in current assets, comprised of $ 615,749 in cash, $84,365 in accounts receivable and $1,790,952 in inventory, compared to $3,255,135 in current assets, comprised of $ 326,713 in cash, $1,899,674 in accounts receivable and $12,172,327 in inventory,, at December 31, 2020. Current liabilities at December 31, 2021, totaled $392,431compared to $1,028,749 at December 31, 2020. As a result, on December 31 2021, we had $2,101,636 in total working capital in comparison to 2,226,387 at December 31 2020:
If we require financing for growth and cannot raise funds through a private placement of our equity or debt securities, or secure a loan, we would be required to operate at a moderate level to sustain operation. Unless we are able to increase our sales, we must raise cash to implement our strategy to grow and expand in accordance with our business plan.
We anticipate our short-term liquidity needs to be approximately $4,5M which will be used to increase our sales staff and manufacturing capacity. Since we expect gross profits of approximately $1,0M_ we would need to raise $3,5M to cover the negative cash flow. To meet these financial needs, we intend to seek debt or equity financing. Once this is completed, and we implement our sales and marketing plan to sell our laser cleaning products, we anticipate minimal long-term liquidity needs which we expect to meet through short-term borrowings or equity financing.
Additionally, we will have to meet all the financial disclosure and reporting requirements associated with being a publicly reporting company. Our management will have to spend additional time on policies and procedures to make sure it is compliant with various regulatory requirements, especially that of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. This additional corporate governance time required of management could limit the amount of time our management has to implement our business plan and may delay our anticipated growth plans. We anticipate over the next 12 months the cost of being a reporting public company will be approximately $650,000.
The following table details our line-of-credit facilities and long-term notes as of December 31, 2021:
(1) At maturity, the outstanding note balance will be $0.0.
(2) At maturity, the outstanding note balance will be $0.0.
In January 2020, the Company issued a promissory note to ICT in the principal amount of $439,990 bearing 6% annual interest with a maturity date of January 31, 2023. This note may be prepaid in whole or in part. As of December 31, 2021, the Note was paid in full and there is no unpaid principal amount of the this note
In October 2020, the Company issued a second promissory note to ICT in the principal amount of $745,438 bearing 6% annual interest with a maturity date of December 31, 2023. This Note may be prepaid in whole or in part. As of December 31, 2021, the unpaid principal amount of the note was $261,684.
Lease Liability
We are leasing our manufacturing facility from the landlord with monthly payments and recording those expenses as rent expense. On September 30, 2021, we entered into a lease agreement for 18,000 sf of manufacturing space on a 3 year basis at a cost of $15,096 per month. Our facility is currently equipped with three of our latest advanced laser cleaning demonstration models. It has a materials stock room, ramp and high dock in the warehouse with loading and moving equipment. It also has a machine shop, electronic assembly and equipment assembly area.
As of December 31, 2021, the amount of the recorded lease liability less the current portion was $328,001.
We adopted ASU 2016-02 effective as of January 1, 2020, utilizing the cumulative-effect adjustment transition method of adoption, which resulted in the recognition on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, of $499,758 of right-of-use assets for operating leases and $171,757 of current operating lease liability.
The maturity date of our facility operating lease is November 1, 2024.
The maturity amounts of our lease liabilities are as follows:
Net Earnings/Loss per Share
Basic earnings/loss per share is calculated by dividing the loss attributable to stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares outstanding for the period. Diluted loss per share reflects the potential dilution that could occur if securities or other contracts to issue common stock were exercised or converted into common stock or resulted in the issuance of common stock that shared in the earnings (loss) of the Company. Diluted earnings/ loss per share is computed by dividing the earnings/loss available to stockholders by the weighted average number of shares outstanding for the period and dilutive potential shares outstanding unless such dilutive potential shares would result in anti-dilution.
As of December 31, 2021, Company recorded $0.13 net income per share.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, "Nature of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies" in the notes to the consolidated financial statements for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the respective dates of adoption or expected adoption and effects on our consolidated financial statements contained in Part IV of this Annual Report.