Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion, particularly information with respect to our financial results of operations or financial condition, business strategy, plans and objectives of management for future operations, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties as described under the heading “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. You should review the disclosure under the heading “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
DISCO provides a cloud-native, artificial intelligence-powered legal solution that simplifies ediscovery, legal document review and case management for enterprises, law firms, legal services providers and governments. Our scalable, integrated solution enables legal departments to easily collect, process and review enterprise data that is relevant or potentially relevant to legal matters. We leverage a cloud-native architecture and powerful artificial intelligence, or AI, models to automatically identify legally relevant documents and improve the accuracy and speed of legal document review. Our AI models continuously learn from legal work conducted on our solution and can be reused across legal matters, which further strengthens our ability to help our customers find evidence and resolve matters faster as they expand usage of our solution. We provide legal departments with the ability to centralize legal data into a single solution, improving security and privacy for our customers, enabling transparent collaboration with other legal industry participants and allowing customers to reuse data and lawyer work product
across legal matters. By automating the manual, time-consuming and error-prone parts of ediscovery, legal document review and case management, we empower legal departments to focus on delivering better legal outcomes.
We generate substantially all of our revenue from our customers’ actual usage of our solution. Customers generally do not commit to purchase a specific amount of usage on our solution and their usage can fluctuate based on the number and nature of legal matters they have at any particular time. As a result, our revenue and other financial results can fluctuate from period to period given the inherent unpredictability of the timing, duration and scope of legal casework. We also offer our customers the option to enter into subscriptions based on committed minimum usage on an annual or multi-year basis, which represented 11% and 14% of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. In addition, we generate revenue from a range of professional services aimed at accelerating the time-to-value for our customers.
After using and realizing the benefits of our solution, our customers often increase usage of our solution to cover additional legal matters and adopt more of our offerings. As our customers use our solution over time, the amount of enterprise data in our solution increases, enhancing the strategic value and stickiness of our solution within an organization. This dynamic of increased activity from our existing customers and overall user satisfaction is best demonstrated by our dollar-based net retention rate. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 our dollar-based net retention rate was 146% and 127%, respectively.
Our customers include a diverse set of enterprises across a broad set of industries, as well as law firms, legal services providers of all sizes and government organizations. While we serve customers across many different industries, the way in which lawyers and legal professionals use our solution is similar regardless of the specific industry in which each customer operates. This commonality has created efficiencies in our sales and marketing and research and development activities because we do not need to tailor our sales and marketing activities to a wide range of different customer use cases. As of December 31, 2021, we had 1,126 customers, increasing from 825 customers as of December 31, 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 we had 214 large customers, defined as customers with revenue in excess of $100,000 over the previous 12-month period, increasing from 141 large customers as of December 31, 2020. Large customers accounted for approximately 81%, and 74% of our revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our go-to-market strategy is focused on acquiring new customers and driving continued use and increased usage of our solution for existing customers. We primarily sell through a direct sales force, which is organized based on the stages of our sales motion. Our sales organization is segmented into sales development representatives, field sales, inside sales, solution architects and our customer success team. In addition, our solution is designed such that customers can grant access to third parties, including law firms and other legal service providers, to use our applications on the customers’ behalf. This access facilitates widespread adoption of our solution, as these law firms and other legal service providers often become customers on their own or recommend our solution to other legal industry participants after realizing the benefits of working on our solution. Likewise, if a law firm is our customer, the law firm may add users from its clients’ legal departments to our solution in order to collaborate with them. These users may then become champions and encourage the companies they work for to become customers.
We have experienced rapid growth in recent periods. Since inception, we have raised $401.1 million of capital, of which $240.0 million was obtained through the proceeds of our initial public offering and $161.1 million through the sale of redeemable convertible preferred stock. We had $255.5 million of cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021. We generated revenue of $114.3 million and $68.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing a period-over-period growth of 67%. Our net loss was $24.3 million and $22.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We generated Adjusted EBITDA of $(16.3) million and $(19.9) million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. See the section titled “-Non-GAAP Financial Measure” for the definition of Adjusted EBITDA, as well as a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
The COVID-19 pandemic has caused general business disruption worldwide beginning in January 2020. The full extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic will directly or indirectly impact our business, results of operations, cash flows and financial condition will depend on future developments that are highly uncertain and cannot be accurately predicted. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments in many of the jurisdictions in which we or our customers operate instituted shelter-in-place orders in March and April 2020 to mitigate the outbreak of COVID-19, forcing court closures and causing general delays in litigation proceedings, as well as leading to delays in the collection of enterprise data. Due to these factors, we experienced flat revenue growth in the second quarter of 2020 from the first quarter of 2020, during which we generated $15.7 million in each quarter. In addition, we executed a reduction in our workforce in March 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
This reduction in workforce resulted in a total impact of $0.7 million of charges related to severance. As shelter-in-place orders expired and businesses and court systems adjusted their operations to accommodate remote work policies, usage in our solution increased and our revenue in the third quarter of 2020 returned to pre-pandemic levels of growth.
We have also experienced, and may continue to experience, a modest positive impact on other aspects of our business, including slower growth in certain operating expenses due to reduced business travel, deferred hiring for some positions and the virtualization or cancellation of customer and employee events.
We cannot predict how long we will continue to experience these impacts as shelter-in-place orders and other related measures are expected to change over time. However, as certain of our customers or partners experience downturns or uncertainty in their own business operations or revenue resulting from the spread of COVID-19, they may decrease or delay their legal spending or request pricing discounts, any of which may result in decreased revenue for us. In addition, we may experience customer losses, including due to bankruptcy or our customers ceasing operations, which may result in an inability to collect accounts receivable from these customers. In addition, in response to the spread of COVID-19, we have required substantially all of our employees to work remotely to minimize the risk of the virus to our employees and the communities in which we operate. In September 2021, we opened our headquarters to employees on a voluntary basis. We may take further actions as may be required by government authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers and business partners.
The global impact of COVID-19 continues to rapidly evolve and we will continue to monitor the situation and the effects on our business and operations closely. We do not yet know the full extent of potential impacts on our business or operations or on the global economy as a whole, particularly if the COVID-19 pandemic continues and persists for an extended period of time. Given the uncertainty, we cannot reasonably estimate the impact on our future results of operations, cash flows or financial condition. For additional details, see the section titled “Risk Factors”.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that the growth and future success of our business depends on many factors. While each of these factors present significant opportunities for our business, they also pose important challenges that we must successfully address in order to sustain our growth, improve our results of operations and establish and maintain profitability.
Maintain and Advance Our Innovation and Brand
Our success depends in part on our ability to maintain and advance our innovation and brand. We have a strong history of innovation, demonstrated by our DISCO Ediscovery, DISCO Review and DISCO Case Builder offerings, and have built a research and development process that reliably produces applications and features that lawyers love. We intend to continue combining our deep legal domain expertise and commitment to world-class software engineering to continue delivering features that lawyers love and introducing new applications to address more areas of legal work. Our future success is dependent on our ability to successfully develop, market and sell existing and new applications of our solution to both new and existing customers.
Add New Customers
We believe we have a significant opportunity to continue to grow our customer base. As enterprises continue their digital transformation journeys and the demand for differentiation in the competitive market for legal services continues to grow, we expect more and more companies will struggle with existing legal solutions and ultimately will adopt integrated, easy-to-use solutions like DISCO to improve productivity and legal outcomes. We believe our market leadership and differentiated solution will enable us to efficiently acquire new customers across all channels. As of December 31, 2021, we had 1,126 customers, increasing from 825 customers as of December 31, 2020. Our ability to attract new customers will depend on a number of factors, including the effectiveness and pricing of our offerings, the offerings of our competitors and the effectiveness of our marketing efforts. We will need to dedicate significant resources to further develop the market for our solution and expand, retain and motivate our sales and marketing personnel.
Increase Usage and Penetration Within Our Existing Customer Base
Our large base of customers represents a significant opportunity for further sales expansion. We believe that we will be able to continue expanding customer relationships by increasing customers’ usage of offerings that they already buy from us, selling more of our existing offerings to existing customers, and, in the future, introducing additional offerings to sell to existing
customers. Our long-term offerings strategy is aimed at building features and offerings that address more and more types of legal work so that customers can continue to centralize on our solution as the system of record and engagement for the legal function. Our ability to increase sales to existing customers will depend on a number of factors, including our customers’ satisfaction with our solution, competition, pricing and overall changes in our customers’ spending levels. Even if our customers expand their usage of our solution, we cannot guarantee that they will maintain those usage levels for any meaningful period of time or that they will renew their commitments.
A further indication of the propensity of our customers to continue to work with and expand their relationship with us over time is our dollar-based net retention rate, which compares our revenue from the same set of customers in one period to the prior year period. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our dollar-based net retention rate was 146% and 127%, respectively. We calculate our dollar-based net retention rate as of the end of a period by using (a) the revenue from all customers during the twelve months ending one year prior to such period as the denominator and (b) the revenue from all customers during the twelve months ending as of the end of such period minus the revenue from all customers who are new customers during those twelve months as the numerator. Our dollar-based net retention rate could decrease over time as our customer base matures and the amount of revenue used in the denominator to calculate net retention grows.
Expand Our Sales Coverage and Establish a Digital Sales Channel
We intend to continue to increase our sales force headcount in strategic locations across the United States and globally. Additionally, we plan to develop a digital, self-service sales channel that can simplify the sales process and enable customers to easily adopt our solution through our website without the need to speak with a sales representative. Our ability to achieve significant revenue growth will depend, in large part, on our success in recruiting, training and retaining sufficient numbers of sales personnel to support our growth. We will need to spend significant resources to expand, retain and motivate our sales and marketing personnel.
Expand Internationally
Our market is global and we believe there is a significant opportunity to expand internationally. In 2021, less than 10% of our revenue was generated by customers outside of the United States. International expansion, including our global sales efforts, will add increased complexity and cost to our business.
Extend and Strengthen Our Channel Partnerships and Integrations
Our partnerships, including with legal services providers and cloud infrastructure providers, assist us in driving awareness and adoption of DISCO and extending our reach. We intend to cultivate and leverage channel partners to grow our market presence, enhance the virality of our solution and drive greater sales efficiency. Our future success is dependent in part on our ability to develop and maintain relations with these partners.
Expand Our Offering Portfolio
We believe that our technology, and especially our approach to automation and AI, is applicable to a wider range of legal processes outside of our current core offerings. We intend to leverage our technology to introduce further offerings that increase lawyer productivity across more and more areas of legal work over time. We may expend significant resources in the development of additional offerings. Our ability to successfully develop, market and sell new offerings will depend on a number of factors, including the availability of capital to invest in innovation, our customers’ satisfaction with such offerings, competition, pricing and overall changes in our customers’ spending levels.
Pursue Strategic Acquisitions and Strategic Investments
We intend to selectively pursue acquisitions and strategic investments that we believe can expand the functionality and value of our solution and bring talent to our company. We believe that the combination of our market leadership, deep legal expertise and powerful end-to-end solution provides an advantage in pursuing select acquisitions. We may be required to expend significant resources in connection with the pursuit of acquisitions and investments.
Key Components of Statement of Operations
Revenue
All of our revenue-generating activities directly relate to the sale and support of our legal solution within a single operating segment. We have two primary types of contractual arrangements: usage-based and subscription solutions. Our usage-based revenue is derived from contracts under which customers are billed monthly based on their usage of our offerings. Subscription revenue is derived from contracts where customers are contractually committed to a minimum data volume over a period of time. Revenue received from usage amounts above the fixed data volume in our subscription contracts is considered usage-based revenue.
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, usage-based revenue represented 89% and 86% of our total revenue, respectively. In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, subscription revenue fees represented 11% and 14% of total revenue, respectively.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of third-party cloud infrastructure expenses incurred in connection with our customers’ use of our solution. Cost of revenue also includes outsourced staffing costs, amortization of internal-use software and personnel costs from employees involved in the delivery of our solution. Personnel costs include salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs. We intend to continue to invest additional resources in our infrastructure to expand the capability of solutions and ensure that our customers are realizing the full benefit of our solutions. The level, timing and relative investment in our cloud infrastructure could affect our cost of revenue in the future. Additionally, cost of revenue in future periods could be impacted by changes in outsourced staffing costs and amortization associated with capitalized internal-use software costs.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative expenses and refund of sales and use taxes. Personnel costs are the most significant component of operating expenses and consist of salaries, benefits, bonuses, share-based compensation expenses and sales commissions. Operating expenses also include overhead costs for facilities and shared IT related expenses, including depreciation expense. During the year ended December 31, 2020, certain operating expenses decreased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and a related reduction in force. Certain expenses impacted by COVID-19 resumed in 2021, although the magnitude of these expenses did not reach pre-pandemic levels.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for our development team, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expenses and allocated overhead costs. Research and development expenses also include contractor or professional services fees and third-party cloud infrastructure expenses incurred in developing our solution. During the year ended December 31, 2020, growth in research and development expenses was offset by a one-time reduction in force in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, particularly as we incur additional costs related to continued investments in our solution. Our research and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue over time. In addition, research and development expenses that qualify as internal-use software development costs are capitalized, the amount of which may fluctuate significantly from period to period.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs directly associated with our sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs. Sales and marketing expenses also include advertising costs and other expenses associated with our marketing and business development programs. In addition, sales and marketing expenses are comprised of travel-related expenses, software services dedicated for use by our sales and marketing organizations and outside services contracted for sales and marketing purposes. Travel-related expenses decreased in the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and resumed in the second half of 2021, although the magnitude of these expenses has not reached pre-pandemic levels. We expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars and continue to be our largest operating expense for the foreseeable future as we grow our business. Our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue over time.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related costs associated with our finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs. General and administrative expenses also include external legal, accounting and other professional services fees, software services dedicated for use by our general and administrative functions, insurance and other corporate expenses.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations and professional services. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows but may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue from period to period.
Refund of Sales and Use Taxes
Refund of sales and uses taxes consist of a one-time gain due to a sales tax refund related to sales tax paid in prior periods based on the resolution of a sales tax audit.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest income, income related to non-operating activities, interest expense and gains and losses from foreign currency transactions and remeasurements of foreign currency-denominated monetary assets and liabilities to the U.S. Dollar.
Provision for Income Taxes
Provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to foreign and state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a valuation allowance on our federal and state deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is not more likely than not that the deferred assets will be utilized.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations and such data as a percentage of our revenue for each of the periods presented.
______________
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
______________
* Less than 0.5% of revenue.
** Columns may not add up to 100% due to rounding.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $45.9 million, or 67%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. Approximately 70% of the increase is related to additional usage and adoption of our solution by our existing customers. The remaining 30% increase in revenue is related to new customers added throughout the period.
Cost of Revenue
Total cost of revenue increased by $10.6 million, or 52%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in outsourced staffing vendor fees of $5.3 million and costs for cloud hosting of $2.0 million related to increased usage of our solution. Additionally, cost of revenue increased $2.9 million due to increased personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, as a result of increased headcount.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased by $7.8 million, or 29%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an additional $8.3 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, as a result of increased headcount. Additionally, professional services expense increased $0.2 million related to security and compliance. These increases were offset by a decrease of $0.5 million of restructuring charges related to the one-time reduction in force that occurred in the first quarter of 2020.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased by $16.0 million, or 51%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily related to an additional $12.3 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, as a result of increased headcount and variable compensation for our sales personnel. Software expense also increased $0.7 million to support the additional headcount. Additionally, marketing expenses increased $2.5 million and professional services expense increased $0.5 million to support our growth.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased by $11.7 million, or 84%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an additional $6.2 million in personnel costs, including stock-based compensation, as a result of increased headcount and a $3.0 million increase in professional services related to additional compliance requirements of being a public company. Additionally, corporate insurance expense and franchise taxes increased $2.2 million as a result of our recent initial public offering.
Refund of Sales and Use Taxes
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received a sales tax refund of $1.1 million related to sales tax paid in prior periods based on the resolution of a sales tax audit. There were no similar transactions in the current period.
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We report our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. However, management believes that Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure, provides investors with additional useful information in evaluating our performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net loss, adjusted to exclude: depreciation and amortization expense, provision for income taxes, interest and other, net, stock-based compensation expense, payroll tax expense on employee stock transactions, refund of sales and use taxes related to sales tax in prior periods and other one-time, non-recurring items, when applicable. We monitor Adjusted EBITDA as a non-GAAP financial measure to supplement the financial information we present in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, to provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results.
Adjusted EBITDA is a financial measure that is not required by or presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA, when taken together with our financial results presented in accordance with GAAP, provides meaningful supplemental information regarding our operating performance and facilitates internal comparisons of our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis by excluding certain items that may not be indicative of our business, results of operations or outlook. In particular, we believe that the use of Adjusted EBITDA is helpful to our investors as it is a measure used by management in assessing the health of our business and evaluating our operating performance, as well as for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
Adjusted EBITDA is presented for supplemental informational purposes only, has limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP. Some of these limitations include that: (i) it does not properly reflect capital commitments to be paid in the future; (ii) although depreciation and amortization expense is a non-cash charge, the underlying assets may need to be replaced and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect these capital expenditures; (iii) it does not consider the impact of stock-based compensation expense and payroll tax expense on employee stock transactions; (iv) it does not reflect other non-operating expenses, including interest expense; (v) it does not consider the impact of any contingent consideration liability valuation adjustments; and (vi) it does not reflect tax payments that may represent a reduction in cash available to us. In addition, our use of Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because they may not calculate Adjusted EBITDA in the same manner, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. Because of these limitations, when evaluating our performance, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial measures, including our net loss and other results stated in accordance with GAAP. We expect Adjusted EBITDA to fluctuate in the near term as we continue to invest in our business and improve over the long term as we achieve greater scale in our business and efficiencies in our operating expenses.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP, for the periods presented (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed operations since our inception primarily through customer payments and net proceeds from sales of equity securities, including our IPO in July 2021, as well as borrowings under our former revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents, totaling $255.5 million and $58.6 million, respectively. Cash equivalents include highly liquid investments that are readily convertible to known amounts of cash and have original maturities of three months or less. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund anticipated cash requirements for the next 12 months. We believe we will meet our longer-term expected future cash requirements primarily from a combination of cash flow from operating activities and available cash and cash equivalents. We may also engage in equity or debt financings to secure additional funds.
The following table presents our material cash requirements for future periods as of December 31, 2021:
a.We occupy certain facilities under non-cancelable lease arrangements. Our only lease agreement is set to expire in October 2022. We may lease or purchase additional space as needed to accommodate our needs.
b.We lease certain furniture and fixtures classified as a finance lease. The leased furniture is depreciated on a straight-line basis over the life of the lease and is included in depreciation expense.
c.Cloud platform purchase commitments encompass non-cancellable agreements to support our software. These expenses are incurred as services are performed and are in the normal course of business.
d.Other purchase commitments encompass non-cancellable software agreements to support our internal functions. These expenses are incurred as services are performed and are in the normal course of business.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our revenue growth rate, usage of our solution, billing frequency, the timing and extent of spending to support further sales and marketing and research and development efforts, and the continuing market acceptance of our solution. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has not materially impacted our liquidity to date, we plan to continue to evaluate aspects of our spending, including capital expenditures, discretionary spending, and strategic investments in 2022. We have considered the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our liquidity and capital resources to date, and we do not currently expect it to impact our ability to meet future liquidity needs.
We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products and technologies. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or
generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations and financial condition.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is payments received from our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, marketing expenses, hosting expenses and overhead expenses. We have historically generated negative cash flows and have supplemented working capital requirements primarily through net proceeds from the sale of equity securities.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $21.6 million, a decrease of $1.1 million from net cash used in operating activities of $22.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash flow used in operations was primarily due to an increase in net loss of $1.5 million. Fluctuations in net loss are further explained in the Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 section included elsewhere in Management’s Discussion and Analysis. The increase in cash used in operating activities was also due to an increase in accounts receivable of $2.7 million related to revenue growth and an increase in other current assets of $3.1 million related to various prepaid expenses. These increases in cash used in operating activities were partially offset by an increase in stock-based compensation of $3.6 million due to additional equity awards issued during the period with increased underlying share values and an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $3.8 million related to growth of our operations.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.1 million, an increase of $1.2 million from net cash used in investing activities of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities was related to purchases of property and equipment to support the growth of our business and the capitalization of internal-use software associated with additional features in our solution.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $221.7 million, an increase of $161.7 million from net cash provided by financing activities of $60.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change in cash flows were primarily related to an increase in net proceeds from equity financings of $159.9 million. In the year ended December 31, 2021 we received $219.8 million in net proceeds from our IPO. In the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $59.9 million in net proceeds from issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock. Additionally, proceeds from exercises of stock options increased $1.8 million due to an increase in option exercise activity related to our stock being publicly traded.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received and repaid $23.3 million of proceeds from our revolving credit facility and the Paycheck Protection Program. We had no borrowings in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial
statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis using historical experience and other factors and adjust those estimates and assumptions when facts and circumstances dictate. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates and assumptions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the accounting policies we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue from contracts with customers using the five-step method described in Note 3 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our performance obligations consist of usage-based and subscription solutions. Our usage-based revenue is generated from solutions that are typically billed on a monthly basis based on actual usage. Subscription revenue is derived from contracts where customers are contractually committed to a minimum data volume over a period of time. Usage amounts above the minimum data volume are considered usage-based revenue. Subscription arrangements are typically billed on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis with revenue recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual term. On a limited basis, we enter into contracts whereby the consideration payable is contingent upon the conclusion of the legal matter. We do not recognize the revenue related to these contracts until the legal matter is resolved. Such amounts recognized have been immaterial to date.
In general, we satisfy the majority of our performance obligations over time as we transfer the promised solutions to our customers. We review the contract terms and conditions to evaluate the timing and amount of revenue recognition, the related contract balances, and our remaining performance obligations. These evaluations involve uncertainty because they may require significant judgment that could affect the timing and amount of revenue recognized. Usage-based revenue is recognized monthly based on actual usage and subscription revenue is recognized on a ratable basis over the contractual term, which is generally one year.
Internal-Use Software Development
We capitalize certain costs related to the development of our solution and other software applications for internal use. In accordance with authoritative guidance, we begin to capitalize our costs to develop software when preliminary development efforts are successfully completed, management has authorized and committed project funding, and it is probable that the project will be completed and the software will be used as intended. We stop capitalizing these costs when the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use, including the completion of all significant testing. These costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the related asset, generally estimated to be four years. We also capitalize costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable the expenditure will result in additional functionality and expense costs incurred for maintenance and minor upgrades and enhancements. Costs incurred prior to meeting these criteria together with costs incurred for training and maintenance are expensed as incurred and recorded within product development expenses in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The capitalization of internal-use software development contains uncertainties because it requires management to exercise judgment in determining the point at which various projects may be capitalized, in assessing the ongoing value of the capitalized costs and in determining the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized. To the extent that we change the manner in which we develop and test new features and functionalities related to our solution, assess the ongoing value of capitalized assets or determine the estimated useful lives over which the costs are amortized, the amount of internal-use software development costs we capitalize and amortize could change in future periods.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation in accordance with the authoritative guidance on stock compensation. Under the fair value recognition provisions of this guidance, stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense, over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award.
Determining the fair value of stock-based awards at the grant date requires judgment. Prior to the completion of our IPO in July 2021, we used the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of stock options granted to our employees and directors. Subsequent to the completion of our IPO, the grant date fair value of equity awards is determined
using the fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. The determination of the grant date fair value of stock options using an option-pricing model is affected by our estimated common stock fair value as well as assumptions regarding a number of other complex and subjective variables. These variables include the fair value of our common stock, our expected stock price volatility over the expected term of the options, stock option exercise and cancellation behaviors, risk-free interest rates and expected dividends, which are estimated as follows:
•Fair value of the common stock. Prior to our IPO, the fair value of common stock underlying the stock options had historically been determined by our Board of Directors, with input from our management. Our Board of Directors previously determined the fair value of the common stock at the time of grant of the options by considering a number of objective and subjective factors, including the results of contemporaneous independent third-party valuations of our common stock; the prices, rights, preferences, and privileges of our redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to those of our common stock; the prices of redeemable convertible preferred stock sold by us to third-party investors in arms-length transactions; the lack of marketability of our common stock; actual operating and financial results; current business conditions and projections; our history and the timing of the introduction of new applications; our stage of development; the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event, such as an initial public offering or a merger or acquisition of our company given prevailing market conditions; the market performance of comparable publicly-traded companies; recent secondary stock sales transactions; and U.S. and global market conditions. Subsequent to our IPO, the fair value of our underlying common stock is determined by the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant, as reported by the NYSE.
•Expected term. The expected term represents the period that the stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified calculation of expected term, as we do not have sufficient historical data to use any other method to estimate expected term.
•Expected volatility. The expected volatility is derived from an average of the historical volatilities of the common stock of several entities with characteristics similar to ours, such as the size and operational and economic similarities to our principle business operations.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for zero coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the expected term of the stock-based awards.
•Expected dividend. The expected dividend is assumed to be zero as we have never paid dividends and have no current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
The following table summarizes the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options:
If any assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option-pricing model change significantly, stock-based compensation expense may differ. For example, a 10% increase in the fair value of common stock would cause a $0.5 million increase in stock-based compensation recognized over the requisite service period for stock options granted in 2021.
We have also granted restricted stock awards (“RSAs”), and commencing in 2021, we granted restricted stock units (“RSUs”). Stock-based compensation related to RSAs and RSUs is measured based on the fair value of the common stock on the grant date. It is recognized in our consolidated statement of operations over the period the recipient is required to perform services in exchange for the award, which is generally the vesting period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or JOBS Act, and, for so long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. In addition, pursuant to Section 107 of the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. If we cease to be an emerging growth company, we will no longer be able to take advantage of these exemptions or the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards.
7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
We are a smaller reporting company, as defined by Rule 12b-2 under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 and in Item 10(f)(1) of Regulation S-K, and are not required to provide the information under this item.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm (PCAOB ID: 42)
Consolidated Balance Sheets
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Shareholders and the Board of Directors of CS Disco, Inc.
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of CS Disco, Inc. (the Company) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the related consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, changes in redeemable convertible preferred stock and stockholders’ equity (deficit) and cash flows for years then ended, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company at December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company's management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Ernst & Young, LLP
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2018.
Austin, Texas
February 25, 2022
CS DISCO, INC.
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(in thousands, except par value amounts)
CS DISCO, INC.
Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss
(in thousands, except per share amounts)
CS DISCO, INC.
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock and Stockholders’ Equity (Deficit)
For the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
(in thousands)
CS DISCO, INC.
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(in thousands)
CS DISCO, INC.
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
1. Organization and Nature of Operations
CS Disco, Inc. (the “Company” or “DISCO”), and its wholly owned subsidiary CS Disco Ltd., has built a cloud-native, AI-powered software platform that enterprises, law firms, legal services providers, and governments use for ediscovery, legal document review, and case management in a wide variety of legal matters, ranging from litigation to investigations to compliance to diligence. The Company incorporated as a Delaware corporation on December 2, 2013, and registered CS Disco Ltd. in the United Kingdom on October 24, 2018. The Company’s headquarters are located in Austin, Texas.
Public Offerings
On July 23, 2021, the Company completed the initial public offering (“IPO”) of its common stock pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-1. In the IPO, the Company sold an aggregate of 7,500,000 shares of common stock, including 500,000 shares issued pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares at a public offering price of $32.00 per share. The IPO resulted in net proceeds of approximately $223.2 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $16.8 million. An existing stockholder sold an additional 200,000 shares of common stock pursuant the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares of common stock at $32.00 per share. The Company did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares by the selling stockholder in the IPO. Offering expenses incurred by the Company for the IPO were approximately $3.7 million and were recorded against stockholders’ equity. Upon the completion of the IPO, all outstanding shares of the Company’s redeemable convertible preferred stock were converted into 35,793,483 shares of common stock.
On September 17, 2021, the Company completed a secondary public offering of its common stock pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-1. In the secondary offering, selling stockholders sold an aggregate of 6,050,000 shares of common stock, including 550,000 shares sold pursuant to the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares at an offering price of $53.00 per share. The Company did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares through the secondary offering. Offering expenses incurred by the Company that were not subject to reimbursement were approximately $0.1 million and were recorded as general and administrative expense. The total number of outstanding shares of common stock remained unchanged as a result of the secondary offering.
2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Emerging Growth Company Status
The Company is an emerging growth company, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). The JOBS Act provides that an emerging growth company can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of some accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. The Company has elected to use the extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date it (1) is no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, the Company’s financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Basis of Presentation and Consolidation
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U. S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and include the accounts of the Company. All significant intercompany balances and transactions have been eliminated. There are no differences between the net loss and comprehensive loss.
Risks and Uncertainties
The ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic has impacted many operational aspects of the Company’s business and may continue to do so in the future. The Company assessed the impact that COVID-19 had on its results of operations, including, but
not limited to an assessment of its allowance for credit losses, the carrying value of other long-lived assets, and the impact to revenue recognition and cost of revenues. In March 2020, the Company executed a reduction in workforce in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This reduction in force resulted in a total impact of $0.7 million of charges related to severance. While the COVID-19 pandemic has not had a material adverse impact on the Company’s financial operations to date, the future impacts of the pandemic and any resulting economic impact are largely unknown and rapidly evolving. The Company will continue to actively monitor the impact that COVID-19 has on the results of the Company’s business operations, and may make decisions required by federal, state or local authorities, or that are determined to be in the best interests of the Company’s employees, customers, partners, and suppliers. As a result, the Company’s estimates and judgments may change materially as new events occur or additional information becomes available to them.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company to make certain estimates, judgments, and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses during the reporting period. There is complexity and judgment required in the Company’s process in determining the nature and timing of the satisfaction of performance obligations which affect the amounts of revenue, unbilled receivables and deferred revenue. Estimates are also used for, but not limited to, current expected credit losses, capitalization and useful life of the Company’s capitalized internal-use software development costs, useful lives of assets, income taxes and deferred tax asset valuation and valuation of the Company’s stock and stock options. Numerous internal and external factors can affect estimates. Actual results could differ from those estimates and such differences could be material to the Company’s consolidated financial position and results of operations.
Net Loss Per Share Attributable to Common Stockholders
Basic and diluted net loss per share attributable to common stockholders is presented in conformity with the two-class method required for participating securities. All series of the Company’s redeemable convertible preferred stock are considered to be participating securities because all holders are entitled to receive a non-cumulative dividend on a pari passu basis in the event that a dividend is paid on the common stock. The holders of the redeemable convertible preferred stock do not have a contractual obligation to share in the Company’s losses. As such, the Company’s net losses were not allocated to these participating securities
Under the two-class method, basic net loss per share attributable to common stockholders is computed by dividing the net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period.
Diluted earnings per share attributable to common stockholders adjusts basic earnings per share for the potentially dilutive impact of stock options, restricted stock awards, stock warrants and redeemable convertible preferred stock. As the Company has reported losses for all periods presented, all potentially dilutive securities are anti-dilutive, and accordingly, basic net loss per share equaled diluted net loss per share.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid investments acquired with an original maturity of three months or less at the date of purchase to be cash equivalents. Cash equivalents, which include the Company’s money market account, are measured at fair value on a recurring basis.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are recorded and carried at the original invoiced amount less an allowance for credit losses. The Company determines its trade accounts receivable allowances in line with (Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments (“Topic 326”), based upon the assessment of various factors, such as: historical experience, credit quality of its customers, geographic related risks, economic conditions, and other factors that may affect a customer’s ability to pay. Increases and decreases in the allowance for credit losses are included as a component of general and administrative expense in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The Company does not have any off-balance sheet credit exposure related to its customers.
Due to the short-term nature of our receivables, the estimate of the amount of accounts receivable that may not be collected is based on historical experience and the financial condition of customers. The Company has provisioned $1.0 million
for expected losses for the year ended December 31, 2021, and $0.5 million has been written off and charged against the allowance for the year ended December 31, 2021. Recoveries made by the Company were $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The allowance for credit losses related to accounts receivable was $1.2 million and $0.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Concentration of Credit Risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist of cash and cash equivalents and trade accounts receivable. The Company maintains its cash and cash equivalent balances in highly rated financial institutions, which at times may exceed federally insured limits or be held in foreign jurisdictions. The Company has not experienced any loss relating to cash and cash equivalents in these accounts. The Company performs periodic credit evaluations of its customers’ financial condition and generally does not require collateral.
To reduce risk, the Company routinely assesses the financial strength of its customers. No customer represented more than 10% of total revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
The Company groups its assets and liabilities measured at fair value in a three-tier fair value hierarchy, which prioritizes the inputs used in measuring fair value. These tiers include: Level 1, defined as observable inputs such as quoted prices in active markets, with valuations obtained from readily available pricing sources for market transactions involving identical assets or liabilities; Level 2, defined as inputs other than quoted prices in active markets that are either directly or indirectly observable, such as quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities, quoted prices in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable or can be corroborated by observable market data for substantially the full term of the assets or liabilities; and Level 3, defined as unobservable inputs in which little or no market data exists, therefore requiring an entity to develop its own assumptions. Level 3 assets and liabilities include financial instruments whose value is determined using pricing models, discounted cash flow methodologies, or similar techniques, as well as instruments for which the determination of fair value requires significant management judgment or estimation.
The level of the fair value hierarchy in which the fair value measurement falls is determined by the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement.
The Company’s financial instruments consist principally of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, accrued expenses, and debt. The carrying amounts of cash and cash equivalents, accounts receivable, accounts payable, and accrued expenses are considered to approximate their respective fair values due to the short-term nature of such financial instruments. Cash equivalents, primarily consisting of investments in money market funds, are measured at fair value on a recurring basis, and are categorized as Level 1 based on quoted prices in active markets. The carrying value approximates the fair value for these assets and liabilities at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The Company had no Level 2 or Level 3 assets or liabilities at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company recognizes transfers between levels at the end of the reporting period as if the transfers occurred on the last day of the reporting period. There were no transfers during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Property and Equipment, Net
Property and equipment are recorded at cost, less accumulated depreciation. Maintenance, repairs and minor replacements are charged to expense as incurred. Significant renewals and betterments are capitalized. Depreciation on property and equipment, with the exception of leasehold improvements, is recorded using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Depreciation on leasehold improvements is recorded using the shorter of the lease term or useful life. The estimated useful life of each asset category is as follows:
Furniture and fixtures 5 years
Leasehold improvements Shorter of lease term or 5 years
Computer equipment 2 years
The Company periodically reviews the estimated useful lives of property and equipment and any changes to the estimated useful lives are recorded prospectively from the date of the change.
When property is retired or disposed of, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts and any resulting gains or losses are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss in the period of disposal.
Capitalized Internal-Use Software Development Costs
Costs related to software acquired, developed, or modified solely to meet our internal requirements, with no plans to market such software at the time of development, are capitalized. Costs incurred during the preliminary planning and evaluation stage of the project and during post implementation operational stage are expensed as incurred. The Company capitalizes qualifying internal-use software development costs that are incurred during the application development stage. Capitalization of costs begins when two criteria are met: (i) the preliminary project stage is completed and (ii) it is probable that the software will be completed and used for its intended function. Capitalization ceases when the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use, including the completion of all significant testing. The Company also capitalizes costs related to specific upgrades and enhancements when it is probable the expenditures will result in additional functionality. Costs incurred for maintenance, minor upgrades and enhancements are expensed. Costs related to preliminary project activities and post-implementation operating activities are expensed as incurred.
Capitalized costs are included in property and equipment on the consolidated balance sheets. These costs are amortized over the estimated useful life of the software, generally four years, on a straight-line basis. Management evaluates the useful life of these assets on an annual basis and tests for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances occur that could impact the recoverability of these assets. The amortization of costs related to the platform applications is included in cost of revenue.
Debt Issuance Costs
The Company records underwriting, legal, and other direct costs incurred related to the issuance of revolving line of credit within other current assets and amortizes these costs to interest expense over the term of the related debt on a straight-line basis, which approximates the effective interest rate method. Amortization of deferred financing costs was nominal for the year ended December 31, 2020. In November 2021, the Company extinguished the debt and $0.2 million of unamortized capitalized deferred financing costs were recorded to interest expense.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is or contains a lease at contract inception. The Company presents the operating leases in long-term assets and current and long-term liabilities. Finance lease assets are included in property and equipment, net, and finance lease liabilities are presented in current and long-term liabilities in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Right of use assets represent the Company’s right to use an underlying asset over the lease term and lease liabilities represent the Company’s obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the estimated present value of lease payments over the lease term. The Company includes any anticipated lease incentives in the determination of lease liability.
The Company uses its estimated incremental borrowing rate, which is derived from information available at the lease commencement date, in determining the present value of lease payments. The Company gives consideration to its recent debt issuances as well as publicly available data for instruments with similar characteristics when determining its incremental borrowing rates.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever an event or change in circumstances indicates that the carrying amount of an asset or group of assets may not be recoverable. The impairment review includes comparison of future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or group of assets with the associated assets’ carrying value. If the carrying value of the asset or group of assets exceeds its expected future cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges), an impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount of the asset exceeds its fair value. The Company did not identify any impairment indicators and recorded no impairment charges in the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Segment Information
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer is the chief operating decision maker, who reviews the Company’s financial information presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating the Company’s financial performance. Accordingly, the Company has determined that it operates in a single reporting segment.
Revenue Recognition
Refer to Note 3, “Revenue” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for our Revenue Recognition policy.
Advertising
The Company expenses advertising costs as incurred. Advertising expenses were $0.4 million and $0.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively. These costs are included in sales and marketing expenses in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of third-party cloud infrastructure expenses incurred in connection with customers’ use of the Company’s solutions. Cost of revenue also includes outsourced staffing costs, amortization of internal-use software and personnel costs from employees involved in the delivery of our solutions. Personnel costs include salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs for the development team, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation expenses and allocated overhead costs. Research and development expenses also include contractor or professional services fees, third-party cloud infrastructure expenses incurred in developing the Company’s solution and software services dedicated for use by the research and development organization.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel-related costs directly associated with the sales and marketing staff, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, commissions, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs. Sales and marketing expenses also include advertising costs and other expenses associated with the marketing and business development programs. In addition, sales and marketing expenses are comprised of travel-related expenses, software services dedicated for use by the sales and marketing organizations, and outside services contracted for sales and marketing purposes.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel-related costs associated with the finance, legal, human resources and administrative personnel, including salaries, benefits, bonuses, stock-based compensation and allocated overhead costs. General and administrative expenses also include external legal, accounting, professional services fees, software services dedicated for use by the general and administrative functions, insurance and other corporate expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company measures and recognizes compensation expense for all stock-based awards (collectively referred to as stock-based compensation expense), including stock options, restricted stock awards and restricted stock units granted to employees, directors and non-employees, based on the estimated fair value of the awards on the date of grant in accordance with ASC Topic 718 Compensation - Stock Compensation (“Topic 718”). The fair value of each stock option granted is estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The Black-Scholes pricing model requires the Company to make assumptions and judgments about the inputs used in the calculation, including the expected term, the volatility of the Company’s common stock, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yield. The assumptions used to determine the fair value of the option awards represent management’s best estimates. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. Stock-based compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are accounted for in the period in which they occur.
Sales Taxes
The Company recognizes sales and other taxes collected from customers and subsequently remits to government authorities. The Company relieves the sales tax payable balances from the consolidated balance sheets as cash is collected from the customer and the taxes are remitted to the appropriate tax authority.
In September 2020, the Company received a $1.1 million refund of sales and use taxes from the state of Texas related to overpayments of sales taxes made between 2016 and 2019. There were no similar transactions in the current period.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with the asset and liability method. Under the asset and liability method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates that are expected to apply to taxable income in the periods in which the deferred tax asset or liability is expected to be realized or settled. Valuation allowances are established when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized. All deferred tax assets and liabilities are classified as non-current within the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
The Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it meets the “more likely than not” threshold that the position will be sustained upon examination by the taxing authority, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the consolidated financial statements from such a position are measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than fifty percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company includes interest and penalties related to its uncertain tax positions, if any, as part of income tax expense within the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
The Company’s policy is to recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits outside of income tax expense within general and administrative expenses. No such interest or penalties were recognized during the periods presented. The Company had no accruals for interest and penalties as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
In December 2019, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes” which simplifies the accounting for income taxes by eliminating certain exceptions to the guidance in Topic 740 related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. The new guidance also simplifies aspects of the accounting for franchise taxes and enacted changes in tax laws or rates and clarifies the accounting for transactions that result in a step-up in the tax basis of goodwill and allocating consolidated income taxes to separate financial statements of entities not subject to income tax. The standard is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. The Company adopted this guidance as of January 1, 2021, and the adoption did not have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements.
3. Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized, in an amount that reflects the consideration the Company expects to be entitled to over the term of the agreement, when control of the Company’s solutions are transferred to customers.
The Company recognizes revenue through the following five-step framework in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers:
(1) Identification of the contract, or contracts with the customer;
(2) Identification of performance obligations in the contract;
(3) Determination of the transaction price;
(4) Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract;
(5) Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct solution to the customer. The Company identifies performance obligations in its contracts with customers, which primarily include usage-based and subscription
solutions. Usage-based solutions include fees based on usage of the Company’s platform or professional services, incurred on a time and materials basis, while subscription solutions represent the purchase of a committed data volume on the Company’s platform over a period of time. The transaction price is determined based on the amount which the Company expects to be entitled to in exchange for providing the promised services to the customer. For contracts that include multiple performance obligations, the transaction price in the contract is allocated to each distinct performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. Revenue is recognized over time as performance obligations are satisfied. Variable consideration is evaluated on a contract-by-contract basis, and a constraint is applied using the facts and circumstances of the contract when applicable. On a limited basis, the Company enters into contracts whereby the consideration payable is contingent upon the conclusion of the legal matter. The Company does not recognize the revenue related to these contracts until the legal matter is resolved. Such amounts recognized have been immaterial to date.
The Company’s software contracts do not allow the customer to take possession of the software supporting the cloud-based solution. Customers are not entitled to any refunds. The Company generally invoices its customers monthly, quarterly or annually in advance and recognizes revenue ratably over the life of the contract.
The Company’s arrangements do not contain general rights of return; however, credits may be issued on a case-by-case basis. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and in revenue or deferred revenue depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Nature of Solutions
The Company’s revenue-generating activities directly relate to the sale and support of its legal solution within a single operating segment. The Company disaggregates revenue from contracts with customers based on how the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors. The Company has two primary types of contractual arrangements: usage-based and subscription solutions. Usage-based revenue is generated from solutions that are billed on a monthly basis and can be canceled with one month’s notice or are incurred on a time and materials basis. Subscription revenue is derived from contracts where customers are contractually committed to a fixed data volume over a period of time. Usage amounts above the fixed data volume are considered usage-based revenue. Subscription arrangements are typically billed on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis.
In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, usage-based revenue represented 89% and 86% of total revenue, respectively. In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, subscription revenue fees represented 11% and 14% of total revenue, respectively.
No significant judgments are required in determining whether services are considered distinct performance obligations and should be accounted for separately versus together, or to determine the stand-alone selling price (“SSP”).
Deferred Revenue
Deferred revenue primarily consists of amounts that have been billed to or received from customers in advance of performing the associated services. Of the $1.6 million and $1.4 million of deferred revenue balance as of December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, the Company recognized $1.6 million and $1.4 million as revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 the Company recorded $2.2 million and $1.6 million of current deferred revenue, respectively. The Company has no non-current deferred revenue as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Contract Assets
Contract assets represent revenue recognized for contracts that have not yet been invoiced to customers, but are billed in arrears and for which the Company has an unconditional right to payment. Total contract assets were $3.2 million and $1.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, and were included within accounts receivable on the consolidated balance sheets.
Remaining Performance Obligations
Remaining performance obligations (“RPO”) represent the amount of contracted future revenue that has not yet been recognized, including both deferred revenue and non-cancelable contracted amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods. RPO exclude performance obligations from certain time and materials contracts that are billed in arrears. RPO are not necessarily indicative of future revenue growth because they do not account for consumption in excess of
contracted capacity.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company expects to recognize approximately $17.4 million of revenue from remaining performance obligations. The Company expects to recognize revenue of approximately $9.6 million as of December 31, 2021 from remaining performance obligations over the next 12 months, with the remaining balance recognized thereafter.
Incremental Contract Costs
Incremental costs to obtain or fulfill a contract are recognized as an asset if the expected benefit is expected to be longer than one year. These assets are amortized over the expected period of benefit. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company identified no material incremental costs to obtain or fulfill a contract, primarily based on the nature and terms of the Company’s contracts, as well as the expected period of benefit.
4. Property and Equipment
Property and equipment consist of the following (in thousands):
Depreciation and amortization expense relating to the Company’s property and equipment was $1.6 million and $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Amortization expense relating to the cost of revenue for capitalized internal-use software was $0.7 million and $0.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively.
The Company capitalized $1.9 million and $1.4 million in internal-use software development costs in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 the unamortized balance of capitalized internal-use software costs on our consolidated balance sheets was approximately $4.0 million and $2.8 million respectively. No impairment indicators were identified when the capitalized development costs were assessed for impairment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
5. Leases
As of December 31, 2021 the Company had one lease with a remaining lease term of 0.8 years and no leased properties classified as “short-term” leases. In accordance with Topic 842, leases with a term of 12 months or less are not recorded on the Company’s consolidated balance sheet. For each lease, the Company recognizes a right-of-use-asset and lease liability in accordance with Topic 842. The asset and liability are then amortized as payments are made.
The cost of leases recorded in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss were as follows (in thousands):
The Company’s operating and finance right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are as follows (in thousands):
The weighted average remaining lease term and discount rate as of December 31, 2021 are as follows:
As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any leases with initial or remaining non-cancellable lease terms in excess of one year.
6. Operating Segment and Geographic Information
The Company’s Chief Executive Officer is the chief operating decision maker, who reviews the Company’s financial information presented on a consolidated basis for purposes of allocating resources and evaluating the Company’s financial performance. Accordingly, the Company has determined that it operates in a single reporting segment.
The Company determines the location of revenue using the billing address of each customer. The following table sets forth revenue by geographic area (in thousands):
Long-lived assets outside of the United States are not significant.
7. Debt and Related Warrants
In July 2015, the Company entered into a revolving debt facility (“Loan and Security Agreement”). The Loan and Security Agreement was subsequently amended and restated, the First Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, in November 2018 to increase the available borrowings to $18.0 million and extend the maturity date to April 2021.
In December 2020, the Company entered into the Second Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, which provided a $40.0 million revolving credit facility with a maturity date of November 30, 2023. The Company’s obligations under the agreement contained certain customary covenants, including, but not limited to, those relating to additional indebtedness, liens, asset divestitures and affiliate transactions. The agreement also contained a liquidity covenant equal to the greater of (i) $5.0 million or (ii) total 6-month adjusted EBITDA burn when the sum of the outstanding principal amounts are equal or in excess of $18.0 million. The revolving credit facility bore interest on outstanding borrowings as the sum of the Daily Adjusting LIBOR Rate for such day plus 2.50% plus an applicable margin of 0.25% per annum.
Additionally, the revolving debt facility included an unused facility fee equal to 0.25% per annum of the difference between the total revolving credit facility and the average outstanding principal balance of the obligations under the revolving credit facility during each quarter.
Substantially all the Company’s assets were pledged as collateral for these loans. The Company was required to meet certain nonfinancial covenants.
In connection with its amended and restated loan and security agreements, at various times, the Company granted warrants to purchase 49,869 shares of the Company’s common stock at exercise prices ranging from $0.525 per share to $10.80 per share. The warrants are exercisable for 10 years. At the time of issuance, the Company determined the estimated fair value of the warrants. As the warrants represent a freestanding equity instrument, the Company recorded the fair value of the warrants in additional paid in capital. In October 2021, all outstanding warrants were exercised for a total of $0.1 million.
In March 2020, the Company borrowed $17.0 million on its revolving debt facility. The Company repaid the $17.0 million outstanding balance on the revolving debt facility in October 2020. Additionally, the Company applied for and received a loan under the Paycheck Protection Program in April 2020 totaling $6.3 million. The Company subsequently repaid the outstanding balance of $6.3 million in April 2020.
In November 2021, the Company extinguished the Loan and Security Agreement. The Company did not incur any early termination fees in connection with the termination of the agreement.
The Company incurred nominal aggregate debt issuance costs in connection with its loan and security agreements. These costs were being amortized to non-cash interest expense over the terms of the related indebtedness using the straight-line method which approximates the effective interest method. In connection with the extinguishment of the Loan and Security Agreement in November 2021, the Company recognized the remaining $0.2 million of debt issuance costs as interest expense.
8. Commitments and Contingencies
Leases and Other Commitments
The Company leases office facilities under a non-cancellable operating lease with a remaining term of 0.8 years as well as furniture under a non-cancellable finance lease. See Note 5 to these consolidated financial statements for additional detail on the Company’s operating and finance lease commitments.
Additionally, the Company has contractual commitments that are noncancellable and expire within one to four years after December 31, 2021. These commitments, which relate mainly to hosting agreements as well as computer software licenses used to facilitate company operations, are as follows (in thousands):
Litigation
From time to time, the Company is involved in various legal proceedings arising from the normal course of business activities. The Company is not presently a party to any litigation the outcome of which, the Company’s management believes, if determined adversely to the Company, would individually or taken together have a material adverse effect on the Company’s business, operating results, cash flows or financial condition.
9. Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
As of December 31, 2020, the Company had six outstanding series of redeemable convertible preferred stock. These redeemable convertible preferred shares were classified as temporary equity within the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2020. Upon closing of the Company’s IPO, the outstanding redeemable convertible preferred stock was automatically converted into 35,793,483 shares of common stock. No dividends were paid to holders of redeemable convertible preferred stock. As of December 31, 2021, there was no redeemable convertible preferred stock issued and outstanding.
10. Stock-Based Compensation
Equity Incentive Plans
On December 17, 2013, the Company adopted the Long-Term Incentive Plan (“2013 Plan”). The 2013 Plan was terminated in July 2021 in connection with the adoption of the 2021 Equity Incentive Plan (“2021 Plan”), which became effective on July 20, 2021, and no further awards will be granted under the 2013 Plan. The 2021 Plan provides for the grant of incentive stock options (“ISOs”), within the meaning of Section 422 of the Code to employees, including employees of any parent or subsidiary, and for the grant of nonstatutory stock options (“NSOs”), stock appreciation rights, restricted stock awards (“RSAs”), restricted stock units (“RSUs”), awards, performance awards and other forms of awards to the Company’s employees, directors and consultants, including employees and consultants of the Company’s affiliates. As of December 31, 2021, 5.1 million shares remained available for future issuance under the 2021 Plan. The Company recognized total stock-based compensation cost related to equity incentive awards of $5.7 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Stock Options
Options under the 2021 Plan are granted at the estimated fair value of the shares on the date of grant. The maximum term of options granted under the plan is 10 years from the date of grant. Options normally vest according to a four-year vesting schedule, with 25% of the shares vesting on the one-year anniversary and equal monthly vesting installments thereafter.
The following table summarizes the stock option activity under the 2013 Plan and 2021 Plan (in thousands except for per share amounts and years):
Aggregate intrinsic value represents the difference between the Company’s estimated fair value of its common stock and the exercise price of outstanding options. The aggregate intrinsic value of stock options exercised was $33.6 million and $1.9 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, unrecognized stock-based compensation cost related to outstanding unvested stock options that are expected to vest was $3.2 million and $3.7 million, which is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of 2.44 years and 2.26 years, respectively.
Restricted Stock Awards
The fair value of RSAs is determined using the fair value of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company granted 0.2 million RSAs. No RSAs were granted during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, 51,336 and 50,000 RSAs vested and were released from the Company’s right to repurchase, respectively, and no RSAs were cancelled.
The weighted average estimated fair value of RSAs granted for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $18.70 per share. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had $3.7 million and $0.9 million of unrecognized stock-based compensation related to RSAs, respectively. The weighted average remaining requisite service period was 3.32 years and 2.15 years, respectively.
Restricted Stock Units
The fair value of RSUs is determined using the closing market price of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant. The RSUs vest over the requisite service period, generally four years, subject to the continuous service of the individual. The following table summarizes the RSU activity under the 2021 Plan (in thousands except for per share amounts):
At December 31, 2021, there was an estimated $21.0 million of total unrecognized stock-based compensation costs related to RSUs. These costs will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 3.59 years.
Valuation Assumptions
The Company grants stock options with an exercise price equal to the stock’s fair value at the date of grant. The fair value of a stock option is estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized, net of forfeitures, over the requisite service periods of the awards. Stock option awards generally have 10-year terms and vest and become exercisable at a rate of 25% on the first anniversary of the vesting commencement date and 1/48th each month thereafter.
The Black-Scholes assumptions used to value the employee options during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
These assumptions and estimates were determined as follows:
•Fair Value of Common Stock. The Company’s Board of Directors determined the fair value of its common stock using various valuation methodologies, including external valuation analyses.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate for the expected term of the options was based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant.
•Weighted-Average Expected Term. The expected term was estimated using the simplified approach, in which the expected term of an award is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the expiration date of the award, as the Company does not have sufficient historical data relating to stock-option exercises.
•Expected Dividend Yield. The Company has never declared or paid any cash dividends and does not presently plan to pay cash dividends in the foreseeable future. As a result, an expected dividend yield of zero was used.
•Expected Volatility. As there is not a long trading history of the Company’s common stock, the expected volatility is determined based on the historical stock volatilities of its comparable companies. Comparable companies consist of public companies in the Company’s industry, which are similar in size, stage of life cycle, and financial leverage. The Company intends to continue to apply this process using the same or similar public companies until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of its share price becomes available, or unless circumstances change such that the identified companies are no longer similar, in which case, more suitable companies whose share prices are publicly available would be used in the calculation.
11. Income Taxes
The U.S. and non-U.S. components of loss before income taxes consisted of the following (in thousands):
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows (in thousands):
Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to reverse. Significant components of the Company’s deferred tax liabilities and assets are as follows (in thousands):
The Company has established a valuation allowance due to uncertainties regarding the realization of deferred tax assets based on the Company’s lack of earnings history. During 2021, the valuation allowance increased by approximately $8.9 million due to continuing operations.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had federal net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $122.2 million and $93.2 million, respectively, and state net operating loss carryforwards of approximately $86.5 million and $60.7 million, respectively, that will begin to expire in 2033, if not utilized prior to that time. Approximately $71.8 million of the U.S. federal net operating losses arose in tax years beginning after December 31, 2017 and have an indefinite carryforward period. Utilization of the net operating loss carryforwards may be subject to substantial annual limitation due to the “change in ownership” provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. The annual limitation may result in the expiration of net operating losses and tax credit carryforwards before utilization.
The Company’s provision for income taxes attributable to continuing operations differs from the expected tax expense amount computed by applying the statutory federal income tax rate of 21% to loss before income taxes due to the following:
The Company files income tax returns in the U.S. federal jurisdiction, various state jurisdictions, and in the United Kingdom. The Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state and local income tax examinations by tax authorities for years before 2017. Operating losses generated remain open to adjustment until the statute of limitations closes for the tax year in which the operating losses are utilized. The Company is not currently under examination by any tax jurisdiction, but tax years 2017 through 2020 remain open to examination.
The Company recognizes the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has recorded no unrecognized tax benefits.
The Company’s practice is to recognize interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits outside of income tax expense. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not recognize any interest or penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits.
A U.S. shareholder is subject to tax on Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income, or GILTI, earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. Under GAAP, an entity can make an accounting policy election to either recognize deferred taxes for temporary basis differences expected to reverse as GILTI in future years or to provide for the tax expense related to GILTI in the year the tax is incurred as a period expense. The Company has elected to account for GILTI as a period cost in the year the tax is incurred.
12. Defined Contribution Plan
The Company sponsors a defined contribution retirement plan qualifying under Section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. This plan covers all employees within the United States who meet minimum age and service requirements and allows participants to defer a portion of their annual compensation on a pre-tax basis. The Company’s contributions to the plan may be made at the discretion of the Board of Directors. The Company did not make any employer contributions to the plan during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The Company also engages in required pension plans of the United Kingdom. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the liability under this plan was immaterial.
13. Net Loss Per Share Attributable to Common Stockholders
The following tables present calculations for basic and diluted net loss per share (in thousands, except per share amounts):
The following outstanding shares of common stock equivalents as of the periods presented were excluded from the computation of diluted net loss per share for the periods presented because the impact of including them would have been anti-dilutive (in thousands):
14. Related-Party Transactions
In October 2018, the Company loaned an officer of the Company $0.2 million, bearing interest at 2.83% per annum for the purpose of exercising stock options. The outstanding amount due under the note was repaid in June 2021.
15. Subsequent Events
In January 2022, the Company granted a total of 1.0 million RSUs to employees pursuant to the 2021 Plan. The fair value of the RSU grants was determined based upon the market closing price of the Company’s common stock on the date of grant. The RSUs vest over the requisite service period, subject to the continued service of the individual. The Company expects to recognize aggregate stock-based compensation expense of $32.5 million related to the RSUs over a weighted-average requisite service period of approximately 4.0 years.
On February 22, 2022, the Company acquired legal workflow solutions from Congruity360, LLC in exchange for approximately $6.1 million of cash and up to $2.0 million of contingent consideration. With the acquisition of these legal workflow solutions, the Company will expand its offerings to address customers’ legal hold requirements. The Company is currently evaluating the purchase price allocation for this transaction.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosures
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
We maintain “disclosure controls and procedures,” as defined in Rule 12a-15(e) and Rule 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act, that are designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by a company in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is recorded and processed, summarized and reported, within the time periods specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Disclosure controls and procedures include, without limitation, controls and procedures designed to ensure that information required to be disclosed by a company in the reports that it files or submits under the Exchange Act is accumulated and communicated to our management, including our principal executive and principal financial officers, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Our management, with the participation of our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, evaluated the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021. Based on the evaluation of our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021, our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer concluded that, as of such date, our disclosure controls and procedures were effective at the reasonable assurance level.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
This Annual Report on Form 10-K does not include a report of management’s assessment regarding internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Rules 12a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) under the Exchange Act) or an attestation report of our independent registered public accounting firm as permitted in the transition period under the rules of the SEC for newly public companies.
Remediation of Previously Reported Material Weakness
We previously identified a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting related to designing and maintaining effective controls to evaluate and assess secondary sales transactions in our common stock. We have concluded that the material weakness arose because, as a private company, we did not have the necessary processes and controls formalized to effectively determine, in a timely manner, whether additional compensation expense was incurred based on the nature of the transaction.
Accordingly, we determined that these control deficiencies constituted a material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting. A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in our internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our consolidated financial statements would not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
We implemented additional processes and controls during 2021 to address the deficiencies identified in our internal control over financial reporting. Based on the additional controls implemented and our evaluation of these controls, management has concluded that the material weakness described above and first disclosed in our Prospectus has been remediated as of December 31, 2021.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There was no change in our internal control over financial reporting identified in connection with the evaluation required by Rule 13a-15(d) and 15d-15(d) of the Exchange Act that occurred during the fiscal quarter ended December 31, 2021 that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Inherent Limitations on Effectiveness of Controls
Our management, including our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer, believe that our disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial reporting are designed to provide reasonable assurance of achieving their objectives and are effective at the reasonable assurance level. However, our management does not expect that our disclosure controls and procedures or our internal control over financial reporting will prevent all errors and all fraud. A control system, no matter how well conceived and operated, can provide only reasonable, not absolute, assurance that the objectives of the control system are met. Further, the design of a control system must reflect the fact that there are resource constraints, and the benefits of controls must be considered relative to their costs. Because of the inherent limitations in all control systems, no evaluation of controls can provide absolute assurance that all control issues and instances of fraud, if any, have been detected. These inherent limitations include the realities that judgments in decision making can be faulty, and that breakdowns can occur because of a simple error or mistake. Additionally, controls can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by collusion of two or more people or by management override of the controls. The design of any system of controls also is based in part upon
certain assumptions about the likelihood of future events, and there can be no assurance that any design will succeed in achieving its stated goals under all potential future conditions; over time, controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or the degree of compliance with policies or procedures may deteriorate. Because of the inherent limitations in a cost-effective control system, misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
Item 9C. Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections
Not applicable.
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Information required by Part III, Item 10 (other than as set forth below) will be included in our Proxy Statement relating to our 2022 annual meeting of stockholders, or the 2022 Proxy Statement, to be filed with the SEC within 120 days after the end of our fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, and is incorporated by reference.
We have adopted a Code of Conduct that applies to all our employees, officers and directors. This includes our principal executive officer, principal financial officer and principal accounting officer or controller or persons performing similar functions. The full text of our Code of Conduct is available on our website at www.csdisco.com. We intend to disclose on our website any future amendments of our Code of Conduct or waivers that exempt any principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or controller, persons performing similar functions to our directors from provisions in the Code of Conduct. Information contained on, or that can be accessed through, our website is not incorporated by reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and you should not consider information on our website to be part of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
Information required by Part III, Item 11, will be included in our 2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated by reference.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owner and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
Information required by Part III, Item 12, will be included in our 2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated by reference.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
Information required by Part III, Item 13, will be included in our 2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated by reference.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services
Information required by Part III, Item 14, will be included in our 2022 Proxy Statement and is incorporated by reference.
Part IV
Item 15. Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules.
(a) Exhibits.
The following exhibits are included herein or incorporated herein by reference:
Incorporated by Reference
Exhibit
number Description Form File No. Exhibit Filing Date
3.1 Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of the Registrant, as currently in effect.
8-K 001-40624 3.1 July 23, 2021
3.2 Amended and Restated Bylaws of Registrant.
8-K 001-40624 3.2 July 23, 2021
4.1 Form of Common Stock Certificate.
S-1/A 333-257435 4.1 July 12, 2021
4.2* Description of Securities.
10.1 Fifth Amended and Restated Investors’ Rights Agreement, dated as of September 29, 2020.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.1 June 25, 2021
10.2+ Long Term Incentive Plan, as amended, and forms of agreements thereunder.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.2 June 25, 2021
10.3+ 2021 Equity Incentive Plan for forms of agreements thereunder.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.3 July 12, 2021
10.4+ 2021 Employee Stock Purchase Plan.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.4 July 12, 2021
10.5+ Form of Indemnity Agreement entered into by and between Registrant and each director and executive officer.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.5 July 12, 2021
10.6† Sublease Agreement, dated August 8, 2018, by and between the Registrant and Spiceworks, Inc.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.6 June 25, 2021
10.7 Second Amended and Restated Loan and Security Agreement, dated December 14, 2020, by and between the Registrant and Comerica Bank.
S-1/A 333-257435 10.7 July 12, 2021
10.8+ Amended and Restated Employment Agreement by and between the Registrant and Kiwi Camara.
10-Q 001-40624 10.5 November 10, 2021
10.9+ Amended and Restated Employment Agreement by and between the Registrant and Michael Lafair.
10-Q 001-40624 10.6 November 10, 2021
10.10+ Amended and Restated Employment Agreement by and between the Registrant and Sean Nathaniel.
10-Q 001-40624 10.7 November 10, 2021
10.11+ Amended and Restated Employment Agreement by and between the Registrant and Andrew Shimek.
10-Q 001-40624 10.8 November 10, 2021
10.12+ Amended and Restated Employment Agreement by and between the Registrant and Keith Zoellner.
10-Q 001-40624 10.9 November 10, 2021
10.13+ Non-Employee Director Compensation Policy
S-1/A 333-257435 10.13 July 12, 2021
10.14+* Transition and Separation Agreement by and between the Registrant and Sean Nathaniel.
21.1* List of subsidiaries of the Registrant.
23.1* Consent of Ernst & Young LLP, independent registered public accounting firm.
24.1* Power of Attorney (see the signature page to this Annual Report on Form 10-K).
31.1* Certification of Principal Executive Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2* Certification of Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to Rules 13a-14(a) and 15d-14(a) under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1# Certification of Principal Executive Officer and Principal Financial Officer Pursuant to 18 U.S.C. Section 1350, as Adopted Pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
101.INS XBRL Instance Document.
101.SCH XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document.
101.CAL XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document.
101.DEF XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document.
101.LAB XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document.
101.PRE XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document.
___________
* Filed herewith.
# This certification is deemed not filed for purposes of Section 18 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or otherwise subject to the liability of that section, nor shall it be deemed incorporated by reference into any filing under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
+ Indicates management contract or compensatory plan.
† Certain schedules and exhibits to this exhibit have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. A copy of any omitted schedule and/or exhibit will be furnished to the SEC upon request.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
None.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized.
CS DISCO, INC.
Date: February 25, 2022
By: /s/ Kiwi Camara
Name: Kiwi Camara
Title: Chief Executive Officer
POWER OF ATTORNEY
KNOW ALL PERSONS BY THESE PRESENTS, that each person whose signature appears below hereby constitutes and appoints Kiwi Camara and Michael Lafair, and each of them, as his or her true and lawful attorney-in-fact and agent with full power of substitution, for him and her in any and all capacities, to sign any and all amendments to this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and to file the same, with all exhibits thereto and other documents in connection therewith, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, granting unto said attorney-in-fact, proxy, and agent full power and authority to do and perform each and every act and thing requisite and necessary to be done in connection therewith, as fully for all intents and purposes as he or she might or could do in person, hereby ratifying and confirming all that said attorney-in-fact, proxy and agent, or his or her substitute, may lawfully do or cause to be done by virtue hereof.
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Act of 1933, report has been signed by the following persons in the capacities and on the dates indicated.
Signature Title Date
/s/ Kiwi Camara Chief Executive Officer and Director February 25, 2022
Kiwi Camara (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Michael Lafair Chief Financial Officer February 25, 2022
Michael Lafair (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
/s/ Krishna Srinivasan Chair of the Board of Directors and Director February 25, 2022
Krishna Srinivasan
/s/ Tyson Baber Director February 25, 2022
Tyson Baber
/s/ Susan L. Blount Director February 25, 2022
Susan L. Blount
/s/ Colette Pierce Burnette Director February 25, 2022
Colette Pierce Burnette
/s/ Aaron Clark Director February 25, 2022
Aaron Clark
/s/ Robert P. Goodman Director February 25, 2022
Robert P. Goodman
/s/ Scott Hill Director February 25, 2022
Scott Hill
/s/ James Offerdahl Director February 25, 2022
James Offerdahl