ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis provides information that Luminar’s management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of Luminar’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read together with “Selected Historical Consolidated Financial and Operating Data of Luminar” and the historical audited annual consolidated financial statements as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related notes thereto, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon Luminar’s current expectations, estimates and projections that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements due to, among other considerations, the matters discussed under “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.” Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this subsection to “Luminar” refer to the business of Luminar Technologies, Inc., a Delaware corporation, and its subsidiaries prior to the consummation of the Business Combination, which is the business of the post-Business Combination Company and its subsidiaries following the consummation of the Business Combination.
Discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included in Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on April 14, 2021.
Overview
Our vision is to make autonomous transportation safe and ubiquitous. As a global leader in lidar autonomous driving technology, we are enabling the world’s first autonomous solutions for automotive series production in passenger cars and commercial trucks.
Founded in 2012 by President and Chief Executive Officer Austin Russell, we built a new type of lidar from the chip-level up, with technological breakthroughs across all core components. As a result, we have created what we believe is a lidar sensor that meets the demanding performance, safety, and cost requirements for Level 3 through Level 5 autonomous vehicles in production, bypassing the traditional limitations of legacy lidar technology, while also enabling Level 0 through Level 2 Advanced Driving Assistance Systems (“ADAS”) with our Proactive Safety solution. Integrating this advanced hardware with our custom developed software stack enables a turn-key autonomous solution to accelerate widespread adoption across automakers at series production scale.
Our lidar hardware and software products help set the standard for safety in the industry, and are designed to enable accurate and reliable detections of some of the most challenging “edge cases” that autonomous vehicles can encounter on a regular basis. This is achieved by advancing existing lidar range and resolution to new levels, ensuring hard-to-see objects like a tire on the road ahead or a child that runs into the street are not missed, as well as our software to interpret the data and inform autonomous and assisted driving decisions.
Business Combinations
Reverse Merger with Gores
On December 2, 2020 (the “Closing Date”), we merged with Gores Metropoulos, Inc. (“Gores”), at which time First Merger Sub, a newly formed subsidiary of Gores, merged with and into Luminar Technologies, Inc. (the “Company” or “Luminar”), with Luminar being the surviving corporation (the “First Merger”). Immediately following the consummation of the First Merger and as part of the same overall transaction as the First Merger, Luminar, merged with and into Dawn Merger Sub II, LLC (“Second Merger Sub”), a newly formed subsidiary of Gores, with Second Merger Sub continuing as the surviving entity (the “Second Merger” and, in combination with the First Merger and the other related transactions, the “Business Combination”). Luminar was deemed the accounting predecessor and the post-combination Company is the successor SEC registrant, which means that Luminar’s financial statements for previous periods will be disclosed in our future periodic reports filed with the SEC, as appropriate. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. Under this method of accounting, Gores was treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes.
OptoGration Acquisition
On August 3, 2021, we completed our acquisition of OptoGration. The OptoGration acquisition helps us secure intellectual property and supply of Indium Gallium Arsenide (“InGaAs”) photodetector semiconductor chips, which are used to convert optical power into an electrical current. The acquisition of OptoGration is part of our vertical integration strategy, which will secure supply of a key component of our sensor technology.
COVID-19 Impact
The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has adversely affected our and some of our customers’ business operations. The extent of the continued impact of the coronavirus pandemic on our operational and financial performance will depend on
various future developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, including the emergence of variants, and impact on our customers, suppliers, and employees, all of which is uncertain at this time. We expect the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic to adversely impact our business, including product development and industrialization initiatives, timing of shipment of products and provision of services to customers, supply chain, and may impact our financial position and results of operations. We are unable to predict at this time the potential adverse impact. For more information on our operations and risks related to health epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, see Item 1A. Risk Factors in this Form 10-K.
Basis of Presentation
We currently conduct our business through two operating segments: (i) Autonomy Solutions and (ii) Components.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Our revenue producing activities are organized in two operating segments: (i) Autonomy Solutions and (ii) Components.
The Autonomy Solutions segment is engaged in design, manufacturing, and sale of lidar sensors as well as related perception and autonomy enabling software solutions catering mainly to the original equipment manufacturers in the automobile, commercial vehicle, robo-taxi and adjacent industries. The Autonomy Solutions segment revenue also includes fees earned from non-recurring engineering services provided to customers in connection with customization of our sensor and software products.
The Components segment primarily provides designing, testing, consulting services and manufacturing for non-standard integrated circuits and components to various customers, including government agencies and defense contractors generally for purposes unrelated to autonomous vehicles.
Revenue is recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. Fixed fee arrangements are satisfied over time and utilize the input method based on costs incurred. Accordingly, revenue for fixed fee arrangements is recognized on a percentage of completion basis. Certain customer contracts are also structured as time and materials and billed at cost of time incurred plus a markup. Such time and material contracts are recognized over time.
Cost of sales and gross profit (loss)
Cost of sales includes the fixed and variable manufacturing cost of our lidar sensors, which primarily consists of personnel-related costs including certain engineering personnel and stock-based compensation and material purchases from third-party contract manufacturers and suppliers which are directly associated with our manufacturing process. Cost of sales includes cost of providing services to customers, depreciation and amortization for manufacturing fixed assets or equipment, cost of components, product testing costs, an allocated portion of overhead, facility and information technology (“IT”) costs, write downs for excess and obsolete inventory and shipping costs.
The Components segment provides certain services and components to the Autonomy Solutions segment which are recorded as cost of goods sold or research and development costs depending on the nature and use of such services and components by the Autonomy Solutions segment. These inter-segment transactions are eliminated in the consolidated results.
Gross profit (loss) equals revenue less cost of sales.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development (R&D)
R&D costs are expensed as incurred.
Our R&D efforts are focused on enhancing and developing additional functionality for our existing products and on new product development, including new releases and upgrades to our lidar sensors and integrated software solutions. R&D expenses consist primarily of:
•Personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense, for personnel in our research and engineering functions;
•Expenses related to materials, software licenses, supplies and third-party services;
•Prototype expenses; and
•An allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation.
The Components segment provides certain services and components to the Autonomy Solutions segment which are recorded as cost of goods sold or research and development costs depending on the nature and use of such services and
components by the Autonomy Solutions segment. These inter-segment transactions are eliminated in our consolidated results. We expect our R&D costs to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in research and development activities to achieve our product roadmap.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist of personnel and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation of our business development team as well as advertising and marketing expenses. These include the cost of marketing programs, trade shows, promotional materials, demonstration equipment, an allocated portion of facility and IT costs and depreciation.
We expect to increase our sales and marketing activities, mainly in order to continue to build out our geographic presence to be closer to our partners and better serve them. We also expect that our sales and marketing expenses will increase over time as we continue to hire additional personnel to scale our business.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of personnel and personnel-related expenses, including stock-based compensation of our executive, finance, human resources, information systems and legal departments as well as legal and accounting fees for professional and contract services.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we scale headcount with the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including compliance with the rules and regulations of the SEC, legal, audit, additional insurance expenses, investor relations activities, and other administrative and professional services.
Change in Fair Value of Warrants
Change in fair value of warrants are non-cash changes and primarily consist of changes in fair value related to said instruments. The warrant liabilities are classified as marked-to-market liabilities and the corresponding increase or decrease in value impacts our net loss.
Interest Income and Other, and Interest Expense and Other
Interest income and other consists primarily of income earned on our cash equivalents and marketable securities. These amounts will vary based on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities balances, and also with market rates. It also includes realized gains and losses related to the marketable securities, as well as impact of gains and losses related to foreign exchange transactions. Interest expense and other consisted primarily of interest on convertible senior notes issued in December 2021, finance leases and interest on our senior secured term loan facility, which was repaid upon consummation of the Business Combination.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The results of operations presented below should be reviewed in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included elsewhere in this report. The following table sets forth our consolidated results of operations data for the periods presented (in thousands):
Revenue
The increase in revenue for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by increased revenue from our Autonomy Solutions segment. The breakdown of our revenue by our segments for the periods presented was as follows (in thousands):
The increase in revenue of our Autonomy Solutions segment in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily driven by (a) 142% increase in revenue from customization / non-recurring engineering services and (b) 177% increase in sales of sensors.
The increase in revenue of our Components segment in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to revenue from OptoGration acquired in August 2021.
Cost of Sales
The $21.1 million increase in our cost of sales in 2021 compared to 2020, was primarily due to increase in sales of sensors and increase in customization / NRE services. These increases were partially offset by lower excess inventory reserves and recovery of previously reserved Model Hydra sensors sold during 2021 due to higher customer demand.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
The $50.2 million increase in research and development expenses in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due:
•$25.5 million increase in personnel-related costs driven mainly by increased headcount and increased stock-based compensation expense; and
•$14.7 million increased contractor fees and external spend in relation to continued development and testing of our sensor and software products, as well as development activities related to advanced manufacturing.
Sales and Marketing
The $9.9 million increase in sales and marketing expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due:
•a $6.2 million increase in personnel related costs including stock-based compensation costs from increase in headcount; and
•a $2.6 million increase in marketing expenses related to trade shows and presentations in auto industry conventions as well as increased spend with outside consultants related to business development activities.
General and Administrative
The $64.4 million increase in general and administrative expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to:
• a $41.2 million increase in personnel costs including stock-based compensation costs, driven mainly by increased headcount;
•a $7.5 million increase in costs associated with (a) recruiting costs; and (b) being a public company, for example audit fees, tax advisory fees, listing fees, etc.; and
•a $4.5 million increase in travel related expenses as domestic and international travel increased with the easing of COVID-19 restrictions.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
The change in fair value of warrant liabilities is a non-cash benefit or charge due to the corresponding decrease or increase in the estimated fair value of warrants.
Pursuant to the Business Combination, the 2017 Warrants, 2018 Warrants and 2020 Warrants were exercised on December 2, 2020. Prior to the exercise, the fair value of the warrants was calculated using the closing stock price on December 2, 2020, and the increase in the fair value was recorded. The non-cash charge related to the 2017 Warrants, 2018 Warrants and 2020 Warrants was $27.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Further, subsequent to the Business Combination, we had 13,333,309 Public Warrants and 6,666,666 Private Warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2020. The non-cash charge related to the Public and Private Warrants recorded in December 2020 was $241.0 million.
In March 2021, 16,718,316 Public and Private Warrants were exercised and the remaining 204,638 Public Warrants were redeemed. The non-cash charge related to Public and Private Warrants was $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
The $4.0 million loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020 related to the termination and prepayment of the senior secured term loan.
Segment Operating Loss
Segment profit or loss is defined as income or loss before taxes. Our segment loss breakdown is as follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity and Capital Requirements
Our capital requirements will depend on many factors, including lidar and software sales volume, the timing and extent of spending to support R&D efforts, investments in information technology systems, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, and market adoption of new and enhanced products and features. Until we can generate sufficient revenue from sale
of products and services to cover our operating expenses, working capital, and capital expenditures, we expect our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities, and proceeds from debt and/or equity financings to fund our cash needs. If we are required to raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, dilution to stockholders would result. Any equity securities issued may also provide for rights, preferences or privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. If we raise funds by issuing debt securities, these debt securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of holders of our common stock. The terms of debt securities or borrowings could impose significant restrictions on our operations. The credit market and financial services industry have in the past, and may in the future, experience periods of uncertainty that could impact the availability and cost of equity and debt financing.
We expect to continue to invest in our product and software development as well as incur efforts to build customer relations and markets. Further, we expect to invest in developing advanced manufacturing capabilities, both, internally as well as with our contract manufacturing partners. For example, in January 2022, we executed an arrangement with Celestica committing approximately $26.9 million for purchase of capital equipment as well as engineering efforts related to manufacturing process. We expect to fund these product and business development initiatives, and capital expenditures either through our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities or through our stock-as-cash program.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents totaling $330.0 million and marketable securities of $462.1 million. To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been proceeds received from issuances of debt and equity. Market and economic conditions, such as increase in interest rates by federal agencies, may materially impact relative cost and mix of these sources of liquidity.
In December 2021, we issued $625.0 million aggregate principal amount of 1.25% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026 in a private placement (the “Convertible Senior Notes”). The interest on the Convertible Senior Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears on June 15 and December 15 of each year, beginning on June 15, 2022. The Convertible Senior Notes will mature on December 15, 2026, unless earlier repurchased or redeemed by us or converted pursuant to their terms. The total net proceeds from the debt offering, after deducting debt fees paid to the initial purchasers, was approximately $609.4 million.
We have not generated positive cash flows from operating activities and have incurred significant losses from operations in the past as reflected in our accumulated deficit of $822.5 million as of December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur operating losses for at least the foreseeable future due to continued R&D investments that we intend to make in our business and, as a result, we may require additional capital resources to grow our business. We believe that current cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities will be sufficient to continue to execute our business strategy in the next 12 months and until we expect to begin series production.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table summarizes Luminar’s cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $148.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Net cash used in operating activities was due to our net loss of $238.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items of $129.5 million, primarily consisting of $77.7 million of stock-based compensation, $26.1 million of change in fair value of warrant liabilities, $10.8 million of vendor payments in stock in lieu of cash, $4.2 million of depreciation and amortization and $2.9 million of inventory impairment offset by use of cash for operating assets and liabilities of $39.9 million due to the timing of cash payments to vendors and cash receipts from customers.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $194.2 million in 2021 comprised of $716.9 million related to purchases of marketable securities and $6.4 million in capital expenditures, offset by $366.9 million and $161.9 million, respectively, of cash proceeds from maturities and sales of marketable securities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $463.6 million in 2021 primarily related to $609.4 million of cash received from the issuance of Convertible Senior Notes, $153.9 million of cash received from exercises of Public and Private Warrants,
$5.9 million of cash received from exercises of stock options, offset by $231.6 million of cash paid for repurchases of common stock and redemption of Public Warrants and $73.4 million of cash paid for purchases of capped call options.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can significantly impact the amounts we report as assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and the related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the accounting policies and estimates discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance as these policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity.
Revenue
Revenue from product sales is recognized upon transfer of control of promised products. Revenue for service projects is recognized as services are performed and amounts are earned in accordance with the terms of a contract. Revenue is recognized in an amount that reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for those products and services.
Revenues related to NRE projects are recognized over time using the cost input method. In using this input method, we generally apply the cost-to-cost method of accounting where sales and profits are recorded based on the ratio of costs incurred to estimated total costs at completion. Recognition of profit on the NRE contracts requires estimates of the total contract value, the total cost at completion, and the measurement of progress towards completion. Significant judgment is required when estimating total contract costs and progress to completion on the arrangements, as well as whether a loss is expected to be incurred on the contract. In estimating total contract costs, we are also required to estimate the effort expected to be incurred to complete a NRE project. These estimates are subject to significant estimation uncertainty as actual time and effort incurred on completing a NRE project or actual rates of either internal or contracted personnel working on such NRE projects may differ from our estimates. If circumstances arise that change the original estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward completion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known to us. We perform ongoing profitability analysis of our contracts accounted for under this method to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs, and profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately.
We enter into contracts that can include various combinations of products and services, which are generally capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations; however, determining whether products or services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may sometimes require significant judgment. Transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price (“SSP”) basis. Judgment is required to determine SSP for each distinct performance obligation. We use a range of sales prices from actual sales to customers to estimate SSP when products and services are sold separately. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, we determine SSP using information that may include other observable inputs available to it.
Changes in judgments with respect to these assumptions and estimates could impact the timing or amount of revenue recognition.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 in Item 8. of this Form 10-K for information related to recent accounting pronouncements.