Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with Part I, including matters set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Form 10-K and our Consolidated Financial Statements and notes thereto, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Business Overview
The amounts set forth below are in thousands unless otherwise indicated except for unit (including the average selling price per unit), share, and per share data.
How The Company Generates Revenue
The Company derives its revenues from sales of new units, sales of pre-owned units, and other revenue. Other revenue consists of RV parts, service and repairs, commissions earned on sales of third-party financing and insurance products, Tampa campground and food facilities revenue, and other revenues. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company derived its revenues from these categories in the following percentages:
New and pre-owned RV sales accounted for approximately 90% and 89% of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. These revenue contributions have remained relatively consistent year over year.
Key Performance Indicators
Gross Profit and Gross Margin (excluding depreciation and amortization). Gross profit is total revenue less total costs applicable to revenue excluding depreciation and amortization. The vast majority of the cost applicable to revenues is related to the cost of vehicles. New and pre-owned vehicles have accounted for 97% of the cost of revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of revenue. Gross profit and gross margin are GAAP metrics commonly used (including by Company management) to compare results between periods and entities.
The Company’s gross profit is variable in nature and generally follows changes in revenue. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, gross profit was $324.8 and $179.0 million, respectively, and gross margin was 26.3% and 21.9%, respectively. Last-in, first-out (“LIFO”) adjustments were $4.8 and $0.09 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, gross margins were also impacted by other revenue, including finance and insurance revenues and parts, service, and accessories revenue. The Company’s margins on these lines of business typically carry higher gross margin percentages than margins on new and pre-owned vehicle sales, and contributed a smaller portion of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 than for the prior year. These combined other revenues were 10.0% and 10.7%, respectively, of total revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
SG&A as a percentage of Gross Profit. Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses consist primarily of wage-related expenses, selling expenses related to commissions and advertising, lease expenses and corporate overhead expenses. Historically, salaries, commissions and benefits represent the largest component of the Company’s total SG&A expense and averages approximately 50-63% of SG&A. SG&A expenses do not include transaction costs, stock-based compensation, finance lease interest and depreciation and amortization. SG&A expenses as a percentage of gross profit allows the Company to monitor its overhead expenses relative to profitability over a period of time.
The Company calculates SG&A expenses as a percentage of gross profit by dividing SG&A expenses for the period by total gross profit. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, SG&A as a percentage of gross profit was 56.6% and 65.8%, respectively. The decrease in this percentage reflects the fact that the growth in gross profit exceeded the growth in SG&A costs, driven primarily by the overall growth of the business, improved gross margins, improved fixed cost operating leverage, as well as overhead cost reductions implemented in April 2020.
In addition, as the Company executes its growth strategy, the Company may acquire property, plant, and equipment and intangible assets, and the related depreciation and amortization expense may negatively impact our net income or loss in future periods.
Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is not a U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principle (“GAAP”) financial measure, but it is one of the primary non-GAAP measures management uses to evaluate the financial performance of the business. Adjusted EBITDA is also frequently used by analysts, investors, and other interested parties to evaluate companies in the recreational vehicle industry. The Company uses Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin to supplement GAAP measures of performance as follows:
● as a measurement of operating performance to assist in comparing the operating performance of the Company’s business on a consistent basis, and remove the impact of items not directly resulting from the Company’s core operations;
● for planning purposes, including the preparation of the Company’s internal annual operating budget and financial projections;
● to evaluate the performance and effectiveness of the Company’s operational strategies; and
● to evaluate the Company’s capacity to fund capital expenditures and expand the business.
The Company believes Adjusted EBITDA can provide a more complete understanding of the underlying operating results and trends and an enhanced overall understanding of financial performance and prospects for the future. The Company defines Adjusted EBITDA as net income excluding depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, non-floor plan interest expense, amortization of intangible assets, income tax expense, stock-based compensation, transaction costs and other supplemental adjustments which for the periods presented includes LIFO adjustments, severance costs, other one-time charges and gain (loss) on sale of property and equipment and change in fair value of warrant liabilities. The Company believes Adjusted EBITDA, when considered along with other performance measures, is a useful measure as it reflects certain operating drivers of the business, such as sales growth, operating costs, selling and administrative expense and other operating income and expense.
Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a measure of liquidity or cash flows from operations, or a measure comparable to net income as it does not take into account certain requirements such as non-recurring gains and losses which are not deemed to be a normal part of the underlying business activities. The Company’s measure of Adjusted EBITDA is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled captions of other companies due to different methods of calculation. The Company strives to compensate for these limitations by using Adjusted EBITDA as only one of several measures for evaluating business performance. In addition, capital expenditures, which impact depreciation and amortization, interest expense, and income tax expense, are reviewed separately by management. For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income, a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA Margin to net income margin, and a further discussion of how the Company utilizes this non-GAAP financial measure, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
COVID-19 Developments
In March 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of the novel coronavirus disease COVID-19 a pandemic, which continues to spread throughout the United States and globally. Beginning in mid-to-late March of 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic led to severe disruptions in general economic activity as businesses and federal, state, and local governments took increasingly broad actions to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on public health, including through “shelter in place” or “stay at home” orders in the states in which we operate. As we modified our business practices to conform to government guidelines and best practices to ensure the health and safety of our customers, employees and the communities we serve, we saw significant early declines in new and pre-owned vehicle unit sales, sales of parts, accessories and related services, including finance and insurance revenues as well as campground and miscellaneous revenues.
We took a number of actions in April 2020 to adjust resources and costs to align with reduced demand caused by the pandemic. These actions included:
● Reduction of our workforce by 25%;
● Temporary reduction of senior management salaries (April 2020 through May 2020);
● Suspension of 2020 annual pay increases;
● Temporary suspension of 401k match (April 2020 through May 2020);
● Delay of non-critical capital projects; and
● Focus of resources on core sales and service operations.
To further protect our liquidity and cash position, we negotiated with our lenders for the temporary suspension of scheduled principal and interest payments on our term and mortgage loans from April 15, 2020 through June 15, 2020 and for the temporary suspension of scheduled floorplan curtailment payments from April 1, 2020 through June 15, 2020. We also received $8.7 million in loans under the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP Loans”). As of December 31, 2021, all of the PPP Loans had a portion forgiven for a total of $6,626. We expect no further forgiveness of the remaining loans.
The improvement in sales beginning in May 2020 likely relates, at least in part, to an increase in consumer demand as consumers seek outdoor travel and leisure activities that permit appropriate social distancing. However, we can provide no assurances that such growth in sales will continue at the same rate as between May 2020 and December 2021, or at all, over any time period, and sales may ultimately decline. Furthermore, our improved sales and cost savings measures to date may not be sufficient to offset any later adverse impacts of the pandemic, including the Delta and Omicron variants, and our liquidity could be negatively impacted, if sales trends from May 2020 through December 2021 are reversed, which may occur, for example, if consumer preferences shift towards cruise line, air travel and hotel industries.
Our operations also depend on the continued health and productivity of our employees at our dealerships service locations and corporate headquarters throughout this pandemic. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic ultimately impacts our business, results of operations, and financial condition will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including the severity and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic, the efficacy and availability of vaccines, and further actions that may be taken by individuals, businesses and federal, state and local governments in response. Even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided, we may experience significant adverse effects to our business as a result of its global economic impact, including any economic recession or downturn and the impact of such a recession or downturn on unemployment levels, consumer confidence, levels of personal discretionary spending, credit availability and any long term disruptions in supply chains.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth information comparing the components of net income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Summary Financial Data
(in thousands)
Revenue
Revenue increased by approximately $417.9 million, or 51.1%, to $1.2 billion from $817.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted consumer lifestyles by leading to social distancing and limited travel options. These trends have been favorable to the RV industry and the Company. It is uncertain how long these trends will continue to affect the industry and the Company.
New Vehicles and Pre-Owned Vehicles Revenue
Revenue from new and pre-owned vehicle sales increased by approximately $382.0 million, or 52.3%, to $1.1 billion from $729.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue from new vehicle sales increased by approximately $245.5 million, or 51.2%, to $725.1 million from $479.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This was primarily due to (a) an increase in the number of new vehicle units sold from 6,151 to 8,932, driven by increased demand across all locations as well as the acquisitions in 2021 of three dealerships located in Knoxville, Tennessee (March), Milwaukee, Wisconsin (August) and a dealership with two locations in Portland, Oregon and Vancouver, Washington (August) (“New Locations”), and (b) an increase in average unit selling price from $76,400 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $81,182 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue from pre-owned vehicle sales increased by approximately $136.5 million, or 54.6%, to $386.8 million from $250.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Excluding the effect of wholesale sales, there was an increase in units sold from 3,869 to 5,338 for the years December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively, as well as an increase in the average unit selling price from approximately $60,700 per unit for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $69,795 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other Revenue
Other revenue consists of sales of parts, accessories, and related services. It also consists of finance and insurance revenues as well as campground and miscellaneous revenues. Other revenue increased by approximately $35.9 million, or 41.1%, to $123.1 million from $87.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As a component of other revenue, sales of parts, accessories and related services increased by approximately $8.6 million, or 22.3%, to $47.3 million from $38.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, primarily due to increased level of business.
Finance and insurance revenue increased by approximately $27.5 million, or 61.0%, to $72.6 million from $45.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020, respectively, primarily due to higher RV unit sales.
Campground and other revenue decreased by approximately $0.3 million, or 7.6%, to $3.2 million from $3.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020, respectively.
Gross Profit (excluding depreciation and amortization)
Gross profit consists of gross revenues less cost of sales and services and excludes depreciation and amortization. Gross profit increased by approximately $145.8 million, or 81.5%, to $324.8 million from $179.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase was attributable to growth in all lines of business. Gross margin was 26.3% and 21.9% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Consumer demand was favorably impacted and supply restrained by the COVID-19 pandemic, which in turn had a favorable impact on gross margins. It is uncertain how long these trends will continue to affect the industry and the Company.
New and Pre-Owned Vehicles Gross Profit
New and pre-owned vehicle gross profit increased $119.6 million, or 105.1%, to $233.4 from $113.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is primarily attributable to the increase in units sold, as well as our ability to maintain higher margins in a period where inventory and supply has been tight.
Other Gross Profit
Other gross profit increased by $31.1 million, or 47.8% to $96.2 million from $65.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 due to increased finance and insurance revenues associated with increased RV sales.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses, which, as explained above, do not include transaction costs, stock-based compensation expense, and depreciation and amortization expense, increased 56.2% to $183.8 million from $117.7 million during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in SG&A expenses was primarily related to; (a) overhead associated with the Phoenix dealership acquired in May 2020; (b) the Elkhart dealership acquired in October 2020; (c) the Burns Harbor dealership acquired in December 2020; (d) the Louisville, Tennessee dealership acquired in March 2021; (e) the Portland, Oregon, Vancouver, Washington and Milwaukee, Wisconsin dealerships acquired in August 2021; and (f) increased performance wages as a result of the increased unit sales and revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Stock based compensation decreased $0.8 million as a result of the graded vesting of the awards with market conditions which were issued to members of management in 2018, with the majority of the expense being recorded in the early portion of the derived service period.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by approximately $0.5 million to $8.5 million from $8.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due primarily to higher floorplan balances in the latter part of the year, offset by the use of an interest reduction equity account, which earns interest to offset floorplan interest expense.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities represents the mark-to-market fair value adjustments to the outstanding warrants issued in connection with the Company’s SPAC merger. The change in fair value of the outstanding warrants was $11.7 million and $14.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The change in fair value is the result of increases in market prices which drive the value of the financial instruments.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense increased to $28.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 from income tax expense of $10.4 million during the same period of 2020, due to the increase in income.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
The Company uses certain non-GAAP financial measures, such as EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, to analyze its performance and financial condition as described in “Key Performance Indicators”, above. The Company utilizes these financial measures to manage the business on a day-to-day basis and believes that they are relevant measures of performance. The Company believes that these supplemental measures are commonly used in the industry to measure performance. The Company believes these non-GAAP measures, in addition to the standard GAAP-based financial measures, provide expanded insight to measure revenue and cost performance.
The presentation of non-GAAP financial information should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. You should read this discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations together with the consolidated financial statements of the Company and the related notes thereto also included herein.
EBITDA is defined as net income excluding depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, interest expense, net, amortization of intangible assets, and income tax expense.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income excluding depreciation and amortization of property and equipment, non-floor plan interest expense, amortization of intangible assets, income tax expense, stock-based compensation, transaction costs and other supplemental adjustments which for the periods presented includes LIFO adjustments, PPP Loan forgiveness, other one-time charges, gain or loss on sale of property and equipment and change in fair value of warrant liabilities.
Adjusted EBITDA Margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of total revenues.
Reconciliations from Net Income per the Consolidated Statements of Operations to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA and Net Income Margin to EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA Margin for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are shown in the tables below.
* Interest expense includes $5,520 and $4,816 relating to finance lease payments for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Operating lease payments are included as rent expense and included in net income.
Note: Figures in the table may not recalculate exactly due to rounding.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
Net Cash from Operating Activities
The Company generated cash from operating activities of approximately $2.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $111.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net income increased by approximately $67.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Adjustments for non-cash expenses, included in net income, decreased $10.8 million to $19.4 million from $30.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Non-cash adjustments include a decrease in net income of $11.7 million related to the change in fair value of the Company’s warrants and an increase of $6.6 million related to the forgiveness of the PPP loans. During the year ended December 31, 2021, there was approximately ($98.6) million of changes in operating assets and liabilities as compared to $66.2 million of cash provided in 2020. The fluctuations in assets and liabilities were primarily due to the increase in inventory of $105.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, excluding the impact of inventory added by the acquisitions in Knoxville, Tennessee; Portland, Oregon; Vancouver, Washington and Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Net Cash from Investing Activities
The Company used cash in investing activities of approximately $84.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to approximately $30.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021, net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to cash paid for acquisitions of $63.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $21.3 million, offset by cash provided by the sales of property and equipment of $0.2 million.
Net Cash from Financing Activities
The Company generated cash from financing activities of $116.0 million during the year ended December 31,2021 compared to cash used in financing activities of approximately $48.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to a net increase of the M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit related to increased inventory of $73.1 million as defined under “M&T Credit Facility” below, proceeds from financing liabilities of $26.2 million, proceeds from exercises of warrants of $11.6 million, and proceeds from exercises of stock options of $30.7 million. These payments were partially offset by stock repurchases of $12.0 million. In addition, the Company paid dividends on the Series A Preferred Stock of $4.8 million as well as $2.5 million of acquisition notes payable.
Funding Needs and Sources
The Company has historically satisfied its liquidity needs through cash from operations and various borrowing arrangements. Cash requirements consist principally of scheduled payments of principal and interest on outstanding indebtedness (including indebtedness under its existing floor plan credit facility), the acquisition of inventory, capital expenditures, salary and sales commissions and lease expenses, and in 2021 also consisted of the acquisition of three dealerships. The Company expects that it has adequate cash on hand, cash from operations and borrowing capacity to meet it liquidity needs for the next twelve months. Management continually evaluates capital requirements and options to facilitate our growth strategy, and currently believes capital is adequate to support the business and its growth strategy under various market conditions.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had liquidity of approximately $98.1 million in cash and had working capital of approximately $109.3 million.
Capital expenditures include expenditures to extend the useful life of current facilities, relating to purchases of new capital assets and construction, and to expand operations. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company invested approximately $21.3 million and $18.6 million in capital expenditures, respectively.
The Company maintains sizable inventory in order to meet the expectations of its customers and believes that it will continue to require working capital consistent with past experience. Historically, the Company has funded its operations with internally generated cash flow and borrowings. Changes in working capital are driven primarily by levels of business activity. The Company maintains a floor plan credit facility to finance its vehicle inventory. At times, the Company has made temporary repayments on its existing floor plan credit facility using excess cash flow from operations.
Short-Term Material Cash Requirements
For at least the next twelve months, our primary capital requirements are capital to maintain our current operations and to support our planned pipeline of greenfield build-to-suits. We may also use our resources for the funding of potential acquisitions. During 2022, we anticipate discretionary capital spending for maintaining current operations of approximately $8 million. We also anticipate spending $3.6 million to complete the buildout of our Elkhart dealership facility, plus an additional $5.6 million for land purchases for future greenfield development. Greenfield land purchases and build-to-suits are expected to be financed through leasing partners. Cash used for acquisitions will be dependent upon deal flow and individual targets. Inventory associated with acquisitions and stocking new greenfield location inventories will mostly be financed using the M&T floorplan facility.
We have financing commitments that will require $5.5 million in 2022 for the current portion of long-term debt associated with our M&T Bank term loan and repayment of notes associated with acquisitions. We also have approximately $2.0 in obligations associated with 2022 payments on our current financing leases.
We expect to meet our short-term liquidity requirements primarily through current cash on hand and cash generated by operations. We also have a firm commitment to finance the $3.6 million associated with the completion of our Elkhart dealership facility, and plan to obtain lease financing for the $5.6 million land purchases and the additional costs of building out greenfield dealerships on these properties. Additional sources of funds, should we need them, include the $25 million M&T revolving credit line, all of which is available.
We believe that our cash flows from operations, combined with our current cash levels and available borrowing capacity, will be adequate to support our ongoing operations and to fund our operating and growth requirements for at least the next twelve months. We believe that we have access to additional funds, if needed, through the capital markets under the current market conditions, but we cannot guarantee that such financing will be available on favorable terms, or at all.
Long-Term Material Cash Requirements
Beyond the next twelve months, our principal demands for funds will be for maintenance of our core business, and continued growth through greenfields and acquisitions. Additional funds may be spent on technology and efficiency investments, at our discretion.
Known obligations beyond the next twelve months include approximately $8 million in annual maintenance capital. Our long-term debt repayment will require $13.8 million beyond the next twelve months. Our average greenfield dealership requires $16 to $18 million for land and development, all of which are expected to be financed through leases, plus approximately $1 million in self-funded start-up operational capital. RV inventory will be financed through our floorplan facility with M&T. The average acquisition costs $4 to $13 million, plus RV inventory which is financed using our floorplan facility, plus entering into a lease arrangement with the seller or a third party.
M&T Credit Facility
On March 15, 2018, the Company replaced its existing debt agreements with Bank of America with a $200 million Senior Secured Credit Facility (the “M&T Facility” and the related credit agreement, the “Credit Agreement”). The M&T Facility included a $175 million M&T floor plan line of credit (“M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit”), a $20 million M&T term loan (“M&T Term Loan”), and a $5 million M&T revolver (“M&T Revolver”). The M&T Facility requires the Company to meet certain financial covenants and is secured by substantially all of the assets of the Company. The M&T Facility was originally due to mature on March 15, 2021. The maturity date was subsequently extended to September 15, 2021.
On March 6, 2020, the Company entered into the Third Amendment and Joinder to Credit Agreement (“Third Amendment”). Pursuant to the Third Amendment, Star Land of Houston, LLC (the “Mortgage Loan Borrower”) and Lone Star Diversified, LLC (“Diversified”), wholly owned subsidiaries of LDRV Holdings Corp, became parties to the Credit Agreement and were identified as additional loan parties. The existing borrowers and guarantors also requested that the lenders provide a mortgage loan credit facility covering acquisition, construction, and permanent mortgage financing for a property acquired by the Mortgage Loan Borrower (the “M&T Mortgage”). The amount borrowed under the M&T Mortgage was $6.136 million. The M&T Mortgage bears interest at (a) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.25% or (b) the Base Rate plus a margin of 1.25%. The M&T Mortgage requires monthly payments of principal of $0.03 million and was due to mature on September 15, 2021 when all remaining principal and accrued interest payments become due.
In order to help mitigate the early effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company entered into the Fourth Amendment to the M&T Credit Agreement on April 15, 2020 (the “Fourth Amendment”). Pursuant to the Fourth Amendment, the parties agreed to a suspension of scheduled principal payments on the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage (to the extent the permanent loan period had begun for the M&T Mortgage) for the period from April 15, 2020 through June 15, 2020. Interest on the outstanding principal balances of the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage continued to accrue and be paid at the applicable interest rate during the deferment period. At the end of the deferment period, the borrowers resumed making all required payments of principal on the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage. All principal payments of the M&T Term Loan and M&T Mortgage deferred during the deferment period are due and payable on the M&T Term Loan maturity date or the M&T Mortgage maturity date, as applicable. Additionally, all principal payments deferred during the deferment period are due and payable (a) as described above or (b) if earlier, the date all outstanding amounts are otherwise due and payable under the terms of the Credit Agreement (including, without limitation, upon maturity, acceleration or, to the extent applicable under the Credit Agreement, demand for payment). In addition, the Fourth Amendment included a temporary suspension of scheduled curtailment payments required by the Credit Agreement for the period from April 1, 2020 through June 15, 2020. Amounts related to floor plan unused commitment fees and interest on the outstanding principal balance of the M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit continued to accrue and be paid at the applicable rate and on the terms set forth in the Credit Agreement during the suspension period.
On July 14, 2021, the Company entered into an amended and restated credit agreement with M&T, as a Lender, Administrative Agent, Swingline Lender, and Issuing Bank, and other financial institutions as Lender parties, (“new M&T Facility”). The credit agreement evidences an approximately $369.1 million aggregate credit facility, consisting of a $327 million floor plan credit facility, a term loan of approximately $11.3 million, a $25 million revolving credit and a $5.8 million mortgage loan facility. The new M&T Facility requires the Company to meet certain financial and other covenants and is secured by substantially all the assets of the Company. The costs of the new M&T Facility were recorded as a debt discount.
The mortgage loan facility (“mortgage”) has LIBOR borrowings bearing interest at LIBOR plus 2.25% and a Base Rate margin of 1.25%. The mortgage requires monthly payments of principal of $0.03 million.
The M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit may be used to finance new vehicle inventory, but only $90 million may be used to finance pre-owned vehicle inventory and $1.0 million may be used to finance permitted Company vehicles. Principal becomes due upon the sale of the respective vehicle. The M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit shall accrue interest at either: (a) the fluctuating 30-day LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin which ranges from 2.00% to 2.30% based upon the Company’s total leverage ratio (as defined in the new M&T Facility); or (b) the Base Rate plus an applicable margin ranging from 1.00% to 1.30% based upon the Company’s total leverage ratio (as defined in the new M&T Facility). The Base Rate is defined in the agreement as the highest of M&T’s prime rate, the Federal Funds rate plus 0.50% or one-month LIBOR plus 1.00%. In addition, the Company will be charged for unused commitments at a rate of 0.15%.
The M&T Term Loan will be repaid in equal monthly principal installments of $242 plus accrued interest through the maturity date. At the maturity date, the Company will pay a principal balloon payment of $2.6 million plus any accrued interest. The M&T Term Loan shall bear interest at: (a) LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.25% to 3.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the new M&T Facility); or (b) the Base Rate plus a margin of 1.25% to 2.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the new M&T Facility).
The M&T Revolver allows the Company to draw up to $25 million. The M&T Revolver shall bear interest at: (a) 30-day LIBOR plus an applicable margin of 2.25% to 3.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the new M&T Facility); or (b) the Base Rate plus a margin of 1.25% to 2.00% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined in the new M&T Facility). The M&T Revolver is also subject to the unused commitment fees at rates varying from 0.25% to 0.50% based on the total leverage ratio (as defined).
As of December 31, 2021, there was $192.2 million outstanding under the M&T Floor Plan Line of Credit, $10.1 million outstanding under the M&T Term Loan and $5.7 million outstanding under the M&T Mortgage.
Please refer to the discussion above under “COVID-19 Developments” for a discussion of measures we took in the spring of 2020 to protect our liquidity, including by applying for, receiving and using the PPP Loans, and the potential impact on liquidity going forward, which disclosure is incorporated into this “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section by reference.
Inflation
The Company has experienced higher than normal RV wholesale price increases as manufacturers have passed through increased supply chain costs in their pricing to dealers. The Company believes it has managed to increase its retail prices to offset these cost increases without dampening consumer demand. The Company cannot accurately anticipate the effect of inflation on its operations from possible continued cost increases, consumers’ willingness to accept higher prices and the potential impact on retail demand and margins.
Cyclicality
Unit sales of RV vehicles historically have been cyclical, fluctuating with general economic cycles. During economic downturns the RV retailing industry tends to experience similar periods of decline and recession as the general economy. The Company believes that the industry is influenced by general economic conditions and particularly by consumer confidence, the level of personal discretionary spending, fuel prices, interest rates and credit availability.
Seasonality and Effects of Weather
The Company’s operations generally experience modestly higher volumes of vehicle sales in the first half of each year due in part to consumer buying trends and the hospitable warm climate during the winter months at our Florida and Arizona locations. In addition, the northern locations in Colorado, Tennessee, Minnesota, Indiana, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin generally experience modestly higher vehicle sales during the spring months.
The Company’s largest RV dealership is located near Tampa, Florida, which is in close proximity to the Gulf of Mexico. A severe weather event, such as a hurricane, could cause severe damage to property and inventory and decrease the traffic to our dealerships. Although the Company believes that it has adequate insurance coverage, if the Company were to experience a catastrophic loss, the Company may exceed its policy limits, and/or may have difficulty obtaining similar insurance coverage in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The Company prepares its consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and in doing so, it must make estimates, assumptions and judgments affecting the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, as well as the related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. The Company bases its estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change the results from those reported. The Company evaluates its critical accounting estimates, assumptions and judgments on an ongoing basis.
We believe that, of our significant accounting policies (see Note 2 of the financial statements included in this Form 10-K), the following policies are the most critical:
Basis of Presentation
Use of Estimates in the Preparation of Financial Statements
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Significant estimates include the assumptions used in the valuation of the net assets acquired in business combinations, goodwill and other intangible assets, provision for charge-backs, inventory write-downs, the allowance for doubtful accounts, stock-based compensation and fair value of warrant liabilities.
Revenue Recognition
The core principle of revenue recognition is that an entity recognizes revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to clients in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The Company applies a five-step model for revenue measurement and recognition.
Revenues are recognized when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to the customers at the expected amount the Company is entitled to for such goods and services. Taxes collected on revenue producing transactions are excluded from revenue in the consolidated statements of operations.
Revenue from the sale of vehicles is recognized at a point in time on delivery, transfer of title and completion of financing arrangements.
Revenue from the sale of parts, accessories, and related service is recognized as services and parts are delivered or as a customer approves elements of the completion of service. Revenue from the sale of parts, accessories, and related service is recognized in other revenue in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Campground revenue is also recognized over the time period of use of the campground.
The Company receives commissions from the sale of insurance and vehicle service contracts to customers. In addition, the Company arranges financing for customers through various financial institutions and receives commissions. The Company may be charged back (“charge-backs”) for financing fees, insurance or vehicle service contract commissions in the event of early termination of the contracts by the customers. The revenues from financing fees and commissions are recorded at the time of the sale of the vehicles and an estimated allowance for future charge-backs is established based on historical operating results and the termination provision of the applicable contracts. The estimates for future chargebacks require judgment by management, and as a result, there may be an element of risk associated with these revenue streams.
Cumulative Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
The Company’s Series A Preferred Stock (See Note 16 - Preferred Stock) is cumulative redeemable convertible preferred stock. Accordingly, it is classified as temporary equity and is shown net of issuance costs and the relative fair value of warrants issued in conjunction with the issuance of the Series A Preferred Stock. Unpaid preferred dividends are accumulated, compounded at each quarterly dividend date and presented within the carrying value of the Series A Preferred Stock until a cash dividend payment is declared by the Board.
Stock Based Compensation
The Company accounts for stock-based compensation for employees and directors in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 718, Compensation (“ASC 718”). ASC 718 requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the statement of operations based on their fair values. Under the provisions of ASC 718, stock-based compensation costs are measured at the grant date, based on the fair value of the award, and are recognized as expense over the employee’s requisite or derived service period. In accordance with ASC 718, excess tax benefits realized from the exercise of stock-based awards are classified as cash flows from operating activities. We record excess tax benefits and tax deficiencies resulting from the settlement of stock-based awards as a benefit or expense within income taxes in the consolidated statements of operations in the period in which they occur.
Warrants
The Company accounts for its warrants in accordance with applicable accounting guidance provided in ASC 815-40, as either derivative liabilities or as equity instruments depending on the specific terms of the warrant agreements. In periods subsequent to issuance, the warrants classified as liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date and transaction date with changes in the estimated fair values of the common stock warrant liabilities and gains and losses on extinguishment of common stock warrant liabilities reported in the consolidated statements of operations.
The Company accounts for its warrants in the following ways: (i) the Private Warrants as liabilities for all periods presented; (ii) the PIPE Warrants as liabilities for all periods presented and (iii) the Public Warrants as equity for all periods presented.
The Public Warrants trade in active markets. When classified as liabilities, warrants traded in active markets with sufficient trading volume represent Level 1 financial instruments as they were publicly traded in active markets and thus had observable market prices which were used to estimate the fair value adjustments for the related common stock warrant liabilities. When classified as liabilities, warrants not traded in active markets, or traded with insufficient volume, represent Level 3 financial instruments that are valued using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model to estimate the fair value adjustments for the related warrant liabilities.
The PIPE Warrants are considered a Level 1 measurement because they are similar to the Public Warrants which trade under the symbol LAZYW and thus have observable market prices which were used to estimate the fair value adjustments for the PIPE Warrants liabilities. The Private Warrants are considered a Level 3 measurement and were valued using a Black-Scholes Valuation Model to estimate the fair value adjustments for the Private Warrants liabilities
Lease recognition
At inception of a contract, we determine whether an arrangement is or contains a lease. For all leases, we determine the classification as either operating or financing.
Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term, and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease payments under the lease. Lease recognition occurs at the commencement date and lease liability amounts are based on the present value of lease payments over the lease term. Our lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that we will exercise that option. Because most of our leases do not provide information to determine an implicit interest rate, we use our incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease payments. Operating lease assets also include any lease payments made prior to the commencement date and exclude lease incentives received. Operating lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term. We have lease agreements with both lease and non-lease components, which are generally accounted for together as a single lease component.