ITEM 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This section presents a review of Lakeland Bancorp, Inc.’s consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read this section in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes to financial statements. As used in the following discussion, the term “Company” refers to Lakeland Bancorp, Inc. and “Lakeland” refers to the Company’s wholly owned banking subsidiary, Lakeland Bank. The Company has omitted comparative discussion of 2020 and 2019 results, which are presented in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on March 8, 2021.
Statements Regarding Forward-Looking Information
The information disclosed in this document includes various forward-looking statements that are made in reliance upon the safe harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 with respect to credit quality (including delinquency trends and the allowance for credit losses), corporate objectives and other financial and business matters. The words “anticipates,” “projects,” “intends,” “estimates,” “expects,” “believes,” “plans,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and other similar expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. The Company cautions that these forward-looking statements are necessarily speculative and speak only as of the date made, and are subject to numerous assumptions, risks and uncertainties, all of which may change over time. Actual results could differ materially from such forward-looking statements.
In addition to the risk factors disclosed in Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, the following factors, among others, could cause the Company’s actual results to differ materially and adversely from such forward-looking statements: changes in the financial services industry and the U.S. and global capital markets; changes in economic conditions nationally, regionally and in the Company’s markets; the ongoing COVID-19 outbreak and its effects on economic activity; government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic, including vaccination mandates, which may affect our workforce, human capital resources and infrastructure; the nature and timing of actions of the Federal Reserve Board and other regulators; the nature and timing of legislation affecting the financial services industry; government intervention in the U.S. financial system; changes in levels of market interest rates; pricing pressures on loan and deposit products; credit risks of Lakeland’s lending and equipment financing activities; successful implementation, deployment and upgrades of new and existing technology, systems, services and products; customers’ acceptance of Lakeland’s products and services; failure to realize anticipated efficiencies and synergies from the merger of 1st Constitution Bancorp into Lakeland Bancorp and the merger of 1st Constitution Bank into Lakeland Bank; and unanticipated expenses, including litigation expenses, related to the merger.
The above-listed risk factors are not necessarily exhaustive, particularly as to possible future events, and new risk factors may emerge from time to time. Certain events may occur that could cause the Company’s actual results to be materially different than those described in the Company’s periodic filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Any statements made by the Company that are not historical facts should be considered to be forward-looking statements. The Company is not obligated to update and does not undertake to update any of its forward-looking statements made herein.
Table of Content
Strategy
The Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary, Lakeland Bank, operates 69 banking offices including those offices obtained in the acquisition of 1st Constitution Bank. The offices are located in northern and central New Jersey and Highland Mills, New York. Lakeland offers a broad range of lending, depository and related financial services to individuals and small to medium-sized businesses located in its market areas. Lakeland also offers a broad range of consumer banking services, including lending, depository, safe deposit services and wealth management services.
Lakeland’s growth has come from a combination of organic growth and acquisitions. In addition to organic growth, through December 31, 2021, the Company has acquired eight community banks with an aggregate asset total of approximately $2.28 billion at the date of the respective acquisitions. The Company completed its most recent acquisition of 1st Constitution Bancorp (NASDAQ: FCCY) (“1st Constitution”) effective January 6, 2022 with 1st Constitution merging into Lakeland Bancorp, Inc. and 1st Constitution’s wholly-owned subsidiary, 1st Constitution Bank, merging into Lakeland Bank. As of January 6, 2022, 1st Constitution had approximately $1.88 billion in assets, $1.12 billion in loans, $1.65 billion in deposits and 25 branches. The acquisition represents a significant addition to Lakeland’s New Jersey franchise and the combined organization will have over $10 billion in assets. 1st Constitution's financial information is not included in our December 31, 2021 and 2020 financial information contained herein. The Company’s strategy is to continue growing both organically and through acquisition should opportunities allow. The Company continues to evaluate opportunities to increase market share by expanding within existing and contiguous markets.
The Company’s strategic aim is to provide an adequate return to its shareholders by focusing on profitable growth through services that meet the needs of its customers in its market areas. This will be accomplished by continuing to offer commercial and consumer loan, deposit and other financial product services in a changing economic and technological environment.
The Company offers online banking, mobile banking and cash management services to meet the needs of its business and consumer customers. In 2019, the Company embarked on a digital strategy initiative, impacting all operational areas of Lakeland, with a focus on providing a superior customer experience, evolving our product and service delivery and enhancing our operational functionality and cost-effectiveness. Throughout 2020 and 2021 the Company continued to build its infrastructure to implement the strategy. We hired a highly-skilled team, strengthened our project management and delivery capabilities and continue to organize data housed in various areas of the Company. Investments were also made in customer relationship management tools, which will provide an enhanced view of our customers. In the coming year, we will continue to apply these emerging capabilities to gain insights into our customers and align our products and services with their needs.
The Company’s results of operations are primarily dependent upon net interest income, the difference between interest earned on interest-earning assets and the interest paid on interest-bearing liabilities. For information on how interest rate change can influence the Company’s net interest income and how the Company manages its net interest income, see “Interest Rate Risk” in the discussion below.
The Company generates noninterest income such as income from retail and business account fees, loan servicing fees, loan origination fees, appreciation in the cash surrender value of bank owned life insurance, income from securities sales, fees from wealth management services and investment product sales, income from the origination and sale of residential mortgages and SBA loans and other fees. The Company’s operating expenses consist primarily of compensation and benefits expense, premises and equipment expense, data processing expense, FDIC insurance expense, marketing and advertising expense and other general and administrative expenses. The Company’s results of operations are also affected by general economic conditions, changes in market interest rates, changes in asset quality, changes in asset values, actions of regulatory agencies and government policies.
The Company continues to control its expenses by continually reviewing its ongoing noninterest expense, including evaluating its compensation expense, ongoing service contract expense, marketing expenses and other expenses. The Company also controls its expenses by leveraging its technology investments that maximize the efficient delivery of products and services to its customers, which allows it further to evaluate its infrastructure. Lakeland will continue to consolidate and close branches when an evaluation determines a significant cost savings may be obtained through the consolidation or closure. In addition, opportunities to open new branches are also evaluated.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The accounting and reporting policies of the Company and Lakeland conform with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”) and predominant practices within the banking industry. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. These estimates and assumptions also affect reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
Table of Content
On December 31, 2020, effective January 1, 2020, the Company adopted new accounting guidance, which requires entities to estimate and recognize an allowance for lifetime expected credit losses for loans and other financial assets measured at amortized cost. Previously, an allowance was recognized based on probable and reasonably estimable incurred losses inherent in the loan portfolio at the balance sheet date. See Note 1 to the Company's financial statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the Company's accounting policies and methodologies for establishing the allowance and the liability for off-balance-sheet commitments.
The allowance for credit losses is a critical accounting estimate for the following reasons:
•estimates relating to the allowance for credit losses require management to project future loan performance, including cash flows, delinquencies, charge-offs and collateral values, based on a reasonable and supportable forecast period utilizing forward-looking economic scenarios in order to estimate potential credit losses;
•the allowance for credit losses is influenced by factors outside of management's control such as industry and business trends, geopolitical events and the effects of laws and regulations as well as economic conditions including, but not limited to, interest rates, housing prices, GDP, inflation and unemployment; and
•judgment is required to determine whether the models used to generate the allowance for credit losses produce results that appropriately reflect a current estimate of lifetime expected credit losses.
The Company uses an open pool loss-rate method to calculate an institution-specific historical loss rate based on historical loan level loss experience for collectively assessed loans with similar risk characteristics. The Company’s methodology considers relevant information about past and current economic conditions, as well as a single economic forecast over a reasonable and supportable period. The loss rate is applied over the remaining life of loans to develop a “baseline lifetime loss.” The baseline lifetime loss is adjusted for changes in macroeconomic variables, including but not limited to interest rates, housing prices, GDP and unemployment, over the reasonable and supportable forecast period. After the reasonable and supportable forecast period, the adjusted loss rate reverts on a straight-line basis to the historical loss rate. The reasonable and supportable forecast and the reversion periods are established for each portfolio segment. The Company measures expected credit losses of financial assets by multiplying the adjusted loss rates to the amortized cost basis of each asset taking into consideration amortization, prepayment and defaults. Changes in any of these factors, assumptions or the availability of new information, could require that the allowance be adjusted in future periods, perhaps materially.
The Company considers five standard qualitative general reserve factors ("qualitative adjustments"): nature and volume of loans, lending management, policy and procedures, independent review and changes in environment. Qualitative adjustments are designed to address risks that are not captured in the quantitative reserves (“quantitative reserve”). Other qualitative adjustments or model overlays may also be recorded based on expert credit judgment in circumstances where, in the Company’s view, the standard qualitative reserve factors do not capture all relevant risk factors. The use of qualitative reserves may require significant judgment that may impact the amount of allowance recognized.
Because management's estimates of the allowance for credit losses involve a high degree of judgment, the subjectivity of the assumptions used and the potential for changes in the forecasted economic environment that could result in changes to the amount of the allowance recorded, there is uncertainty inherent in such estimates. Changes in these estimates could significantly impact the allowance and provision for credit losses.
The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a deterioration in U.S. economic conditions and an increase in economic uncertainty. As a result, the Company's future loss estimates may vary considerably as a result of the changes in the economy compared to management's December 31, 2021 assumptions; the magnitude and duration of the pandemic; and the impact of the national monetary and fiscal response.
Use of Non-GAAP Disclosures
Reported amounts are presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The Company’s management believes that the supplemental non-GAAP information, which consists of measurements and ratios based on tangible equity, tangible assets and the efficiency ratio, which excludes certain items considered to be non-recurring from earnings, is utilized by regulators and market analysts to evaluate a company’s financial condition and therefore, such information is useful to investors. These disclosures should not be viewed as a substitute for financial results determined in accordance with U.S. GAAP, nor are they necessarily comparable to non-GAAP performance measures which may be presented by other companies.
Executive Summary
The Company reported earnings of $95.0 million and diluted earnings per share of $1.85 for 2021 and asset growth of 7%. Deposits grew 8% and non-performing assets declined 60% for the year. The 2021 results were favorably impacted by negative provisions for credit losses totaling $10.9 million due to improvements in asset quality and forecasted macroeconomic conditions. In addition, net interest income increased $27.1 million in 2021 when compared to 2020 and the net interest margin for 2021 was 3.13%.
Table of Content
While we continue to monitor developments related to COVID-19, including its impact on our employees, our customers and the communities we serve, the level of inflation, unemployment and interest rate increases by the Federal Reserve Bank ("FRB") also can affect our business. The Company may experience changes in the value of collateral securing outstanding loans, reductions in the credit quality of borrowers and the inability of borrowers to repay loans in accordance with their terms. Management is actively managing credit risk in the Company's commercial loan portfolio.
Our branch lobbies are open at normal operating hours for customers; however, we may close them from time to time as conditions warrant. Proper COVID-19 protocols are in place in our branches and corporate offices to ensure the continued safety of our associates and customers. Management identified that the COVID-19 pandemic could adversely affect the liquidity of the Company and took specific steps to minimize the risk. In addition to processes already in place to closely monitor changes in liquidity needs, including those that may result from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company increased collateral and expanded access to additional borrowings should it be necessary in order to meet liquidity needs. While the Company is unable to predict actual fluctuations in deposit or cash balances, management continues to monitor liquidity and believes that its current level of liquidity is sufficient to meet its current and future operational needs.
On January 6, 2022, the Company completed its acquisition of 1st Constitution with 1st Constitution merging into Lakeland Bancorp and 1st Constitution’s wholly-owned subsidiary, 1st Constitution Bank, merging into Lakeland Bank. As of January 6, 2022, 1st Constitution had approximately $1.88 billion in assets, $1.12 billion in loans and $1.65 billion in deposits. The acquisition represents a significant addition to Lakeland’s New Jersey franchise and the combined organization will have over $10 billion in assets. Full systems integration was completed in February 2022.
Financial Overview
The following table presents certain key aspects of the Company's performance for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and will be discussed further in this management’s discussion and analysis:
Table of Content
The Company recorded net income of $95.0 million, or $1.85 per diluted share, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net income of $57.5 million, or $1.13 per diluted share, for 2020. The financial results for 2021 were favorably impacted by a negative provision for credit losses of $10.9 million compared to a provision for credit losses of $27.2 million for 2020. The Company's net interest margin was 3.13% for 2021 compared to 3.09% for 2020.
In 2021, return on average assets was 1.19%, return on average common equity was 11.95% and return on average tangible common equity was 14.93%. This compared to 2020 ratios of return on average assets of 0.80%, return on average common equity of 7.74% and return on average tangible common equity of 9.86%.
Total assets at December 31, 2021 were $8.20 billion, increasing $533.8 million or 7% compared to $7.66 billion at December 31, 2020. Total investment securities increased $648.4 million as the Company deployed excess cash into securities. Total loans declined $45.1 million during 2021 to $5.98 billion at December 31, 2021 in large part due to the decline in PPP loans of $228.1 million. Other loan segments experienced growth during the year, including $159.0 million in multifamily loans, $81.4 million in owner occupied commercial loans, $61.3 million in residential loans and $35.3 million in construction loans.
Non-performing assets declined by $25.8 million during 2021 to $17.0 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $42.8 million at December 31, 2020. During 2021, the Company sold $21.7 million in non-performing loans primarily in the commercial secured by real estate loan category, resulting in net charge offs to the allowance for credit losses of $706,000 as well as recovered interest on non-accrual loans of $755,000.
Total deposits increased $510.0 million, or 8%, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, including an increase of $222.2 million, or 15% in noninterest bearing deposits. During 2021, increases in savings and interest-bearing transaction accounts of $606.8 million and noninterest-bearing deposit accounts of $222.2 million were partially offset by a decline in time deposit balances of $319.0 million,
The Company issued $150 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes in September 2021 at 2.875% per annum until September 2026 when the interest rate will reset quarterly to the three-month Secured Overnight Financing Rate ("SOFR") plus a spread of 220 basis points. The Company also redeemed $75 million of 5.125% fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes, that were scheduled to reset quarterly to the current three-month LIBOR rate plus 397 basis points in September 2021.
Table of Content
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between interest income on earning assets and the cost of funds supporting those assets. The Company’s net interest income is determined by: (i) the volume of interest-earning assets that it holds and the yields that it earns on those assets, and (ii) the volume of interest-bearing liabilities that it has assumed and the rates that it pays on those liabilities.
For 2021, the Company's net interest margin was 3.13% compared to 3.09% for 2020. The increase in net interest margin resulted primarily from a 41 basis point decrease in the cost of interest-bearing liabilities.
The following table reflects the components of the Company’s net interest income, setting forth for the years presented, (1) average assets, liabilities and stockholders’ equity, (2) interest income earned on interest-earning assets and interest expense paid on interest-bearing liabilities, (3) average yields earned on interest-earning assets and average rates paid on interest-bearing liabilities, (4) the Company’s net interest spread (i.e., the average yield on interest-earning assets less the average cost of interest-bearing liabilities) and (5) the Company’s net interest margin. Rates are computed on a tax equivalent basis assuming a 21% tax rate.
(1)Includes non-accrual loans, loans held for sale and deferred loan fees. Average deferred loan fees totaled $9.7 million in 2021, $7.7 million in 2020 and $3.0 million in 2019.
(2)Includes interest-bearing cash accounts.
(3)Net interest income on a tax equivalent basis divided by interest-earning assets.
Table of Content
Interest income and expense volume/rate analysis
The following table shows the impact that changes in average balances of the Company’s assets and liabilities and changes in average interest rates have had on the Company’s net interest income over the past two years. This information is presented on a tax equivalent basis assuming a 21% tax rate. If a change in interest income or expense is attributable to a change in volume and a change in rate, the amount of the change is allocated proportionately. There are no out-of-period items or adjustments in the table below.
Net interest income on a tax equivalent basis for 2021 was $235.5 million, compared to $208.1 million in 2020, due primarily to lower interest rates on interest-bearing liabilities as well as growth in average earning assets of $780.8 million partially offset by lower yields on interest-earning assets. The unfavorable effect on net interest income due to the decrease in yield on interest-earning assets was partially mitigated by an increase in interest income earned on free funds (interest-earning assets funded by noninterest-bearing liabilities) resulting from an increase in average noninterest-bearing deposits of $309.0 million.
Interest income on a tax equivalent basis increased from $249.3 million in 2020 to $258.0 million in 2021, an increase of $8.7 million, or 4%. The increase in interest income resulted from a $780.8 million increase in average interest-earning assets partially offset by lower yields on interest-earning assets. The decrease in yield on interest-earning assets was due primarily to a reduction in the yield on loans and investment securities due to decreases in the prime rate and LIBOR during 2020 and 2021. The average balance of loans increased $377.1 million compared to 2020, while the yield on average loans of 3.95% in 2021 was 12 basis points lower than 2020. The yield on average taxable investment securities decreased 51 basis points, while the yield on tax-exempt investment securities decreased 27 basis points compared to 2020.
Total interest expense decreased $18.7 million from $41.2 million in 2020 to $22.5 million in 2021. Total average interest-bearing liabilities increased $423.9 million, mostly due to the increase in total average interest-bearing deposits of $502.6 million as a result of organic growth, offset in part by a decrease in average long-term borrowings of $81.4 million. The cost of average interest-bearing liabilities decreased from 0.83% in 2020 to 0.42% in 2021, largely driven by lower market interest rates as well as a change in the mix of interest-bearing liabilities. The cost of interest-bearing transaction accounts, time deposits and long-term borrowings decreased by 27 basis points, 71 basis points, and four basis points, respectively, compared to 2020.
Table of Content
Provision for Credit Losses
The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 using the modified retrospective method for all financial assets measured at amortized cost at December 31, 2020, effective January 1, 2020. The Company applied the standard's provisions as a cumulative-effect adjustment of $3.4 million to retained earnings as of January 1, 2020. ASU 2016-13 requires the measurement of expected credit losses for financial assets, including investments, loans and certain off-balance-sheet credit exposures, measured at amortized cost. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies to the Company's financial statements for a description of the adoption of ASU 2016-13 and the Company's allowance methodology.
In determining the allowance for credit losses on investments, loans and off-balance-sheet credit exposures, management measures expected credit losses based on relevant information about past events, current conditions, reasonable and supportable forecasts, prepayments and future economic conditions. The key assumptions of the methodology include the lookback periods, historic net charge-off factors, economic forecasts, reversion periods, prepayments and qualitative adjustments. The Company uses its best judgment to assess economic conditions and loss data in estimating the allowance for credit losses.
In 2021, the Company recorded a $10.9 million benefit for credit losses compared to a $27.2 million provision for 2020. The benefit is comprised of a benefit for credit losses on loans of $10.9 million, a benefit for off-balance-sheet exposures of $243,000 and a provision for credit losses on securities of $262,000. The benefit for credit losses on loans was due primarily to an improvement in forecasted macroeconomic conditions, a decrease in nonperforming assets and continued strength in the asset quality of loans. The Company charged off $4.6 million and recovered $2.4 million in 2021 compared to $2.1 million and $541,000, respectively, in 2020.
Noninterest Income
Noninterest income of $22.4 million in 2021 decreased by $4.7 million compared to 2020. The decrease in noninterest income was due primarily to a $4.1 million reduction in swap income compared to 2020 as demand for swap transactions waned due to changes in the yield curve, which decreased demand for these transactions. Service charges on deposit accounts increased $708,000 compared to 2020 due primarily to increases in debit card income. Commissions and fees in 2021 increased $1.1 million compared to 2020 due primarily to increases in commercial loan fees and investment commission income. Gains on sales of loans decreased $1.1 million compared to 2020, due primarily to the Company retaining more originated residential mortgage loans in the loan portfolio. Gain on sales and calls of investment securities totaled $9,000 in 2021 compared to $1.2 million in 2020. Noninterest income represented 9% of total revenue in 2021. Total revenue is defined as net interest income plus noninterest income.
Noninterest Expense
Noninterest expense in 2021 totaled $140.8 million, an increase of $8.0 million from the $132.8 million recorded for 2020. The increase in noninterest expense was due primarily to an increase in compensation and employee benefit expense of $6.1 million in 2021, from 2020, as a result of an increase in staffing levels and normal merit increases. In 2021, premises and equipment expense increased $2.9 million compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in information technology service agreement expense. The increase was expected as part of the Company's digital strategy initiative, which began in 2019. Noninterest expense in 2021 also included merger-related expenses of $1.8 million for the acquisition of 1st Constitution Bancorp. Other operating expense decreased $3.6 million due primarily to the long-term debt prepayment fees totaling $4.1 million recorded in 2020 resulting from the prepayment of $114.9 million in FHLB debt at a weighted average rate of 2.11%. In addition, the Company recorded $831,000 of long-term debt extinguishment costs in 2021 as a result of the redemption of $75.0 million of fixed-to-floating rate subordinated notes.
Table of Content
The efficiency ratio, a non-GAAP measure, expresses the relationship between noninterest expense (excluding long-term debt prepayment fees, merger related expenses and core deposit amortization) to total tax-equivalent revenue (excluding gains and/or losses on securities and gain and/or losses on debt extinguishment).
Income Taxes
The Company’s effective income tax rate was 25.4% and 23.1% in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increased effective tax rate for 2021 was primarily a result of tax advantaged items declining as a percentage of pretax income due to the increase in pretax income.
Financial Condition
Total assets at December 31, 2021 were $8.20 billion, an increase of $533.8 million, or 7%, from $7.66 billion at December 31, 2020. Loans, net of deferred fees, were $5.98 billion and $6.02 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a decrease of $45.1 million, or 1% during 2021. Investment securities were $1.62 billion and $973.2 million December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively an increase of $648.1 million or 67% during 2021, as the Company deployed excess cash into investment securities. Total deposits were $6.97 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $510.0 million, or 8%, from December 31, 2020. Borrowings were $310.5 million at December 31, 2021 a decrease of $2.3 million or 1% from December 31, 2020.
Loans
Lakeland primarily serves New Jersey, the Hudson Valley region in New York and the surrounding areas. Its equipment finance division serves a broader market with a primary focus on the Northeast. At the time of adoption of CECL, the loan portfolio segmentation was expanded to nine portfolio segments, taking into consideration common loan attributes and risk characteristics, as well as historical reporting metrics and data availability. See Note 1 to the Company's financial statements for a full description of the segments. The information below for December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, is presented in accordance with ASU 2016-13. The Company did not reclassify comparative financial periods prior to December 31, 2020, and has presented those disclosures under previously applicable U.S. GAAP.
At December 31, 2021, the amortized cost of loans totaled $5.98 billion, an decrease of $45.1 million when compared to the balance at December 31, 2020 of $6.02 billion. Commercial, industrial and other loans decreased $255.8 million in 2021 due primarily to a decline in PPP loans which totaled $56.6 million and $284.6 million, at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Partially offsetting this decrease was increases in other loan categories, including multifamily loans of $159.0 million, owner occupied commercial loans of $81.4 million and residential loans of $61.3 million. For detailed information on the composition of the Company’s loan portfolio, see Note 5 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Table of Content
The following table presents the classification of Lakeland's loans by major category:
At December 31, 2021, concentrations of loans exceeding 10% by segment of total loans outstanding included non-owner occupied commercial loans, owner occupied commercial loans, multifamily loans and commercial, industrial and other loans. Commercial, industrial and other includes $56.6 million of PPP loans, which are expected to be fully guaranteed by the SBA. Loan concentrations are considered to exist when there are amounts loaned to a multiple number of borrowers engaged in similar activities which would cause them to be similarly impacted by economic or other related conditions.
The following tables present loan maturities and sensitivity to changes in interest rates at December 31, 2021:
Table of Content
Risk Elements
Commercial loans are placed on a non-accrual status with all accrued interest and unpaid interest reversed if (a) because of the deterioration in the financial position of the borrower, they are maintained on a cash basis (which means payments are applied when and as received rather than on a regularly scheduled basis), (b) payment of all contractual principal and interest is not expected, or (c) principal and interest have been in default for a period of 90 days or more unless the obligation is both well-secured and in process of collection. Residential mortgage loans and closed-end consumer loans are placed on non-accrual status at the time principal and interest have been in default for a period of 90 days or more, except where there exists sufficient collateral to cover the defaulted principal and interest payments, and the loans are well-secured and in the process of collection. Open-end consumer loans secured by real estate are generally placed on non-accrual status and reviewed for charge-off when principal and interest payments are four months in arrears unless the obligations are well-secured and in the process of collection. Interest thereafter on such charged-off consumer loans is taken into income when received only after full recovery of principal. As a general rule, a non-accrual asset may be restored to accrual status when none of its principal or interest is due and unpaid and satisfactory payments have been received for a sustained period (usually six months), or when it otherwise becomes well-secured and in the process of collection.
Non-accrual loans decreased to $17.0 million at December 31, 2021 from $42.8 million at December 31, 2020 primarily due to sales of non-performing loans of $21.3 million. Commercial, industrial and other non-accruals increased $4.1 million when compared to December 31, 2020 as a result of one new non-accrual totaling $6.1 million. Non-accruals as of December 31, 2021 include three loan relationships between $500,000 and $1.0 million totaling $1.8 million, and three loan relationships exceeding $1.0 million totaling $13.1 million. All non-accrual loans are in various stages of litigation, foreclosure, or workout. Non-accrual loans included $127,000 and $1.1 million in troubled debt restructurings as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, Lakeland had $3.3 million and $3.9 million, respectively, in loans that are TDRs and still accruing. Restructured loans that are still accruing are those loans where Lakeland has granted concessions to the borrower in payment terms, in rate and/or in maturity as a result of the financial difficulties of the borrower where the borrower has demonstrated the ability to repay based on the modified terms of the loan.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had $102.3 million and $139.4 million, respectively, of loans that were rated substandard that were not classified as non-performing. There were no additional loans at December 31, 2021, other than those designated non-performing or substandard, where Lakeland was aware of any credit conditions of any borrowers that would indicate a possibility of the borrowers not complying with the present terms and conditions of repayment and which may result in such loans being included as non-accrual, past due or renegotiated at a future date.
The Company adopted ASU 2016-13 in 2020, with an adjustment to the allowance for credit losses on loans of $6.7 million, using a modified retrospective approach. For further information see Notes 1, 5 and 6 to the Company's Consolidated Financial Statements.
The following tables present the historical relationships between credit ratios, including allowance for credit losses to total loans, non-accrual loans to total loans, allowance for credit losses to non-accrual loans and net charge-offs to average loans by loan category:
Table of Content
(1) The Company expanded its loan segments with the adoption of ASU 2016-13 on December 31, 2020.
Table of Content
For 2021 and 2020, the ratio of the allowance for credit losses on loans to total loans outstanding was 0.97% and 1.18%, respectively. The Company recorded a benefit to the provision of credit losses on loans in 2021 of $10.9 million due to an improvement in forecasted macroeconomic conditions, a decrease in nonperforming loans and continued improvement in asset quality. The ratio of non-accrual loans to total loans improved to 0.28% in 2021 from 0.71% in 2020 due to a reduction in non-accrual loans of $25.8 million. In addition, the reduction in the allowance for credit losses on loans and in non-accrual loans caused the ratio of allowance for credit losses on loans to non-accrual loans to improve 341.83% from 166.32%.
Management believes, based on appraisals and estimated selling costs, that the majority of its non-performing loans are well secured and that the reserves on its non-performing loans are adequate. Based upon the process employed and giving recognition to all accompanying factors related to the loan portfolio, management considers the allowance for credit losses on loans to be adequate at December 31, 2021.
Net charge-offs as a percentage of average loans outstanding remain at low levels at 0.04% and 0.03% for 2021 and 2020, respectively. The primary category showing an increase in net charge-offs was non-owner occupied commercial loans, totaling $2.2 million in 2021.
The following table presents the allowance for credit losses on loans allocated by loan category and the percent of loans in each category to total loans at the dates indicated. The allowance for credit losses on loans allocated to each category is not necessarily indicative of future losses in any particular category and does not restrict the use of the allowance to absorb losses in other categories.
Investment Securities
Investment securities totaled $1.59 billion at December 31, 2021, increasing $648.4 million compared to $946.5 million at December 31, 2020. The Company has classified its investment securities into the available for sale and held to maturity categories based on its intent and ability to hold the securities to maturity. During the third quarter of 2021, the Company transferred $494.2 million of previously designated available for sale securities to a held to maturity designation at estimated fair value. The securities transferred had an unrealized net gain of $3.8 million at the time of transfer, which was reflected, net of taxes, in accumulated other comprehensive income. Subsequent amortization will be recognized over the life of the securities. The Company recorded net amortization of $383,000 during 2021. For detailed information on the composition and maturity distribution of the Company’s investment securities portfolio, see Note 4 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements contained in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Table of Content
The following table presents the maturity distribution and weighted average yields (calculated on the basis of the stated yields to maturity, considering applicable premium or discount), on a fully taxable equivalent basis, of investment securities as of December 31, 2021, at book value:
Table of Content
Other Assets
Assets included within "other assets" on the Company's balance sheet decreased from $110.3 million at December 31, 2020 to $71.8 million at December 31, 2021 primarily due to a reduction in swap assets of $36.9 million. Demand for swap transactions declined in 2021 because of changes in the yield curve.
Deposits
Total deposits increased from $6.46 billion at December 31, 2020 to $6.97 billion at December 31, 2021, an increase of $510.0 million, or 8%. Savings and interest-bearing transaction accounts and noninterest-bearing deposits increased $606.8 million and $222.2 million, respectively, while time deposits decreased $319.0 million. The increase in deposits during 2021 can be attributed to organic growth, PPP-related deposits and money market promotions.
Table of Content
The average amount of deposits, the average rates paid on deposits and the balance of uninsured deposits (i.e., the portion of deposit accounts that exceed the FDIC insurance limit) for the years indicated are summarized in the following table:
The aggregate amount of outstanding time deposits that are uninsured in excess of $250,000, broken down by time remaining to maturity at December 31, 2021, was as follows:
Federal Home Loan Bank Advances and Other Borrowings
Lakeland may borrow from time to time from the Federal Home Loan Bank ("FHLB") and other correspondent banks as part of its overall funding and liquidity management program. FHLB advances totaled $25.0 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, with a weighted average interest rate of 0.77%. These advances are collateralized by first mortgage loans and have prepayment penalties. In 2020, the Company repaid an aggregate of $114.9 million in advances and recorded $4.1 million in long-term prepayment fees.
Derivatives
Lakeland enters into interest rate swaps (“swaps”) with loan customers to provide a facility to mitigate the fluctuations in the variable rate on the respective loans. These swaps are matched in offsetting terms to swaps that Lakeland enters into with an outside third party. The swaps are reported at fair value in other assets or other liabilities. Lakeland’s swaps qualify as derivatives, but are not designated as hedging instruments; thus any net gain or loss resulting from changes in the fair value is recognized in other noninterest income.
In 2016, the Company entered into two five-year cash flow hedges in order to hedge the variable cash outflows associated with its subordinated debentures. The notional value of these hedges was $30.0 million. The Company’s objectives in using the cash flow hedge was to add stability to interest expense and to manage its exposure to interest rate movements. The Company used interest rate swaps designated as cash flow hedges which involved the receipt of variable amounts from a counterparty in exchange for the Company making fixed-rate payments over the life of the agreements without exchange of the underlying notional amount. In these particular hedges the Company was paying a third party an average of 1.10% in exchange for a payment at three-month LIBOR over a five-year period. The effective portion of changes in the fair value of derivatives designated and that qualify as cash flow hedges were recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income and were subsequently reclassified into earnings in the period that the hedged forecasted transaction affects earnings. During 2021, the Company did not record any hedge ineffectiveness. During 2021, the $30.0 million in notional value of the swaps matured and the Company did not enter into any additional hedges. Further discussion of Lakeland’s financial derivatives can be found in Note 20 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Table of Content
Liquidity
“Liquidity” measures whether an entity has sufficient cash flow to meet its financial obligations and commitments on a timely basis. The Company is liquid when its subsidiary bank has the cash available to meet the borrowing and cash withdrawal requirements of customers and the Company can pay for current and planned expenditures and satisfy its debt obligations.
Lakeland funds loan demand and operation expenses from several sources:
•Net income. Cash provided by operating activities was $95.1 million in 2021 compared to $85.0 million in 2020.
•Deposits. Lakeland can offer new products or change its rate structure in order to increase deposits. In 2021, Lakeland generated $510.1 million in deposit growth compared to $1.16 billion in 2020.
•Sales of securities and overnight funds. At year-end 2021, the Company had $770.0 million in securities designated “available for sale.” Of these securities, $528.5 million was pledged to secure public deposits and for other purposes required by applicable laws and regulations.
•Repayments on loans and investments can also be a source of liquidity to fund further loan growth.
•Overnight credit lines. As a member of the Federal Home Loan Bank of New York (“FHLB”), Lakeland has the ability to borrow overnight and short term based on the market value of collateral pledged. Lakeland had no overnight and short-term borrowings from the FHLB on December 31, 2021. Lakeland also has overnight federal funds lines available for it to borrow up to $215.0 million from correspondent banks. Lakeland had no borrowings against these lines at December 31, 2021. Lakeland also has the ability to utilize a line of credit from the FHLB to secure a portion of its public deposits. Lakeland may also borrow from the discount window of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York based on the market value of collateral pledged. Lakeland had no borrowings with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as of December 31, 2021.
•Other borrowings. Lakeland can also generate funds by utilizing long-term debt or securities sold under agreements to repurchase that would be collateralized by security or mortgage collateral. At times the market values of securities collateralizing our securities sold under agreements to repurchase may decline due to changes in interest rates and may necessitate our lenders to issue a “margin call” which requires the Company to pledge additional collateral to meet that margin call. For more information regarding the Company’s borrowings, see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Management and the Board of Directors monitor the Company’s liquidity through the Asset/Liability Committee, which monitors the Company’s compliance with certain regulatory ratios and other various liquidity guidelines.
The cash flow statements for the periods presented provide an indication of the Company’s sources and uses of cash, as well as an indication of the ability of the Company to maintain an adequate level of liquidity. Cash and cash equivalents totaling $228.5 million at December 31, 2021, decreased $41.6 million from December 31, 2020. Operating activities provided $95.1 million in net cash. Investing activities used $615.3 million in net cash, primarily reflecting net purchases of investments securities. Financing activities provided $478.6 million in net cash primarily reflecting a net increase in deposits and subordinated debt of $510.1 million and $59.4 million, respectively, partially offset by a decrease in federal funds purchased and securities sold under agreements to repurchase and dividends paid of $63.1 million and $27.1 million, respectively.
The Company’s management believes that its current level of liquidity is sufficient to meet its current and anticipated operational needs, including current loan commitments, deposit maturities and other obligations. Actual results could differ materially from anticipated results due to a variety of factors, including uncertainties relating to the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic; general economic conditions; unanticipated decreases in deposits; changes in or failure to comply with governmental regulations; and uncertainties relating to the analysis of the Company’s assessment of rate sensitive assets and rate sensitive liabilities and the extent to which market factors indicate that a financial institution such as Lakeland should match such assets and liabilities.
Table of Content
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations
The following table sets forth contractual obligations and other commitments representing required cash outflows as of December 31, 2021. Interest on subordinated debentures and other borrowings is calculated based on current contractual interest rates.
(1) Includes interest on other borrowings and subordinated debentures at a weighted rate of 2.63%.
Interest Rate Risk
Closely related to the concept of liquidity is the concept of interest rate sensitivity (i.e., the extent to which assets and liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates). As a financial institution, the Company’s potential interest rate volatility is a primary component of its market risk. Fluctuations in interest rates will ultimately impact the level of income and expense recorded on a large portion of the Company’s assets and liabilities, and the market value of all interest-earning assets, other than those which possess a short term to maturity. Based upon the Company’s nature of operations, the Company is not subject to foreign currency exchange or commodity price risk. The Company does not own any trading assets.
The Company’s net income is largely dependent on net interest income. Net interest income is susceptible to interest rate risk to the extent that interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice on a different basis than interest-earning assets. For example, when interest-bearing liabilities mature or reprice more quickly than interest-earning assets, an increase in market interest rates could adversely affect net interest income. Conversely, when interest-earning assets reprice more quickly than interest-bearing liabilities, an increase in market interest rates could increase net interest income.
The Company’s Board of Directors has adopted an Asset/Liability Policy designed to stabilize net interest income and preserve capital over a broad range of interest rate movements. This policy outlines guidelines and ratios dealing with, among others, liquidity, volatile liability dependence, investment portfolio composition, loan portfolio composition, loan-to-deposit ratio and gap analysis ratio. Key quantitative measurements include the percentage change of net interest income in various interest rate scenarios (net interest income at risk) and changes in the market value of equity in various rate environments (net portfolio value at risk). The Company’s performance as compared to the Asset/Liability Policy is monitored by its Risk Committee. In addition, to effectively administer the Asset/Liability Policy and to monitor exposure to fluctuations in interest rates, the Company maintains an Asset/Liability Committee (the “ALCO”), consisting of the Chief Executive Officer, the Chief Financial Officer, Chief Operating Officer, Chief Lending Officer, Chief Banking Officer, Chief Credit Officer, Chief Risk Officer and certain other senior officers. This committee meets quarterly to review the Company’s financial results and to develop strategies to implement the Asset/Liability Policy and to respond to market conditions.
The Company monitors and controls interest rate risk through a variety of techniques, including use of an interest rate risk management model. With the interest rate risk management model, the Company projects future net interest income, and then estimates the effect of various changes in interest rates and balance sheet growth rates on that projected net interest income. The Company also uses the interest rate risk management model to calculate the change in net portfolio value over a range of interest rate change scenarios.
Table of Content
Interest rate sensitivity modeling is done at a specific point in time and involves a variety of significant estimates and assumptions. Interest rate sensitivity modeling requires, among other things, estimates of how much and when yields and costs on individual categories of interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities will respond to general changes in market rates, future cash flows and discount rates.
Net interest income simulation considers the relative sensitivities of the balance sheet including the effects of interest rate caps on adjustable rate mortgages and the relatively stable aspects of core deposits. As such, net interest income simulation is designed to address the probability of interest rate changes and the behavioral response of the balance sheet to those changes. Market Value of Portfolio Equity represents the fair value of the net present value of assets, liabilities and off-balance-sheet items. Changes in estimates and assumptions made for interest rate sensitivity modeling could have a significant impact on projected results and conclusions. These assumptions could include prepayment rates, sensitivity of non-maturity deposits, decay rates and other similar assumptions. Therefore, if our assumptions should change, this technique may not accurately reflect the impact of general interest rate movements on the Company’s net interest income or net portfolio value.
Management reviews the accuracy of its model by back testing its results (comparing predicted results in past models with current data), and it periodically reviews its prepayment assumptions, decay rates and other assumptions.
The starting point (or “base case”) for the following table is an estimate of the following year’s net interest income assuming that both interest rates and the Company’s interest-sensitive assets and liabilities remain at year-end levels. The net interest income estimated for 2021 (the base case) is $223.7 million. The information provided for net interest income assumes that changes in interest rates change gradually in equal increments (“rate ramp”) over the twelve month period.
The ALCO’s policy review of interest rate risk includes policy limits for net interest income changes in various “rate shock” scenarios. Rate shocks assume that current interest rates change immediately. The information provided for net interest income assumes fluctuations or “rate shocks” for changes in interest rates as shown in the table below.
The base case for the following table is an estimate of the Company’s net portfolio value for the periods presented using current discount rates, and assuming the Company’s interest-sensitive assets and liabilities remain at year-end levels. The net portfolio value at December 31, 2021 (the base case) was $1.28 billion. The information provided for the net portfolio value assumes fluctuations or rate shocks for changes in interest rates as shown in the table below.
The Company's net portfolio value change in the -100 basis point scenario was -10.1% for 2020 compared to its policy limit of -10.0% resulting from the effects of the extremely low interest rate environment at the time. Management determined that no corrective action was necessary at the time and the portfolio value change was within policy limits during 2021.
The information in the above tables represent the policy scenario that the ALCO reviews on a quarterly basis. There are also other scenarios run that the ALCO examines that vary depending on the economic environment. These scenarios include a yield curve flattening scenario and scenarios that show more dramatic changes in rates. The Committee uses alternative scenarios, depending on the economic environment, in its interest rate management decisions.
Table of Content
Certain shortcomings are inherent in the methodologies used in the above interest rate risk measurements. Modeling changes in net interest income requires the making of certain assumptions regarding prepayment and deposit decay rates, which may or may not reflect the manner in which actual yields and costs respond to changes in market interest rates. While management believes such assumptions are reasonable, there can be no assurance that assumed prepayment rates and decay rates will approximate actual future loan prepayment and deposit withdrawal activity. Moreover, the net interest income table presented assumes that the composition of interest sensitive assets and liabilities existing at the beginning of a period remains constant over the period being measured and also assumes that a particular change in interest rates is reflected uniformly across the yield curve regardless of the duration to maturity or repricing of specific assets and liabilities. Accordingly, although the net interest income table provides an indication of the Company’s interest rate risk exposure at a particular point in time, such measurement is not intended to and does not provide a precise forecast of the effect of changes in market interest rates on net interest income and will differ from actual results.
Effects of Inflation
The impact of inflation, as it affects banks, differs substantially from the impact on non-financial institutions. Banks have assets which are primarily monetary in nature and which tend to move with inflation. This is especially true for banks with a high percentage of rate sensitive interest-earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. A bank can further reduce the impact of inflation with proper management of its rate sensitivity gap. This gap represents the difference between interest rate sensitive assets and interest rate sensitive liabilities. Lakeland attempts to structure its assets and liabilities and manages its gap to protect against substantial changes in interest rate scenarios, in order to minimize the potential effects of inflation.
Capital Resources
Stockholders’ equity increased from $763.8 million on December 31, 2020 to $827.0 million on December 31, 2021, which was primarily due to $95.0 million of net income, partially offset by the payment of cash dividends on common stock of $27.1 million.
Book value per common share (total common stockholders’ equity divided by the number of shares outstanding) increased from $15.13 on December 31, 2020 to $16.34 on December 31, 2021, primarily as a result of an increase in retained net income. Tangible book value per share was $13.21 on December 31, 2021, increasing from $11.97 on December 31, 2020. For more information see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
The Company and Lakeland are subject to various regulatory capital requirements that are monitored by federal and state banking agencies. Failure to meet minimum capital requirements can lead to certain supervisory actions by regulators; any supervisory action could have a direct material adverse effect on the Company or Lakeland’s financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, the Company and Lakeland met all capital adequacy requirements to which they are subject.
The following table reflects capital ratios of the Company and Lakeland as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Table of Content
The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (the “Act”) was signed into law during the second quarter of 2018. The Act, among other matters, amends the Federal Deposit Insurance Act to require federal banking agencies to develop a specified Community Bank Leverage Ratio (the ratio of a bank's equity capital to its average total consolidated assets) for banks with assets of less than $10 billion. Qualifying participating banks that exceed this ratio shall be deemed to comply with all other capital and leverage requirements. In September 2019, the FDIC approved a final rule allowing community banks with a leverage capital ratio of at least 9% to be considered in compliance with Basel III capital requirements and exempt from the Basel Calculation. Under the final rule, banks with less than $10 billion in assets may elect the community bank leverage ratio framework if they meet the 9% ratio and if they hold 25% or less of assets in off-balance-sheet exposures, and 5% or less of assets in trading assets and liabilities. For institutions that fall below the 9% capital requirement but remain above 8%, the final rule establishes a two-quarter grace period to either meet the qualifying criteria again or comply with the generally applicable capital rule. In 2020, the CARES Act required the federal banking agencies to temporarily lower the Community Bank Leverage Ratio from 9% of average total consolidated assets to 8% for the remainder of 2020. The ratio rose to 8.5% for calendar year 2021 and will revert to 9% thereafter. Management did not elect to use the Community Bank Leverage Ratio framework for Lakeland Bancorp or Lakeland Bank.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Calculation of Tangible Book Value Per Common Share
Calculation of Tangible Common Equity to Tangible Assets
Table of Content
Calculation of Return on Average Tangible Common Equity:
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In October 2021, the Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB") issued Update 2021-08, an update to Topic 805, Business Combinations. The update provides guidance to improve the accounting for acquired revenue contracts with customers in a business combination by addressing diversity in practice and inconsistency related to the recognition of an acquired contract liability and payment terms and their effect on subsequent revenue recognized by the acquirer. The amendment provides specific guidance on how to recognize and measure acquired contract assets and contract liabilities from revenue contracts in a business combination. The amendments in this ASU apply to all entities that enter into a business combination within the scope of Subtopic 805-10, Business Combinations - Overall. This ASU will be effective for financial statements issued by public business entities for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2022. The Company does not expect the ASU to have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.
In March 2020, FASB issued Update 2020-04, an update to Topic 848, Reference Rate Reform. The update provides guidance to ease the potential burden in accounting for, or recognizing the effects of, reference rate reform on financial reporting. The update provides optional expedients and exceptions for applying generally accepted accounting principles to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions affected by reference rate reform if certain criteria are met and only applies to contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate expected to be discontinued because of reference rate reform. In addition, the update provides optional expedients for applying the requirements of certain Topics or Industry Subtopics in the Codification for contracts that are modified because of reference rate reform and contemporaneous modifications of other contract terms related to the replacement of the reference rate. The ASU allows companies to apply the standard as of the beginning of the interim period that includes March 12, 2020 or any date thereafter. The Company is currently assessing the impact to its financial statements; however, the impact is not expected to be material.
In January 2020, FASB issued Update 2020-01, an update to Topic 321, Investments, Topic 323, Joint Ventures and Topic 815, Derivatives and Hedging. The update clarifies the accounting for certain equity securities upon the application or discontinuation of the equity method of accounting in accordance with Topic 321. In addition, the update clarifies scope considerations for forward contracts and purchased options on certain securities. This update will be effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2020. The update did not have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.
In December 2019, FASB issued Update 2019-12, an update to Topic 740, Income Taxes, as part of an initiative to reduce complexity in accounting standards for income taxes. The amendments also improve consistent application of and simplify GAAP for other areas of Topic 740 by clarifying and amending existing guidance. This update will be effective for financial statements issued for fiscal years and interim periods beginning after December 15, 2021 with early adoption permitted. The Company does not expect the update to have a material impact on the Company's financial statements.