ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis describes significant changes in the financial condition and results of operations, as well as liquidity and capital resources of the Company. Additionally, it addresses accounting policies and estimates that management has deemed are “critical accounting policies and estimates.” This discussion and analysis is intended as a supplement to and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements, the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements and other sections of this Form 10-K.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. You should refer to the “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” set forth in Part I of this Annual Report.
We report financial information on a quarterly and fiscal year basis with the most recent being the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. All references herein to a “fiscal year” or “Fiscal” refer to the applicable fiscal year ended June 30.
Company Overview
Lannett Company, Inc. (a Delaware corporation) and its subsidiaries (collectively, the “Company,” “Lannett,” “we” or “us”) primarily develop, manufacture, package, market and distribute solid oral and extended release (tablets and capsules), topical, liquids, nasal and oral solution finished dosage forms of drugs, generic forms of both small molecule and biologic medications, that address a wide range of therapeutic areas. Certain of these products are manufactured by others and distributed by the Company. Additionally, the Company is pursuing partnerships, research contracts and internal expansion for the development and production of other dosage forms including: ophthalmic, nasal, patch, foam, buccal, sublingual, suspensions, soft gel, injectable and oral dosages.
The Company operates a pharmaceutical manufacturing plant in Seymour, Indiana. During Fiscal 2022, the Company completed the sale of its Silarx facility in Carmel, New York. In connection with the sale, the buyer will continue to produce certain products on behalf of the Company at the Carmel facility while the Company completes the transfer of such products to its Seymour, Indiana plant.
The Company’s customers include generic pharmaceutical distributors, drug wholesalers, chain drug stores, private label distributors, mail-order pharmacies, other pharmaceutical manufacturers, managed care organizations, hospital buying groups, governmental entities and health maintenance organizations.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Company has developed a comprehensive plan that enables it to maintain operational continuity with an emphasis on manufacturing, distribution and R&D facilities during this crisis, and to date, has not encountered any significant obstacles implementing its business continuity plans. However, the Company continually assesses COVID-19 related developments and adjusts its risk mitigation planning and business continuity activities as needed. The Company continues to follow CDC recommendations and adheres to state and local guidance where we operate. While employee absenteeism has not had any material effect on the Company’s business or its ability to manufacture and distribute products and plants continue to operate at normal capacity, there is a continuing risk of employee absenteeism as the pandemic continues to linger due to variants or other causes, which could materially impact the Company’s operations.
The pandemic has also contributed in part to global supply chain disruptions, shortages, and recent inflationary pressures. While the Company is still able to receive sufficient inventory of the key materials needed across its network, the Company has recently experienced pressure on its supply chain, including shipping delays, higher prices from suppliers, and reduced availability of materials, particularly excipients and packaging components. To date, the supply chain pressure has not had a material impact on the Company’s results of operations. However, the Company is regularly communicating with its suppliers, third-party partners, customers, healthcare providers and government officials in order to respond rapidly to any issues as they arise. The longer the current situation continues, it is more likely that the Company may experience some sort of material interruption to our supply chain, and such an interruption could adversely affect our business, including but not limited to, our ability to timely manufacture and distribute our products.
As a result of the pandemic, certain clinical trials which were underway or scheduled to begin were temporarily placed on hold, although all such clinical trials were resumed and have been completed. Such delays impacted the Company’s timing for filing applications for product approvals with the FDA as well as related timing of FDA approval of such filings. Additionally, the pandemic has slowed down the Company’s efforts to expand its product portfolio through acquisitions and distribution opportunities, impacting the speed with which the Company is able to bring additional products to market.
Based on the foregoing, the Company cannot reasonably predict the ultimate impact of COVID-19 on our future results of operations due to the continued uncertainty around the duration and severity of the pandemic.
2021 Restructuring Plan
On November 1, 2021, the Board of Directors authorized a restructuring and cost savings plan to further optimize its operations, improve efficiencies and reduce costs. Under the 2021 Restructuring Plan, the Company is consolidating its manufacturing footprint by transferring certain liquid drug production from its Silarx facility in Carmel, New York to the Company’s main plant in Seymour, Indiana. On March 31, 2022, the Company closed on the sale of the Silarx facility, which included equipment within the facility, certain ANDAs and other assets, to Chartwell Pharmaceuticals, LLC (“Chartwell”) and its subsidiaries for total consideration of $10.5 million. In connection with the sale, Chartwell is producing on behalf of the Company certain products at the Carmel facility for a period of up to 18 months while the Company completes the transfer of such products to its Seymour, Indiana plant. During the transition, the Company will scale back or phase out some small low-margin over-the-counter medicines from Carmel and continue to assess its portfolio, which may include introducing or discontinuing additional products.
In addition, the Company has scaled back two low-margin prescription products manufactured KUPI at its Seymour, Indiana facility as part of the restructuring program. The Company also scaled back its research and development operations and eliminated certain administrative positions that primarily supported the Silarx and research and development operations.
The actions contemplated under the 2021 Restructuring Plan are substantially complete as of June 30, 2022. The transfer of certain products from the Carmel facility to the Company’s main plant in Seymour, Indiana is in process and expected to continue into Fiscal 2023. The plan is expected to generate annual cost savings of approximately $20 million.
In connection with the sale of the Silarx facility, Chartwell has retained a majority of the employees at the facility. The Company has completed its reduction in headcount for the 2021 Restructuring Plan, which was approximately 140 positions and included the employees retained by Chartwell. The Company estimates that it will incur approximately $3.5 million to $4.5 million of total costs to implement the 2021 Restructuring Plan, comprised primarily of approximately $2.5 million of severance and employee-related costs and approximately $1.0 million to $2.0 million of tech transfer costs. As of June 30, 2022, the Company has incurred $2.8 million of costs related to the 2021 Restructuring Plan. See Note 3 “Restructuring Charges” for more information. The Company also expects to incur approximately $2.0 million to $3.0 million in capital expenditures to build out the liquid manufacturing business at the Seymour, Indiana facility.
Climate Change
The Company believes in a more sustainable future with a reduced environmental footprint and a general view towards reducing our effect on the climate while maintaining our focus on providing affordable medicines to our customers and ultimately the patients who depend on them. The Company has begun to consider climate-related risks that are pertinent to the Company. Our aspiration is to reduce our environmental footprint. However, related efforts may result in increased costs to the Company including, but not limited to, capital investments, additional management and compliance costs, and reduced output, all of which may be material. Costs incurred by our suppliers and vendors to comply with their own sustainability commitments may also be passed through the supply chain resulting in higher operational costs to the Company. Climate change and the associated risks and regulations are expected to continue to evolve over time and could materially impact the Company’s results of operations and cash flows in any given year. The Company monitors such matters and strives to address them in a timely manner.
Results of Operations - Fiscal 2022 compared to Fiscal 2021
Net sales decreased 29% to $340.6 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022. The following table identifies the Company’s net product sales by medical indication for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021.
The decrease in net sales was driven by a decrease in the selling price of products of $93.8 million and a decrease in volumes of $44.4 million. The decrease in the selling price of products was primarily driven by lower sales prices of Posaconazole, which is included within the Infectious Disease medical indication, Levothyroxine Tablets and Capsules, which are included in the Endocrinology medical indication, and Fluphenazine, which is included within the Anti-Psychosis medical indication. The pressure on sales prices across our portfolio is a reflection of the competitive environment in the generic drug industry. Overall volumes, particularly volumes of Posaconazole, Fluphenazine and Verapamil, which is included within the Cardiovascular medical indication, were also negatively impacted by the competitive environment. In addition, volumes, specifically within the Gastrointestinal medical indication, were lower as a result of certain product discontinuances in connection with the 2021 Restructuring Plan. However, the pressure was partially offset by increased volumes related to certain new product launches such as Levothyroxine Capsules.
In January 2017, a provision in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 required drug manufacturers to pay additional rebates to state Medicaid programs if the prices of their generic drugs rise at a rate faster than inflation. The provision negatively impacted the Company’s net sales by $11.2 million and $18.9 million in Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021, respectively.
The following chart details price and volume changes by medical indication between Fiscal 2022 and Fiscal 2021:
The Company sells its products to customers through various distribution channels. The table below presents the Company’s net sales to each distribution channel for the fiscal year ended June 30:
The overall decrease in sales was primarily driven by lower sales of certain key products due to new competitors entering the market and the discontinuance of two low-margin prescription products as part of the 2021 Restructuring Plan. The Company has also seen increased competitive market pressure among the existing competitor base in recent years, which has resulted in an overall decrease in sales to the distribution channels above. We will continue to seek opportunities for additional launches to offset these competitive pressures.
Cocaine Hydrochloride Solution
In December 2017, a competitor received approval from the FDA to market and sell a cocaine hydrochloride topical product. In March 2018, in accordance with FDA guidance, the FDA requested that the Company cease manufacturing and distributing its unapproved cocaine hydrochloride solution product due to there being an approved product on the market. The Company committed to not manufacturing or distributing cocaine hydrochloride 10% solution, which was not sold during Fiscal 2019. The Company also ceased manufacturing its unapproved cocaine hydrochloride 4% solution on June 15, 2019 and ceased distributing the product on August 15, 2019.
The competitor filed a series of Citizen Petitions beginning in 2019, seeking to block approval of the Company’s Section 505(b)(2) NDA for its cocaine hydrochloride solution product by claiming that the grant of the New Chemical Entity (“NCE”) exclusivity issued to the competitor blocks the approval of the Company’s application for five years. Following the FDA’s rejection of the competitor’s argument and approval of the Company’s Section 505(b)(2) NDA, the competitor filed two lawsuits against the FDA (one in federal court in the District of Columbia and one in federal court in the District of Maryland) seeking a court order in two different federal courts directing the FDA to withdraw approval of the Section 505(b)(2) NDA. Neither court directed the FDA to withdraw the NDA. The Company intervened in both lawsuits and made cross motions for summary judgment in the case filed in federal court for the District of Columbia and a motion to dismiss the complaint filed in the federal court for the District of Maryland.
Separately, on June 6, 2020, the competitor filed a patent infringement complaint, since amended, in the United States District Court for the District of Delaware, asserting that the Company’s approved cocaine hydrochloride product infringes six patents issued to the competitor. The Company filed an answer and counterclaim, alleging that the Company either does not infringe or that the six asserted patents and three additional unasserted patents are invalid. The competitor filed a motion to partially dismiss a portion of the counterclaim as to the unasserted patents.
On August 16, 2021, the Company and the competitor reached an agreement to amicably resolve all pending cases, including the cases in the federal courts in the District of Columbia, District of Maryland and District of Delaware. The parties executed settlement documents on October 15, 2021 and all cases against the Company have been dismissed with prejudice. The Company continues to market its approved cocaine hydrochloride solution product.
Levothyroxine Tablets
In August 2020, the Company commenced distributing Cediprof, Inc.’s (“Cediprof”) Levothyroxine Tablets product under an interim exclusive supply and distribution agreement, which had been previously distributed by Sandoz, Inc. (“Sandoz”) under a separate distribution contract. At around the same time, Sandoz filed several complaints and motions for temporary restraining orders against the Company and Sandoz to prevent the Company from distributing Cediprof’s product. The complaints were subsequently dismissed, and the temporary restraining orders were denied. Cediprof subsequently proceeded against Cediprof in an arbitration in New York, where the Company has agreed to indemnify Cediprof. On August 5, 2022, the arbitrator issued a final award, finding that Cediprof had breached the Sandoz contract and determining that Sandoz is entitled to lost profits, among other damages. The portion of the award subject to indemnification from the Company amounted to $10.9 million, which the Company has accrued as of June 30, 2022. The Company’s indemnification obligation will only be triggered if and when Cediprof pays the award. See Note 10 “Legal, Regulatory Matters and Contingencies” for additional information regarding this matter.
Cost of Sales, including amortization of intangibles. Cost of sales, including amortization of intangibles, for Fiscal 2022 decreased 24% to $307.4 million from $403.2 million in the same prior-year period. Amortization expense included in cost of sales decreased to $12.9 million in Fiscal 2022 compared to $24.9 million for Fiscal 2021 as a result of intangible asset impairment charges incurred in both periods, which resulted in a lower amortizable base for certain assets. The Company has experienced increased competitive market pressure in recent years, which has resulted in overall decrease in sales volumes and, therefore, lower cost of sales in the current period. The 2021 Restructuring Plan resulted in lower overall headcount, which included the sale of the Silarx facility and transition of employees to Chartwell. In addition, in the second quarter of Fiscal Year 2021, the Company recorded $17.2 million in write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory as a result of the decision to discontinue 23 lower margin product lines as well as $5.0 million in consideration to renew the Company’s distribution agreement with Recro Gainesville, LLC (“Recro”), which resulted in higher cost of sales in the prior-year period.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for Fiscal 2022 decreased 56% to $33.2 million or 10% of total net sales. In comparison, gross profit for Fiscal 2021 was $75.6 million or 16% of total net sales. The decrease in gross profit percentage was primarily attributable to decreases in the selling prices of our products as a result of increased competitive pressure.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses decreased 7% to $22.4 million in Fiscal 2022 from $24.2 million in Fiscal 2021. The decrease was primarily due to the timing of spend related to product development projects as well as overall reduced project spend and lower R&D headcount as a result of the 2021 Restructuring Plan.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased 16% to $81.0 million in Fiscal 2022 compared with $68.1 million in Fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily driven by higher expenses related to the reimbursement of legal costs associated with a distribution agreement as well as a non-income tax credit received in the first quarter of Fiscal 2021. In Fiscal 2022, the reimbursement of legal costs included the accrual of the award to cover lost profits for Sandoz, Inc., which totaled $10.9 million. See Note 10 “Legal, Regulatory Matters and Contingencies” for more information.
Asset impairment charges. In Fiscal 2022, the Company recorded various asset impairment charges totaling $103.3 million.
In the fourth quarter of Fiscal 2022, the Company reviewed recent market trends and, consequently, anticipates additional competitive pressures on various key products within its intangible asset portfolio. Accordingly, the Company adjusted its expectations downward for these products, which represented a triggering event for several of its intangible assets. Prior to performing the impairment analysis, the Company reclassed $4.0 million of KUPI in-process research and development (“IPR&D”) assets into KUPI product rights as a result of the FDA approval of the drug application and expected commercialization of the product in Fiscal 2023. As a result of the impairment analysis, the Company recorded a full impairment of its KUPI product rights portfolio, totaling $39.1 million. In addition, the Company recorded impairment charges totaling $16.1 million related to the other product rights category of definite-lived intangible assets, which included the intangible assets associated with the distribution and supply agreement with Cediprof, Inc., the products acquired in Fiscal 2018 from a subsidiary of Endo International plc, the distribution and supply agreement with Sinotherapeutics, Inc., the license agreement with Andor Pharmaceuticals, LLC, and one of the products acquired in Fiscal 2018 from UCB.
In November 2021, the Company announced the 2021 Restructuring Plan, which included the phase out of two low-margin prescription products at KUPI in Seymour, Indiana. Based on the impairment analysis performed as a result of this decision and continued competitive pressures in the market, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $40.6 million related to the KUPI product rights intangible assets. The impairment charge is primarily a result of the decline in net sales and gross margin of certain product lines acquired in connection with the KUPI acquisition.
As part of the 2021 Restructuring Plan, the Company completed the sale of its Silarx facility in Carmel, New York and will transition certain products to the Company’s main plant in Seymour, Indiana. In the second quarter of Fiscal 2022, prior to the sale of the facility, the Company performed a fair value analysis to adjust the carrying value of the facility and certain equipment identified for sale to the fair value, which resulted in an $8.4 million impairment charge.
See Note 8 “Intangible Assets” for more information.
Other Loss. Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2022 totaled $58.0 million compared to $53.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2021. The weighted average interest rate for Fiscal 2022 and 2021 was 9.0% and 8.0%, respectively. The increase in interest expense and the weighted-average interest rate is attributable to the refinancing of the Company’s outstanding debt in April 2021, which resulted in higher interest rates on the Notes and the Second Lien Facility as discussed further below.
Income Tax. The Company recorded income tax benefit in Fiscal 2022 of $2.3 million compared to income tax expense of $60.6 million in Fiscal 2021. The effective tax rate for Fiscal 2022 was 1.0%, compared to (20.0)% for Fiscal 2021. The effective tax rate for Fiscal 2021 was lower compared to Fiscal 2022 primarily due to the valuation allowance recorded in Fiscal 2021.
Net Loss. For the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company reported net loss of $231.6 million, or $(5.74) per diluted share. Comparatively, net loss in the corresponding prior-year period was $363.5 million, or $(9.23) per diluted share.
Results of Operations - Fiscal 2021 compared to Fiscal 2020
Net sales decreased 12% to $478.8 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021. The following table identifies the Company’s net product sales by medical indication for the fiscal years ended June 30, 2021 and 2020.
The decrease in net sales was driven by a decrease in the selling price of products of $90.1 million partially offset by increased volumes of $23.1 million. The decrease in the selling price of products was primarily driven by lower sales prices of Fluphenazine, which is included within the Anti-Psychosis medical indication, and Posaconazole, which is included in Infectious Disease medical indication, due to new competitors entering the market, as well as lower average selling price across the remaining medical indications. Overall volumes increased primarily due to increased volumes of Posaconazole and from new product launches, including Levothyroxine Tablets and Capsules, partially offset by lower volumes of Fluphenazine. The Company has seen increased competitive market pressure in recent years, which has resulted in overall decreases in selling prices of products and sales volume across our product portfolio. We have partially offset these competitive pressures with new product launches and will continue to seek opportunities for additional launches.
In January 2017, a provision in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 required drug manufacturers to pay additional rebates to state Medicaid programs if the prices of their generic drugs rise at a rate faster than inflation. The provision negatively impacted the Company’s net sales by $18.9 million and $35.7 million in Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020, respectively, which contributed to the overall decreased average selling price.
The following chart details price and volume changes by medical indication between Fiscal 2021 and Fiscal 2020:
The Company sells its products to customers through various distribution channels. The table below presents the Company’s net sales to each distribution channel for the fiscal year ended June 30:
The overall decrease in sales was primarily driven by lower sales of Fluphenazine and Posaconazole due to new competitors entering the market partially offset by sales from new product launches. The Company has seen increased competitive market pressure in recent years, which has resulted in overall decrease in sales to the distribution channels above. We have partially offset these competitive pressures with new product launches and will continue to seek opportunities for additional launches.
Cost of Sales, including amortization of intangibles. Cost of sales, including amortization of intangibles, for Fiscal 2021 increased 6% to $403.2 million from $380.5 million in the same prior-year period. The increase was attributable to an increase of $13.2 million in write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory, which primarily relates to the Company’s decision to discontinue 23 lower margin product lines, as well as additional volumes from new product launches. The Company also recorded $5.0 million in consideration to renew the Company’s distribution agreement with Recro during the second quarter of Fiscal Year 2021.
Gross Profit. Gross profit for Fiscal 2021 decreased 54% to $75.6 million or 16% of total net sales. In comparison, gross profit for Fiscal 2020 was $165.2 million or 30% of total net sales. The decrease in gross profit percentage was primarily attributable to lower volumes of Fluphenazine, which had higher than average gross profit margins, as well as overall lower average selling prices of our products. The Company also recorded an increase in the write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory as well as consideration to renew the distribution agreement with Recro in the second quarter of Fiscal 2021.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses decreased 19% to $24.2 million in Fiscal 2021 from $30.0 million in Fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower R&D expenses as a result of timing of certain milestones related to product development projects as well as employee headcount reductions related to the 2020 Restructuring Plan.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased 14% to $68.1 million in Fiscal 2021 compared with $79.5 million in Fiscal 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a lower branded prescription drug fee, lower incentive-based compensation, lower expenses at the Company’s Cody Labs subsidiary and other cost reduction initiatives.
Asset impairment charges. In Fiscal 2021, the Company recorded various asset impairment charges totaling $216.6 million. The Company reviewed its product portfolio during Fiscal 2021 and decided to discontinue 23 lower gross margin product lines, including product lines that were acquired through various past business and product acquisitions. As a result of the discontinuance and the reduction in net sales and gross margin of certain other product lines, the Company recorded an impairment charge of $193.0 million related to the KUPI product rights intangible assets. The impairment charge is primarily a result of the decline in net sales and gross margin of certain product lines acquired in connection with the KUPI acquisition, including those product lines being discontinued. In addition, the Company recorded a $17.0 million impairment charge to its intangible asset for a distribution and supply agreement with Cediprof, Inc., which is included within the other product rights category of definite-lived intangible assets, as a result of increased competition and lower projected cash flows for the Levothyroxine product. The Company also recorded a $5.0 million impairment charge to its KUPI in-process research and development intangible asset due to delays in the expected launch of a product within the portfolio, which results in reduced projected cash flows.
Other Loss. Interest expense for the year ended June 30, 2021 totaled $53.8 million compared to $66.8 million for the year ended June 30, 2020. The decrease was due to a lower average debt balance in Fiscal 2021 as compared to the prior-year as well as a lower weighted-average interest rate due to the full repayment of the outstanding Term Loan A in November 2020. The weighted average interest rate for Fiscal 2021 and 2020 was 8.0% and 8.8%, respectively. The Company also recorded a $10.3 million loss on extinguishment of debt related to the payoff of the Term Loan B Facility during Fiscal 2021.
Income Tax. The Company recorded income tax expense in Fiscal 2021 of $60.6 million compared to income tax benefit of $15.3 million in Fiscal 2020. The effective tax rate for Fiscal 2021 was (20.0)%, compared to 31.4% for Fiscal 2020. The income tax expense recorded in Fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by the full valuation allowance recorded against the Company’s deferred tax assets. See Note 16 “Income Taxes” for more information.
Net Income (Loss). For the year ended June 30, 2021, the Company reported net loss of $363.5 million, or $(9.23) per diluted share. Comparatively, net loss in the corresponding prior-year period was $33.4 million, or $(0.86) per diluted share.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow
The Company has historically financed its operations with cash flow generated from operations and has access $43.4 million on the Amended ABL Credit Facility, which includes use of the facility for letters of credit and is discussed further below. At June 30, 2022, working capital was $185.2 million as compared to $263.1 million at June 30, 2021, a decrease of $77.9 million.
Net cash used in operating activities of $7.1 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 reflected net loss of $231.6 million, adjustments for non-cash items of $195.4 million, as well as cash provided by operating assets and liabilities of $29.1 million. In comparison, net cash provided by operating activities of $60.9 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 reflected net loss of $363.5 million, adjustments for non-cash items of $441.0 million, as well as cash used in operating assets and liabilities of $16.6 million.
Significant changes in operating assets and liabilities from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022 are comprised of:
● A decrease in accounts receivable of $42.6 million mainly due to lower gross sales in the three months ended June 30, 2022 compared to the three months ended June 30, 2021. The Company’s days sales outstanding (“DSO”) at June 30, 2022, based on gross sales for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and gross accounts receivable at June 30, 2022, was 77 days. The level of DSO at June 30, 2022 was comparable to the Company’s expectation that DSO will be in the 70 to 85-day range based on customer payment terms.
● A decrease in royalties payable of $8.1 million mainly due lower sales of distributed products, particularly Posaconazole and Levothyroxine Tablets and Capsules.
Significant changes in operating assets and liabilities from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021 are comprised of:
● A decrease in accounts receivable of $26.9 million mainly due to the overall decrease in sales, as well as the timing of sales and cash receipts. The Company’s DSO at June 30, 2021, based on gross sales for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 and gross accounts receivable at June 30, 2021, was 77 days. The level of DSO at June 30, 2021 was comparable to the Company’s expectation that DSO will be in the 70 to 85-day range based on customer payment terms.
● An increase in income taxes receivable totaling $20.4 million primarily due to additional estimated tax refunds related to provisions of the CARES Act and an anticipated Fiscal 2021 taxable loss, partially offset by income tax receipts of $36.8 million.
● A decrease in rebates payable of $19.2 million primarily due to lower sales of Fluphenazine in Fiscal 2021, which had higher than average government-related rebates.
● A decrease in royalties payable of $7.1 million primarily due to lower sales of distributed products with royalty arrangements in Fiscal 2021.
● A decrease in accrued payroll and payroll-related costs of $5.6 million primarily related to payments made in August 2020 in connection with incentive-based compensation accrued in Fiscal Year 2020 as well as lower incentive-based compensation accrued in Fiscal Year 2021.
Net cash provided by investing activities of $2.1 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was mainly the result of proceeds from the sale of assets, including the Silarx facility in Carmel, NY and the Cody API real estate, of $12.6 million partially offset by purchases of property, plant and equipment of $8.7 million and purchases of intangible assets of $1.8 million. Net cash used in investing activities of $14.8 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was mainly the result of purchases of property, plant and equipment of $10.4 million and purchases of intangible assets of $4.5 million.
Net cash used in financing activities of $0.5 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 was due to purchases of treasury stock totaling $0.8 million, partially offset by proceeds from issuance of stock pursuant to stock compensation plans of $0.3 million. Net cash used in financing activities of $92.2 million for the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021 was primarily due to debt repayments of $437.9 million and payment of debt issuance costs of $10.1 million, partially offset by proceeds from issuance of long-term debt of $356.2 million. The financing activities during Fiscal 2021 were primarily related to the refinancing in April 2021.
Credit Facility and Other Indebtedness
The Company has previously entered into and may enter future agreements with various government agencies and financial institutions to provide additional cash to help finance the Company’s acquisitions, various capital investments and potential strategic opportunities. These borrowing arrangements as of June 30, 2022 are as follows:
7.750% Senior Secured Notes due 2026
On April 22, 2021, the Company issued $350.0 million aggregate principal amount of the Notes in a private placement to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”) and outside the United States to persons other than U.S. persons in reliance upon Regulation S under the Securities Act. The Notes bear interest semi-annually in arrears on April 15 and October 15 of each year, beginning on October 15, 2021, at a rate of 7.750% per annum in cash. The Notes will mature on April 15, 2026, unless earlier redeemed or repurchased in accordance with their terms.
Second Lien Secured Loan Facility
On April 5, 2021, the Company entered into an Exchange Agreement with certain participating lenders to exchange a portion of their existing Term B Loans for Second Lien Loans pursuant to a new $190.0 million Second Lien Secured Loan Facility (“Second Lien Facility”). On April 22, 2021, in connection with the issuance of the Notes and the entrance into the Amended ABL Credit Facility, which is discussed further below, the exchange between the Company and the participating lenders was consummated. From the Closing Date until the one-year anniversary of the Closing Date, the Second Lien Loans bear 10.0% PIK interest. Thereafter, the Second Lien notes will bear 5.0% cash interest and 5.0% PIK interest until maturity, except to the extent the Company elects to pay all or portion of the PIK interest in cash. To date, the Company has not paid any PIK interest in cash. The Second Lien Loans will mature on July 21, 2026. In connection with the Second Lien Facility, the Company issued to the Participating Lenders warrants to purchase up to 8,280,000 shares of common stock of the Company (Warrants”) at an exercise price of $6.88 per share. The Warrants were issued on April 22, 2021 with an eight-year term. The Participating Lenders received registration rights with respect to the shares of common stock of the Company to be received upon exercise of the Warrants. The holders of the Warrants are entitled to receive dividends or distributions of any kind made to the common stockholders to the same extent as if the holder had exercised the Warrant into common stock. The Warrants are considered participating securities under ASC 260, Earnings per share.
In connection with the Second Lien Facility, the Company is required to maintain at least $5.0 million in a deposit account at all times subject to control by the Second Lien Collateral Agent, and a minimum cash balance of $15.0 million as of the last day of each month. At June 30, 2022, the Company classified the $5.0 million required deposit account balance as restricted cash, which is included in other assets caption in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Amended ABL Credit Facility
On December 7, 2020, the Company entered into a credit and guaranty agreement, which provided for an asset-based revolving credit facility (the “ABL Credit Facility”) of up to $30.0 million, subject to borrowing base availability, and included letter of credit and swing line sub-facilities. On April 22, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment to that certain Credit and Guaranty Agreement, dated as of December 7, 2020 (such agreement as so amended, the “Amended ABL Credit Agreement”), among the Company, certain of its wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries party thereto, as borrowers or as guarantors, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent and as collateral agent, and the other lenders party thereto, for the purpose of, among other things, increasing the aggregate amount of the revolving credit facility from $30.0 million to $45.0 million and extending the maturity thereof to the fifth anniversary of the closing date of Notes Offering (subject to a springing maturity as set forth therein).
The Amended ABL Credit Agreement provides for a revolving credit facility (the “Amended ABL Credit Facility”) that includes letter of credit and swing line sub-facilities. Borrowing availability under the Amended ABL Credit Facility is determined by a monthly borrowing base collateral calculation that is based on specified percentages of eligible accounts receivable less certain reserves and subject to certain other adjustments as set forth in the Amended ABL Credit Agreement. Availability is reduced by issuance of letters of credit as well as any borrowings. Loans outstanding under the Amended ABL Credit Agreement bear interest at a floating rate measured by reference to, at the Company’s option, either an adjusted London Inter-Bank Offered Rate (“LIBOR”) (subject to a floor of 0.75%) plus an applicable margin of 2.50% per annum, or an alternate base rate plus an applicable margin of 1.50% per annum. Unused commitments under the Amended ABL Credit Facility are subject to a fee of 0.50% per annum, which fee increases to 0.75% per annum for any quarter during which the Company’s average usage under the Amended ABL Credit Facility is less than $5.0 million.
4.50% Convertible Senior Notes due 2026
On September 27, 2019, the Company issued $86.3 million aggregate principal amount of the Convertible Notes in a private offering to qualified institutional buyers pursuant to Rule 144A under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended. The Convertible Notes are senior unsecured obligations of the Company and bear interest at an annual rate of 4.50% payable semi-annually in arrears on April 1 and October 1 of each year, beginning on April 1, 2020. The Convertible Notes will mature on October 1, 2026, unless earlier repurchased, redeemed or converted in accordance with their terms. The Convertible Notes are convertible into shares of the Company’s common stock at an initial conversion rate of 65.4022 shares per $1,000 principal amount of Convertible Notes (which is equivalent to an initial conversion price of approximately $15.29 per share), subject to adjustments upon the occurrence of certain events (but will not be adjusted for any accrued and unpaid interest). The Company may redeem all or a part of the Convertible Notes on or after October 6, 2023 at a redemption price equal to 100% of the principal amount of the Convertible Notes redeemed, plus accrued and unpaid interest, if any, up to, but excluding, the redemption date, subject to certain conditions relating to the Company’s stock price having been met. Following certain corporate events that occur prior to the maturity date or if the Company delivers a notice of redemption, the Company will, in certain circumstances, increase the conversion rate for a holder who elects to convert its Convertible Notes in connection with such corporate event or notice of redemption. The indenture covering the Convertible Notes contains certain other customary terms and covenants, including that upon certain events of default occurring and continuing, either the trustee or holders of at least 25% in principal amount of the outstanding Convertible Notes may declare 100% of the principal of, and accrued and unpaid interest on, all the Convertible Notes to be due and payable. In addition, if the Company ceases to be listed or quoted on any of The NYSE, The Nasdaq Global Select Market or The Nasdaq Global Market (or any of their respective successors), holders of the outstanding Convertible Notes will have the option to require the Company to repurchase for cash all of such holder’s notes at 100% of the principal amount, plus accrued and unpaid interest.
In connection with the offering of the Convertible Notes, the Company also entered into privately negotiated “capped call” transactions with several counterparties. The capped call transaction will initially cover, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments, the number of shares of common stock that initially underlie the Convertible Notes. The capped call transactions are expected to generally reduce the potential dilutive effect on the Company’s common stock upon any conversion of the Convertible Notes with such reduction subject to a cap which is initially $19.46 per share.
Other Liquidity Matters
Along with executing on our existing pipeline products, we are continuously evaluating the potential for product and company acquisitions as a part of our future growth strategy. In conjunction with a potential acquisition, the Company may utilize current resources or seek additional sources of capital to finance any such acquisition, which could have an impact on future liquidity. The continued competitive pressures on our current portfolio may impact the ultimate success of existing pipeline projects, which may result in the Company exploring alternative opportunities for capital to support the launch of products in the future.
We may also from time to time depending on market conditions and prices, contractual restrictions, our financial liquidity and other factors, seek to prepay outstanding debt or repurchase our outstanding debt through open market purchases, privately negotiated purchases, or otherwise. The amounts involved in any such transactions, individually or in the aggregate, may be material and may be funded from available cash or from additional borrowings.
The Company files income tax returns in the United States federal jurisdiction and its Fiscal 2015 through 2017, 2019, 2020 and 2021 federal returns are currently under examination by the Internal Revenue Service (“IRS”). As part of a lengthy process, the Company has received various Information Document Requests (“IDRs”) and Notices of Proposed Adjustment (“NOPAs”) with respect to positions taken in certain income tax issues, including an accounting method change related to chargebacks and rebates that the IRS is proposing to disallow. We are in the process of assessing the impact of these notices and preparing a response to the IRS. We believe that it is more likely than not that our positions will ultimately be sustained upon further examination, and, if necessary, will contest any additional tax determined to be owed; however, an adverse outcome could have a material impact to the Company’s Consolidated Statements of Operations and financial position.
Contractual Obligations
The following table represents material annual contractual obligations as of June 30, 2022:
(1) Long-term debt amounts above relate to principal amounts due for the Notes, Second Lien Facility, and the Convertible Notes. Interest on obligations primarily consists of cash interest on the Notes, Second Lien Facility and the Convertible Notes. PIK interest on the Second Lien Facility is due upon maturity and is also included in the interest on obligations line above. However, following the one-year anniversary of the closing date of the Second Lien Facility, the Company may elect to pay in cash any interest required to be paid in the form of PIK interest. To date, the Company has not paid any PIK interest in cash. Refer to Note 9 “Long-Term Debt” for additional information.
(2) Operating lease obligations primarily relate to an eight-year lease for the Company’s headquarters in Trevose, Pennsylvania as well as a 116,000 square foot leased warehouse in Seymour, Indiana.
(3) The asset purchase payment obligation above refers to the consideration due to Andor Pharmaceuticals, LLC for the AB-rated Methylphenidate Hydrochloride perpetual license agreement.
In the normal course of business, the Company may enter into noncancelable purchase orders for API and has various ongoing capital expenditure projects that may result in contractual obligations. Under the terms of the License and Collaboration Agreement with HEC to develop an insulin glargine product, the Company agreed to fund up to the initial $32.0 million of the development costs and split 50/50 any development costs in excess thereof. As of June 30, 2022, the Company has incurred approximately $8.2 million of development costs towards the $32.0 million commitment made by the Company. Under the terms of a separate License and Collaboration Agreement with HEC and affiliates to develop a biosimilar insulin aspart product, the Company agreed to fund up to the initial $32.0 million of the development costs, provided that if total development and other costs paid by Lannett are less than $32.0 million then the difference will be paid to Sunshine over the first year of commercialization. As of June 30, 2022, the Company has incurred approximately $1.0 million of costs towards the $32.0 million commitment made by the Company. In conjunction with the HEC collaboration efforts to develop biosimilar insulin glargine and aspart, the Company also separately entered into Customization and Supply Agreements with Ypsomed AG (“Ypsomed”) to develop, manufacture and supply an injection device to be used with both insulin products. The Company is required to pay 14.0 million Swiss Francs (“CHF”) to Ypsomed over various future milestone dates to fund an expansion of their production capacity to meet the anticipated demand. As of June 30, 2022, the Company has paid 4.0 million CHF, equivalent to approximately $4.3 million, towards this commitment. The remaining 4.0 million and 6.0 million CHF payments are to be paid in installments in calendar years 2023 and 2024, respectively. Refer to Note 11 “Commitments” for additional information.
Research and Development Arrangements
In the normal course of business, the Company has entered into certain research and development and other arrangements. As part of these arrangements, the Company has agreed to certain contingent payments, which generally become due and payable only upon the achievement of certain developmental, regulatory, commercial and/or other milestones. In addition, under certain arrangements, we may be required to make royalty payments based on a percentage of future sales, or other metric, for products currently in development in the event that the Company begins to market and sell the product. Due to the inherent uncertainty related to these developmental, regulatory, commercial and/or other milestones, it is unclear if the Company will ever be required to make such payments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our Consolidated Financial Statements in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and the rules and regulations of the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission requires the use of estimates and assumptions. A listing of the Company’s significant accounting policies is detailed in Note 2 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.” A subsection of these accounting policies has been identified by management as “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates.” Critical accounting policies and estimates are those which require management to make estimates using assumptions that were uncertain at the time the estimates were made and for which the use of different assumptions, which reasonably could have been used, could have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operations.
Management has identified the following as “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates:” Revenue Recognition, Inventories, Income Taxes, and Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, including Intangible Assets.
Revenue Recognition
Under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, the Company recognizes revenue when title and risk of loss of promised goods or services have transferred to the customer at an amount that reflects the consideration the Company is expected to be entitled. Our revenue consists almost entirely of sales of our pharmaceutical products to customers, whereby we ship product to a customer pursuant to a purchase order. Revenue contracts such as these do not generally give rise to contract assets or contract liabilities because: (i) the underlying contracts generally have only a single performance obligation and (ii) we do not generally receive consideration until the performance obligation is fully satisfied. The new revenue standard also impacts the timing of the Company’s revenue recognition by requiring recognition of certain contract manufacturing arrangements to change from “upon shipment or delivery” to “over time.” However, the recognition of these arrangements over time does not currently have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated results of operations or financial position. The Company adopted ASC 606 using the modified retrospective method.
When revenue is recognized, a simultaneous adjustment to gross sales is made for estimated chargebacks, rebates, returns, promotional adjustments and other potential adjustments. These provisions are primarily estimated based on historical experience, future expectations, contractual arrangements with wholesalers and indirect customers and other factors known to management at the time of accrual. Accruals for provisions are presented in the Consolidated Financial Statements as a reduction to gross sales with the corresponding reserve presented as a reduction of accounts receivable or included as rebates payable, depending on the nature of the reserve.
Provisions for chargebacks, rebates, returns and other adjustments require varying degrees of subjectivity. While rebates generally are based on contractual terms and require minimal estimation, chargebacks and returns require management to make more subjective assumptions. Each major category is discussed in detail below:
Chargebacks
The provision for chargebacks is the most significant and complex estimate used in the recognition of revenue. The Company sells its products directly to wholesale distributors, generic distributors, retail pharmacy chains and mail-order pharmacies. The Company also sells its products indirectly to independent pharmacies, managed care organizations, hospitals, nursing homes and group purchasing organizations, collectively referred to as “indirect customers.” The Company enters into agreements with its indirect customers to establish pricing for certain products. The indirect customers then independently select a wholesaler from which to purchase the products. If the price paid by the indirect customers is lower than the price paid by the wholesaler, the Company will provide a credit, called a chargeback, to the wholesaler for the difference between the contractual price with the indirect customers and the wholesaler purchase price. The provision for chargebacks is based on expected sell-through levels by the Company’s wholesale customers to the indirect customers and estimated wholesaler inventory levels. As sales to the large wholesale customers, such as Cardinal Health, AmerisourceBergen and McKesson increase (decrease), the reserve for chargebacks will also generally increase (decrease). However, the size of the increase (decrease) depends on product mix and the amount of sales made to indirect customers with which the Company has specific chargeback agreements. The Company continually monitors the reserve for chargebacks and makes adjustments when management believes that expected chargebacks may differ from the actual chargeback reserve.
Rebates
Rebates are offered to the Company’s key chain drug store, distributor and wholesaler customers to promote customer loyalty and increase product sales. These rebate programs provide customers with credits upon attainment of pre-established volumes or attainment of net sales milestones for a specified period. Other promotional programs are incentive programs offered to the customers. Additionally, as a result of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (“PPACA”) enacted in the U.S. in March 2010, the Company participates in a new cost-sharing program for certain Medicare Part D beneficiaries designed primarily for the sale of brand drugs and certain generic drugs if their FDA approval was granted under a NDA or 505(b) NDA versus an ANDA. Drugs purchased within the Medicare Part D coverage gap (commonly referred to as the “donut hole”) result in additional rebates. The Company estimates the reserve for rebates and other promotional credit programs based on the specific terms in each agreement when revenue is recognized. The reserve for rebates increases (decreases) as sales to certain wholesale and retail customers increase (decrease). However, since these rebate programs are not identical for all customers, the size of the reserve will depend on the mix of sales to customers that are eligible to receive rebates.
Returns
Consistent with industry practice, the Company has a product returns policy that allows customers to return product within a specified time period prior to and subsequent to the product’s expiration date in exchange for a credit to be applied to future purchases. The Company’s policy requires that the customer obtain pre-approval from the Company for any qualifying return. The Company estimates its provision for returns based on historical experience, changes to business practices, credit terms and any extenuating circumstances known to management. While historical experience has allowed for reasonable estimations in the past, future returns may or may not follow historical trends. The Company continually monitors the reserve for returns and makes adjustments when management believes that actual product returns may differ from the established reserve. Generally, the reserve for returns increases as net sales increase.
Other Adjustments
Other adjustments consist primarily of price adjustments, also known as “shelf-stock adjustments” and “price protections,” which are both credits issued to reflect increases or decreases in the invoice or contract prices of the Company’s products. In the case of a price decrease, a credit is given for product remaining in customer’s inventories at the time of the price reduction. Contractual price protection results in a similar credit when the invoice or contract prices of the Company’s products increase, effectively allowing customers to purchase products at previous prices for a specified period of time. Amounts recorded for estimated shelf-stock adjustments and price protections are based upon specified terms with direct customers, estimated changes in market prices and estimates of inventory held by customers. The Company regularly monitors these and other factors and evaluates the reserve as additional information becomes available. Other adjustments also include prompt payment discounts and “failure-to-supply” adjustments. If the Company is unable to fulfill certain customer orders, the customer can purchase products from our competitors at their prices and charge the Company for any difference in our contractually agreed upon prices.
Inventories
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value determined by the first-in, first-out method. Inventories are regularly reviewed and write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory are recorded based primarily on current inventory levels, expiration date and estimated sales forecasts. While estimated sales forecasts are subjective in nature, the projections allow management to reasonably predict the net realizable value of current inventory based on expected demand. A decrease in the estimated sales forecasts would indicate the need to write-down excess and obsolete inventory. Management continuously monitors the market activity and assesses inventory levels.
Income Taxes
The Company uses the liability method to account for income taxes as prescribed by ASC 740, Income Taxes. Deferred taxes are recorded to reflect the tax consequences on future years of events that the Company has already recognized in the financial statement or tax returns. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are adjusted to recognize the effect of changes in tax law or tax rates in the period during which the new law is enacted. Under ASC 740, Income Taxes, a valuation allowance is required when it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized through generating sufficient future taxable income. Failure to achieve forecasted taxable income in applicable tax jurisdictions could affect the ultimate realization of deferred tax assets and could result in an increase in the Company’s effective tax rate on future earnings.
The Company may recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position claimed on a tax return only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. The tax benefits recognized in the financial statements from such a position should be measured based on the largest benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The benefit from uncertain tax positions recorded in the financial statements was immaterial for all periods presented.
The Company’s future effective income tax rate is highly reliant on future projections of taxable income, tax legislation, and potential tax planning strategies. A change in any of these factors could materially affect the effective income tax rate of the Company in future periods.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets, including Intangible Assets
The Company’s long-lived assets primarily consist of property, plant and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets.
Property, plant and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is computed on a straight-line basis over the assets’ estimated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 5 to 39 years. Definite-lived intangible assets are stated at cost less accumulated amortization and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the assets’ estimated useful lives, generally for periods ranging from 5 to 15 years. The Company continually evaluates the reasonableness of the useful lives of these assets.
Property, plant and equipment and definite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances (“triggering events”) indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. The nature and timing of triggering events by their very nature are unpredictable; however, management regularly considers the performance of an asset as compared to its expectations, industry events, industry and economic trends, as well as any other relevant information known to management when determining if a triggering event occurred.
If a triggering event is determined to have occurred, the first step in the impairment test is to compare the asset’s carrying value to the undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If the carrying value exceeds the undiscounted cash flows of the asset, then an impairment exists. An impairment loss is measured as the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value, which in most cases is calculated using a discounted cash flow model. Discounted cash flow models are highly reliant on various assumptions which are considered Level 3 inputs, including estimates of future cash flows (including long-term growth rates), discount rates and the probability of achieving the estimated cash flows. Management regularly reviews estimated future cash flows for reasonableness and considers how recent activity, including a triggering event, may impact those projections. Management also compares various industry benchmarks when determining the discount rate to use in an impairment. A higher (lower) estimate of future cash flows and/or discount rate would result in a larger (smaller) impairment. assessment. The judgments made in determining the estimated fair value can materially impact our results of operations. There can be no assurances as to when, or if, future impairments may occur.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity, with changes to modify and simplify the application of U.S. GAAP for certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The ASU requires adoption using either the retrospective basis or the modified retrospective basis. The Company is currently evaluating the impact of ASU 2020-06, but does not currently expect it to have a material impact on its Consolidated Financial Statements.