Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Learn CW Investment Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements and Risk Factor Summary,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on February 2, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. While we may pursue an initial Business Combination target in any industry or geographic location, we intend to focus our search for a target business operating in the media, entertainment and technology industries. Our Sponsor, Learn CW Investment Corporation, a Cayman Islands limited liability company. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt. We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Our registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on October 13, 2021. On October 13, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 23,000,000 units, including the issuance of 3,000,000 units as a result of the underwriter’s full exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $230,000,000. Each Unit consisted of one Public Share and one-half of one redeemable Warrant. Each whole Public Warrant entitles the holder to purchase one Public Share for $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company consummated the sale of 7,146,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to CWAM LC Sponsor, LLC (the “Sponsor”) generating gross proceeds of $7,146,000.
Following the closing of the IPO on October 13, 2021, $232,300,000 ($10.10 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in a non-interest bearing Trust Account (the “Trust Account”), located in the United States at a nationally recognized financial institution, with U.S. Bank National Association acting as trustee, and invested only in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Pursuant to the trust agreement, the trustee will not be permitted to invest in other securities or assets. The Trust Account is intended as a holding place for funds pending the earliest to occur of either: (i) the completion of the initial Business Combination; (ii) the redemption of any public shares properly tendered in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association (A) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to provide holders of the Class A ordinary shares the right to have their shares redeemed in connection with the initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of the public shares if the Company does not complete the initial Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of this offering or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to the rights of holders of the Class A ordinary shares; or (iii) absent the completing an initial Business Combination within 18 months from the closing of this offering, the return of the funds held in the Trust Account to the public stockholders as part of the redemption of the public shares. If the Company does not invest the proceeds as discussed above, the Company may be deemed to be subject to the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete our initial Business Combination within the Combination Period or during any Extension Period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but no more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public Shareholder’s rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the Company’s board of directors, proceed to commence a voluntary liquidation and thereby a formal dissolution of the Company, subject in each case to its obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021, were those related to our formation, the preparation for our Initial Public Offering and, since the closing of the IPO, the search for a prospective initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We incurred expenses as a result of being a public company (including for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for expenses in connection with searching for a prospective initial Business Combination.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
On October 13, 2021, the Company consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 units, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,00. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated a private placement of 7,146,000 Warrants at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to its Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,146,000. Simultaneously, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option and purchased an additional 3,000,000 Over-Allotment Units, generating an aggregate of gross proceeds of $30,000,000.
Following the consummation of the Initial Public Offering on October 13, 2021, an amount of $232,300,000 ($10.10 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the Initial Public Offering was placed in the Trust Account. Transaction costs amounted to $12,375,591 consisting of $2,446,000 of underwriting fees, $9,780,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $930,686 of other costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $232,303,712 cash held in the Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held the Trust Account. To the extent that our shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the post-Business Combination entity, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $237,363 held outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside of the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, properties, or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representative or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor, or our officers and directors may provide us working capital loans (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings under Working Capital Loans. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
To the extent we need to raise additional funds to operate our business, the Company’s management believes that the Sponsor will provide Working Capital Loans that will provide sufficient liquidity to meet the Company’s working capital needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination and one year from the date of this filing. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily include or be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms or if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through one year from the date of the financial statements contained herein, if a Business Combination is not consummated. The financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS
Founder Shares
On February 2, 2021, the Company issued an aggregate of 7,187,000 shares of Class B ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”) to the Sponsor for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000. On August 20, 2021 and September 9, 2021, the Sponsor effected a surrender of 1,287,000 Class B ordinary shares and 150,000 Class B ordinary shares, respectively, to the Company for no consideration, resulting in a decrease in the total number of Class B ordinary shares outstanding from 7,187,000 to 5,750,000. The Founder Shares included an aggregate of up to 750,000 shares subject to forfeiture by the Sponsor to the extent that the underwriters’ over-allotment is not exercised in full or in part. The underwriter’s over-allotment option was exercised in full on October 13, 2021, and these shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
The Sponsor has agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of its Founder Shares until two years after the completion of a Business Combination.
Promissory Note - Related Party
On February 18, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan the Company an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Proposed Offering pursuant to a promissory note (the “Note”). On March 25, 2021, the Company borrowed $300,000 on the Note to cover expenses related to the Proposed Offering. On September 7, 2021, the Sponsor and the company agreed to amend and restate the Note (the “Amended and Restated Note”) to extend the maturity date. The Amended and Restated Note was non-interest bearing and was paid in full in October 2021.
Related Party Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of notes may be converted upon consummation of a Business Combination into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants will be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations other than obligations disclosed herein.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights Agreement
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Shares, and any shares that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon conversion of the Founder Shares) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed upon the effective date of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities were entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders had certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Softbank and Sponsors Investors Investment
A fund managed by SB Management Limited, a 100% directly owned subsidiary of SoftBank Group Corp., and certain members of our Sponsor, in the aggregate, have purchased $100.0 million of units (or 10,000,000 units) and $7.7 million of units (or 770,000 units), respectively, in the Initial Public Offering. The underwriter is entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.35 per unit for every unit purchased by Softbank, the payment of which has been deferred and will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination. The underwriter has not received any underwritten discount for any unit purchased by the sponsor investors.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $7,780,500 in the aggregate, and a discretionary deferred fee of $2,000,000. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting estimates affecting our financial statements:
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”), and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own ordinary shares, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of the warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations. The fair value of the warrants was estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The more significant estimates made by management in these fair value determinations are around the inputs used in the fair value model, with volatility being the most judgmental of those inputs. A 1% increase in volatility input would increase the Company’s warrant liability by approximately $1,700,000.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
In August 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2023, including interim periods within those fiscal years, with early adoption permitted. The Company is currently evaluating the impact this guidance will have on its financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected to irrevocably opt out of such extended transition period, which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, we will adopt the new or revised standard at the time public companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another emerging growth company that has not opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accountant standards used.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company”, we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.