Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on October 7, 2020, effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses, referred to herein as an “initial business combination.” Our sponsor is LDH Sponsor LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“sponsor”).
The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on March 18, 2021. On March 23, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 23,000,000 units (the “units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the units being offered, the “public shares”), including 3,000,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $230.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $13.3 million, of which approximately $8.1 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the private placement (“private placement”) of 5,266,667 warrants (each, a “private placement warrant” and collectively, the “private placement warrants”), at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant with our sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7.9 million.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the private placement, $230.0 million ($10.00 per unit) of the net proceeds of the IPO and certain of the proceeds of the private placement was placed in a trust account (the “trust account”) in the United States, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and will be invested in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or in any money market funds meeting certain conditions of Rule 2a-7 of the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations until the earlier of: (i) the consummation of an initial business combination or (ii) the distribution of the funds in the trust account to our shareholders, as described below.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, or March 23, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account (less taxes payable and up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish our public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any) and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and in all cases subject to the other requirements of applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless if the Company fails to complete its initial business combination within the Combination Period.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from October 7, 2020 (inception) through September 30, 2021, was in preparation for an IPO, and since our IPO, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of investment income from our investments held in the trust account. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $551,000, which consisted of a non-cash income of approximately $1.7 million for a change in fair value of derivative liabilities, and approximately $17,000 of income from investments held in the Trust Account, partly offset by approximately $884,000 in general and administrative expenses and approximately $259,000 in offering costs - derivative liabilities.
Liquidity and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1.1 million in cash and working capital of approximately $1.8 million.
Our liquidity needs to date have been satisfied through a cash payment of $25,000 from our sponsor in exchange for the issuance of Class B ordinary shares initially issued to our sponsor in a private placement prior to the IPO (and the Class A ordinary shares that will be issued upon the automatic conversion of the Class B ordinary shares upon our initial business combination or earlier at the option of the holders thereof) (the “founder shares”), a loan of $300,000 (which was repaid on March 25, 2021) under a promissory note from our sponsor, an advance of approximately $321,000 from the sponsor (which was repaid in full in December 2021), and the net proceeds from the consummation of the private placement not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our officers, directors and initial shareholders may, but are not obligated to, provide us working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. However, in connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation on March 23, 2023 and subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 23, 2023.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Derivative Liabilities
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued share purchase warrants and forward purchase agreements, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
The warrants issued in connection with the IPO (the “public warrants”) and the private placement warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjusts the instruments to fair value at each reporting period until they are exercised. The fair value of the public warrants issued in connection with the IPO and private placement warrants have initially been measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. The fair value of the public warrants as of December 31, 2021, is based on observable listed prices for such warrants. The fair value of the private placement warrants as of December 31, 2021, is measured based on a Monte Carlo simulation model.
The forward purchase agreement between our Company and the sponsor, providing for the investor to purchase $50,000,000 of units, with each unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-fifth of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share, at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit in a private placement concurrently with the closing of the initial business combination, is recognized as a derivative liability in accordance with ASC 815. Accordingly, we recognize the instrument as a liability at fair value and with changes in fair value recognized in our unaudited condensed statement of operations. The fair value of the forward purchase agreement is determined as the estimated unit value less the net present value of the forward purchase agreement.
The determination of the fair value of the derivative liabilities may be subject to change as more current information becomes available and accordingly the actual results could differ significantly. Derivative liabilities are classified as non-current liabilities as their liquidation is not reasonably expected to require the use of current assets or require the creation of current liabilities.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 23,000,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the Company’s condensed balance sheet.
Under ASC 480-10-S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of the reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date of the security. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units sold in the IPO (including the consummation of the over-allotment) and the private placement warrants to purchase an aggregate of 9,866,667 shares of Class A ordinary shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, because their exercise is contingent upon future events. We have considered the effect of Class B ordinary shares that were excluded from the basic weighted average number of shares outstanding as they were contingent on the exercise of over-allotment option by the underwriters. Since the contingency was satisfied, we included these shares in the weighted average number as of the beginning of the interim period to determine the dilutive impact of these shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s unaudited condensed financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the condensed financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.