ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read in conjunction with Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to those described in Item 1A. Risk Factors and below under the caption “Outlook.” Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements.
Business Overview
We are a provider of practical, high-quality, and value-based educational training on the topics of personal finance, entrepreneurship, real estate investing strategies and techniques. Our programs are offered through a variety of formats and channels, including free workshops, basic trainings, forums, telephone mentoring, one-on-one mentoring, coaching and e-learning. We are continuing to manage the impact of COVID-19, which is discussed below. In November 2020, we held our first live post-COVID events.
During 2021, the Company conducted additional live events following strict safety protocols in other areas as lockdown restrictions eased. We have simplified our product offerings and restructured our compensation program with respect to both employees and independent contractors to reduce costs and improve margins, but there can be no assurances that the Company will be effective in selling its products and services, or what the impact such activities will have on our financial performance. Due to the pandemic, we have shifted focus to eLearning opportunities.
Since January 1, 2020, we have operated under two brands:
● Building Wealth with Legacy TM: provides practical, high-quality and value-based educational training on the topics of personal finance, entrepreneurship, real estate, financial markets and investing strategies and techniques. This training program encompasses hands-on experience and the true spirit of investing from beginner to educated investor. In response to the limitations on travel and the social distancing protocols arising out of the Coronavirus pandemic, the Company began marketing its Legacy EducationTM products transitioning to brand name Building Wealth with LegacyTM.
● Homemade Investor by Tarek El MoussaTM introduces people to the investor mindset, real estate investing strategies, and ways to generate cash flow that are designed to help build a foundation of knowledge for their financial goals. Homemade Investor events offered nationwide free workshops, 3-day trainings and large stage events with Tarek presenting as the keynote speaker, all selling into our advanced training products. In November 2020, we suspended conducting Homemade Investor by Tarek El MoussaTM sales events to focus on developing our proprietary Building Wealth with Legacy TM:
Our students pay for their courses in full up-front or through payment agreements with independent third parties. Under United States of America generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”), we recognize revenue upon the earlier of (i) when our students take their courses or (ii) the term for taking their course expires, both of which could be several quarters after the student purchases a program and pays the fee. We recognize revenue immediately when we sell our (i) proprietary products delivered at time of sale and (ii) third party products sales. Our symposiums and forums combine multiple advanced training courses in one location, allowing us to achieve certain economies of scale that reduce costs and improve margins while also accelerating U.S. GAAP revenue recognition, while at the same time, enhancing our students’ experience, particularly, for example, through the opportunity to network with other students.
We also provide a richer experience for our students through one-on-one mentoring (two to four days in length, on site or remotely and telephone mentoring (10 to 16 weekly one-on-one or one-on-many telephone sessions). Mentoring involves a subject matter expert interacting with the student remotely or in person and guiding the student, for example, through his or her first real estate transaction, providing a real hands-on experience.
We were founded in 1996, and through a reverse merger, became a publicly held company in November 2014. Today we are a global company that has cumulatively served more than two million students from more than 150 countries and territories over the course of our operating history.
Our operations are managed through three operating segments: (i) North America, (ii) United Kingdom, and (iii) Other Foreign Markets. During the year ended 2021, the Company has focused efforts on the United States in the North American segment.
Recent Developments
Impact from COVID-19 Coronavirus.
Historically, our operations have relied heavily on our and our students’ ability to travel and attend live events where large groups of people gather in local markets within each of the segments in which we operate. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic which significantly disrupted businesses around the world. As a result of worldwide restrictions on travel and social distancing, in March 2020 we temporarily ceased conducting live sales and fulfillment and furloughed substantially all of our employees. We resumed sales operations in June 2020 with online sales events selling into our suite of online, on-demand, and over-the-phone products. We also resumed online, on-demand, and over-the-phone fulfillment activities in June 2020. We resumed live operations in November 2020, with events in Florida and continued conducting additional live events in other areas as lockdown restrictions continued to ease. The Company continues following strict safety protocols at the live events. We have simplified our product offerings and restructured our compensation program with respect to both employees and independent contractors to reduce costs and improve margins, but there can be no assurances that the Company will be effective in selling its products and services, or what the impact such activities will have on our financial performance.
The ultimate impact from COVID-19 on the Company’s operations and financial results will depend on, among other things, the ultimate severity and scope of the pandemic, the pace at which governmental and private travel restrictions and public concerns about public gatherings will ease, the rate at which historically large increases in unemployment rates will decrease, if at all, and the speed with which the economy recovers. We are not able to fully quantify the impact that these factors will have on our financial results, but expect developments related to COVID-19 to continue to affect the Company’s financial performance in 2022 and beyond.
Results of Operations
Our financial results continue to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Due to the severity and scope of the pandemic, the pace at which governmental and private travel restrictions and public concerns about public gathering will ease, the rate at which historically large increases of unemployment rates will decrease, and the speed with which the economy recovers are all factors that impacted our financial results. In addition, our financial results were impacted due to the winding down our Rich Dad brand and other matters as disclosed in the litigation section of Note 16 “Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Our Results of Operations in 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Our operating results expressed as a percentage of revenue are set forth in the table below:
Outlook
Cash sales were $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.9 million or 100.0%. The decrease was driven primarily by a $1.9 million decrease in our North American segment due to Covid-19 limitations and the decreased number of live in-person events.
We believe that cash sales remain an important metric when evaluating our operating performance. Pursuant to U.S. GAAP, we recognize revenue upon the earlier of (i) when our students take their courses or (ii) the term for taking their course expires, both of which could be several quarters after the student purchases a program. Our students pay for their courses in full up-front or through payment agreements with independent third parties.
Historically, our operations have relied heavily on our and our students’ ability to travel and attend live events where large groups of people gather in local markets within each of the segments in which we operate. On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared the COVID-19 coronavirus outbreak as a pandemic. As a result of worldwide restrictions on travel and social distancing, in March 2020 we ceased conducting live sales and fulfillment events which had a material adverse impact on results of our operations. We resumed live operations in November 2020, with events in Florida. The Company conducted additional live events in other areas as lockdown restrictions continue to ease. The Company will continue following strict safety protocols at the live events. We have simplified our product offerings, shifted focus to enhanced eLearning, and restructured our compensation program with respect to both employees and independent contractors to reduce costs and improve margins.
Due to the economic severity of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition, and liquidity, live in-person events were temporarily suspended in December 2021 to assess the Company’s strategic plan for fiscal year 2022 and beyond. The impact of the temporary suspension of live events is unknown.
Operating Segments
Historically, our operations are managed through three operating segments: (i) North America, (ii) United Kingdom, and (iii) Other Foreign Markets.
Operating results for the segments are as follows:
North America
Revenue derived from the Rich Dad brands in our North America segment was $2.5 million and $16.9 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue, 50.0% and 71.6%, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively. We continue to fulfill contracts for students under the Rich Dad brand, however, we are no longer actively selling the Rich Dad brand. The majority pertained to real estate-related education, with the balance pertaining to financial markets training. We are continuing to develop methods of connecting to our students, diversify our products, and develop proprietary brands in order to increase the North America segment. Revenue derived from our Homemade Investor brand was $0.4 million and $1.0 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue, 8.0% and 4.2%, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The North America segment revenue was $5.0 million and $23.6 million or as a percentage of total revenue was 65.1% and 91.1% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The decrease in revenue of $18.6 million or 78.8% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, was due to the decrease in fulfillment of $4.0 million and decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $14.6 million.
U.K.
Revenue derived from the Rich Dad brands in our U.K. segment was $1.8 million and $0.7 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue was 66.7% and 87.5% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The majority pertained to real estate-related education, with the balance pertaining to financial markets training. With the discontinued operations of UK Legacy, our U.K. segment is no longer as diverse.
The U.K. segment revenue was $2.7 million and $0.8 million or as a percentage of total revenue was 34.9% and 3.3% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in revenue of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, was due to increased fulfillment of $0.1 million and an increase in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $1.8 million.
Other Foreign Markets
Our other foreign markets segment includes other European, Asian and African countries. Revenue derived from the Rich Dad brands was $0.0 million and $0.7 million or as a percentage of total segment revenue was 0.0% and 46.7% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The Other Foreign Markets segment revenue was $0.0 million and $1.5 million or as a percentage of total revenue was 0.0% and 5.6% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The decrease in revenue of $1.5 million or 100.0% during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, was due to decreased fulfillment of $1.2 million and a decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $0.3 million. The segment is in liquidation and we are no longer actively selling in the market.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue was $7.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $25.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $18.2 million or 70.3%. The decrease was due to decreased fulfillment of $5.2 million or 70.5% and a decrease in recognition of revenue from expired contracts of $13.0 million or 70.2%.
Cash sales were $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $1.9 million or 100.0%. The decrease was driven primarily by a $1.9 million decrease in our North American segment.
Operating Expenses
Total operating costs and expenses were $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $12.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $4.6 million or 36.2%. The decrease was due to a $3.5 million decrease in direct course expenses, a $0.7 million decrease in advertising and sales expenses, and a $0.1 million decrease in general and administrative expenses, including the ERC credit from the Cares Act which reduced payroll expense in the amount of $292 thousand.
Direct course expenses
Direct course expenses relate to our free preview workshops, basic and elite training, and individualized mentoring programs, consisting of instructor fees, facility costs, salaries, commissions and fees associated with our field representatives and related travel expenses. Direct course expenses were $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $3.5 million or 60.3%, which was related to decreases in sales and training compensation, due to the economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumers.
Advertising and sales expenses
We generally obtain most of our potential customers through internet-based advertising. Advertising and sales expenses consist of purchased media to generate registrations to our free preview workshops and costs associated with supporting customer recruitment. We obtain the majority of our customers through free preview workshops. Historically, these preview workshops are offered in various metropolitan areas in North America, United Kingdom, and other international markets. Prior to the actual workshop, we spend a significant amount of money in the form of advertising through various media channels.
Advertising and sales expenses were $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $2.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.7 million or 30.4%. As a percentage of revenue, advertising and sales expenses were 21.2% and 8.8% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase is primarily related to the decrease in COVID-19 restrictions on our ability to operate and resuming live events.
Royalty expenses
We are required to pay royalties under the licensing and related agreements pursuant to which we develop, market, and sell Rich Dad and Homemade Investor branded live seminars, training courses, and related products worldwide. There were no royalty expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively due to transitioning sales to our proprietary Building Wealth with Legacy TM.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of compensation, benefits, insurance, professional fees, facilities expenses and travel expenses for the corporate staff, as well as depreciation and amortization expenses. General and administrative expenses were $4.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $0.4 million, or 8.7%. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was partially a result of a decrease in our personnel expenses due to the fact that we furloughed substantially all of our employees during Q2 2020. In addition, the Company assessed eligibility for the business relief provision under the CARES Act known as the Employee Retention Credit (“ERC”), a refundable payroll tax credit, which reduced payroll expense $292 thousand.
Other income, net
Other income was $0.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to other income of $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease in other income of $1.6 million, mainly representing gain on sale of our property and equipment, and investment property during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Gain on forgiveness of PPP Loan
In March 2021, we were notified that PPBI sold substantially all of its PPP loans, including ELE’s loan, to The Loan Source, Inc. (“TLS”), which, together with its servicing partner, ACAP SME, LLC, took over the forgiveness and ongoing servicing process for ELE’s PPP loan. On August 4, 2021, we received notice from TLS that its First Draw PPP Loan had been partially forgiven in the amount of $899.0 thousand in principal and $11.0 thousand in interest. Thus, during the nine months ended September 30, 2021, we recognized the gain on forgiveness of PPP Loan in the total amount of $910.0 thousand (see Note 6 - “Short-Term and Long-Term Debt” to our Consolidated financial statements for further discussion).
Income tax expense
We recorded income tax expense of $0.7 million and $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, a $2.2 million decrease in income tax expense.
Our effective tax rate was (3409.5)% and 19.7%for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our effective tax rates differed from the U.S. statutory corporate tax rate of 21.0%, primarily because of the mix of pre-tax income or loss earned in certain jurisdictions, and intercompany activities.
We record a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We have retained a full valuation allowances of $3.5 million against the deferred tax assets of our Australian, Canadian, U.K., Hong Kong, and South Africa subsidiaries as of December 31, 2021. We have retained full valuation allowances of $3.6 million against the deferred tax assets of our Australian, Canadian, U.K., Hong Kong, and South Africa subsidiaries as of December 31, 2020. The most significant negative factor that was considered in determining whether a valuation allowance was required is a cumulative recent history of losses in all jurisdictions for the entities mentioned above.
Net income (loss) from continuing operations
Net loss from continuing operations was $0.7 million or ($0.02) per basic and diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net income from continuing operations of $11.7 million or $0.51 per basic and $0.50 per diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease in net income from continuing operations of $12.4 million or $0.53 per basic and $0.52 per diluted common share.
Net income from discontinued operations
Net income from discontinued operations was $0.1 million or $0.0 per basic and diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net income from discontinued operations of $$0.1 million or $4.3 million or $0.18 per basic and diluted common share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures. In addition to the estimates presented below, there are other items within our consolidated financial statements that require estimation but are not deemed critical as defined below. We believe these estimates are reasonable and appropriate. However, if actual experience differs from the assumptions and other considerations used, the resulting changes could have a material effect on the financial statements taken as a whole.
Management believes that the following policies and estimates are critical because they involve significant judgments, assumptions, and estimates. Historically, management has discussed the development and selection of the critical accounting estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors and the Audit Committee has reviewed the disclosures presented below relating to those policies and estimates. We currently do not have an audit committee.
Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying amount of our long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We record an impairment loss when indications of impairment are present and undiscounted cash flows estimated to be generated by those assets are less than assets’ carrying value. We evaluate the remaining life and recoverability of long-lived assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of these assets may not be recoverable. At such time, we estimate the future cash flows expected from the use of the assets and their eventual dispositions and, if lower than the carrying amounts, adjust the carrying amount of the assets to their estimated fair value. Because of our changing business conditions including current and projected level of income, business trends, prospects and market conditions, our estimates of cash flows to be generated from our operations could change materially, resulting in the need to record additional impairment charges.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue when our customers obtain control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services, in accordance with Topic 606.
We adopted Topic 606 using the modified retrospective method applied to those contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Revenue amounts presented in our consolidated financial statements are recognized net of sales tax, value-added taxes, and other taxes.
In the normal course of business, we recognize revenue based on the customers’ attendance of the course, mentoring training, coaching session or delivery of the software, data or course materials on-line. After a customer contract expires, we record breakage revenue less a reserve for cases where we allow a customer to attend after expiration. We had deferred revenue of $4.4 million and $10.4 million related to contractual commitments with customers where the performance obligation will be satisfied over time, which ranges from one to two years as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The revenue associated with these performance obligations is recognized as the obligation is satisfied.
The following table disaggregate our segment revenue by revenue source:
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in conformity with the requirements of ASC 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”). Per ASC 740, the provision for income taxes is calculated using the asset and liability approach of accounting for income taxes. We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities, at enacted income tax rates, based on the temporary differences between the financial reporting basis and the tax basis of our assets and liabilities. We include any effects of changes in income tax rates or tax laws in the provision for income taxes in the period of enactment. When it is more likely than not that a portion or all of a deferred tax asset will not be realized in the future, we provide a corresponding valuation allowance against the deferred tax asset.
ASC 740 also clarifies the accounting for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in a company’s financial statements and prescribes a recognition threshold of more likely than not and a measurement process for financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. In making this assessment, a company must determine whether it is more likely than not that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, based solely on the technical merits of the position and must assume that the tax position will be examined by taxing authorities. ASC 740 also provides guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosures and transition.
Accounting for Litigation and Settlements
We are involved in various legal proceedings. Due to their nature, such legal proceedings involve inherent uncertainties including, but not limited to, court rulings, negotiations between affected parties, and the possibility of governmental intervention. Management assesses the probability of loss for such contingencies and accrues a liability and/or discloses the relevant circumstances as appropriate. While certain of these matters involve substantial amounts, management believes, based on available information, that the ultimate resolution of such legal proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on our financial condition or results of operations.
The critical accounting policies discussed above are not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S., with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Known Trends and Uncertainties
In general, we believe we will experience an increase in demand for our products and services compared to prior periods as we develop our Building Wealth with Legacy TM brand and other revenue streams. We believe that our products and services appeal to those who seek increased financial freedom. If we experience a prolonged decline in demand for our products and services, it could have a material adverse effect on our future operating results.
Historically, we have funded our working capital and capital expenditures using cash and cash equivalents on hand. However, given our decreased operating cash flows during the past two years combined, it has been necessary for us to manage our cash position to ensure the future viability of our business. Our cash flows are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, earnings, favorable terms from our merchant processors, seasonality, and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
We continue to take steps to ensure our expenses are in line with our projected cash sales and liquidity requirements for 2021 and based upon current and anticipated levels of operations, we believe cash and cash equivalents on hand will not be sufficient to fund our expected financial obligations and anticipated liquidity requirements for the fiscal year 2022. However, we are exploring alternative sources of capital, but there can be no assurances any such capital will be obtained. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit, a working capital deficit and a negative cash flow from operating activities. These circumstances raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate profits by expanding current operations as well as reducing our costs and increasing our operating margins, and to sustain adequate working capital to finance our operations. The failure to achieve the necessary levels of profitability and cash flows would be detrimental to us.
The following is a summary of our cash flow activities for the periods stated (in thousands):
Operating Cash Flows and Liquidity
Net cash used in operating activities was $4.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash used in operating activities of $7.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a period-over-period increase of $2.2 million. This increase was primarily the result of a decrease in current liabilities for deferred course expense 2021 compared to 2020.
Investing Cash Flows
Net cash provided by investing activities totaled $0.0 million compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $2.9 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, representing proceeds on sale of property and equipment, and investment property in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Financing Cash Flows
Our consolidated capital structure as of December 31, 2021 was 17% debt and 83% equity. As of December 31, 2020, our consolidated capital structure was 14% debt and 86% equity.
Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $3.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, including our net proceeds from borrowings of the second draw of the Paycheck Protection Program loan of $1.9 million, proceeds from debentures with related parties of $0.7 million and proceeds from issuance of the GLD Debenture of $0.5 million. Net cash provided by financing activities totaled $1.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, including our net proceeds from borrowings of the first draw of the Paycheck Protection Program loan.
We expect that our working capital deficit, which is primarily a result of our significant deferred revenue balance, will continue for the foreseeable future. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, our consolidated current deferred revenue was $4.4 million and $10.4 million, respectively.
Our cash and cash equivalents were, and continue to be, invested in short-term, liquid, money market funds. Restricted cash balances consisted primarily of funds on deposit with credit card processors and cash collateral with our credit card vendors. Restricted cash balances held by credit card processors are unavailable to us unless we discontinue sale of our products or discontinue the usage of a vendor’s credit card. As sales of the products and services related to our domestic business have decreased, our credit card vendors have not returned funds held as collateral, resulting in higher restricted cash balances.