Item 7 Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on December 16, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities (a “Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”), our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from December 16, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the search for a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $8,756,054, which consists of the initial classification of Derivative liability - FPA of $286,000, the change in fair value of warrant liability of $10,275,250, and the interest earned on investments held in Trust Account of $65,727, offset by the change in fair value of Derivative liability - FPA of $332,000, transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $588,646, and general and administrative expenses of $950,277.
For the period from December 16, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,000, which consisted of operating costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 25, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 30,000,000 units (the “Units”) at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000 (see Note 3). Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 5,666,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8,500,000. On April 13, 2021, in connection with the underwriters fully exercising the over-allotment option, an additional 4,500,000 Units were sold at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $45,000,000. On April 13, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ fully exercising the over-allotment option, an additional 600,000 Private Placement Warrants were sold to the Sponsor for gross proceeds of $900,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,370,281. Net income of $8,756,054 was affected by the change in the fair value of warrant liability of $10,275,250, interest earned on investments held in Trust Account of $65,727, change in fair value of derivative liability - FPA of $332,000, transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $588,646, and the initial classification of derivative liability - FPA of $286,000. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $420,004 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from December 16, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $5,000 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $5,000.
As of December 31, 2021, the investments held in the Trust Account consisted of cash of $284 and $345,065,443 in U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $587,328. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into up to an additional 1,000,000 Private Placement Warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of up to $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on March 22, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $12,075,000 in the aggregate ( an additional $1,575,000 was deferred when the underwriters’ over-allotment option was exercised in full on April 13, 2021). The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
In connection with the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, the Company entered into a forward purchase agreement with Lead Edge Capital V, LP, a Delaware limited partnership (“LEC V”), which provides for the purchase of up to $50,000,000 of units, with each unit consisting of one Class A ordinary share and one-fourth of one warrant to purchase one Class A ordinary share at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment, for a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, in a private placement to occur concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination. The obligations under the forward purchase agreement do not depend on whether any Class A ordinary shares are redeemed by the public shareholders. The forward purchase securities will be issued only in connection with the closing of the Business Combination. The proceeds from the sale of forward purchase securities may be used as part of the consideration to the sellers in our initial business combination, expenses in connection with the Business Combination or for working capital in the post-transaction company.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities and FPA
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480 and ASC 815. The Company accounts for the warrants and FPA in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, under which the warrants and FPA do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrants and FPA as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants and FPA to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations. The Private Placement Warrants and the Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available are valued using a binomial lattice model and the FPA liability is valued based on the value of the ordinary shares and warrants as compared to the purchase price adjusted for the probability of a Business Combination.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480. Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets. Changes in redemption value are recognized immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average shares of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20 and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)” (“ASU 2020-06”), to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, including the standard in the next paragraph, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.