Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by reference to, the consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results could differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements particularly in light of the economic, social and market uncertainty created by the COVID-19 pandemic and the evolving events regarding the war in Ukraine. See “Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Centrus Energy Corp., a Delaware corporation (“Centrus” or the “Company”), is a trusted supplier of nuclear fuel and services for the nuclear power industry, which provides a reliable source of carbon free energy. References to “Centrus”, the “Company”, “our”, or “we” include Centrus Energy Corp. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries as well as the predecessor to Centrus, unless the context indicates otherwise.
Centrus operates two business segments: (a) low-enriched uranium (“LEU”), which supplies various components of nuclear fuel to commercial customers from our global network of suppliers, and (b) technical solutions, which provides advanced engineering, design, and manufacturing services to government and private sector customers and is deploying uranium enrichment and other capabilities necessary for production of advanced nuclear fuel to power existing and next-generation reactors around the world.
Our LEU segment provides most of the Company’s revenue and involves the sale of nuclear fuel to customers that are primarily utilities that operate commercial nuclear power plants. The majority of these sales are for the enrichment component of LEU, which is measured in separative work units (“SWU”). Centrus also sells natural uranium (the raw material needed to produce LEU) and occasionally sells LEU with the natural uranium, uranium conversion, and SWU components combined into one sale.
LEU is a critical component in the production of nuclear fuel for reactors that produce electricity. We supply LEU and its components to both domestic and international utilities for use in nuclear reactors worldwide. We provide LEU from multiple sources, including our inventory, medium and long-term supply contracts, and spot purchases. As a long-term supplier of LEU to our customers, our objective is to provide value through the reliability and diversity of our supply sources.
Our global order book includes long-term sales contracts with major utilities through 2029. We have secured cost-competitive supplies of SWU under long-term contracts through the end of this decade to allow us to fill our existing customer orders and make new sales. A market-related price reset provision in our largest supply contract took effect at the beginning of 2019 - when market prices for SWU were near historic lows - which has significantly lowered our cost of sales and contributed to improved margins. Spot price indicators for SWU have risen by approximately 65% to $56 as of December 31, 2021, since bottoming out in August 2018.
In October 2020, the U.S. Department of Commerce reached agreement with the Russian Federation on an extension of the 1992 Russian Suspension Agreement (“RSA”), a trade agreement which allows for Russian-origin nuclear fuel to be exported to the United States in limited quantities. The two parties agreed to extend the agreement through 2040 and to set aside a significant portion of the quota for Centrus’ shipments to the United States through 2028 to execute our long-term supply (purchase) agreement (the “TENEX Supply Contract”) with the Russian government entity, TENEX, Joint-Stock Company (“TENEX”). This outcome allows for sufficient quota for Centrus to continue serving its utility customers.
Our technical solutions segment is deploying uranium enrichment and other capabilities necessary for production of advanced nuclear fuel to meet the evolving needs of the global nuclear industry and the U.S. government, while also leveraging our unique technical expertise, operational experience and specialized facilities to expand and diversify our business beyond uranium enrichment, offering new services to existing and new customers in complementary markets.
Our technical solutions segment is dedicated to the restoration of America’s domestic uranium enrichment capability to play a critical role in meeting U.S. national security and energy security requirements, advancing America’s nonproliferation objectives, repairing broken and vulnerable supply chains, providing good clean energy jobs and supporting the communities in which we operate, and in delivering the next-generation nuclear fuels that will power the future of nuclear energy as it provides reliable carbon-free power around the world.
The United States has not had a domestic uranium enrichment capability suitable to meet U.S. national security requirements since the Paducah Gaseous Diffusion Plant (“Paducah GDP”) shut down in 2013. Longstanding U.S. policy and binding nonproliferation agreements prohibit the use of foreign-origin enrichment technology for U.S. national security missions. Our AC100M centrifuge is currently the only deployment-ready U.S. uranium enrichment technology in the U.S. that can meet these national security requirements.
Centrus is working to pioneer U.S. production of High-Assay, Low-Enriched Uranium (“HALEU”), enabling the deployment of a new generation of HALEU-fueled reactors to meet the world’s growing need for carbon-free power. HALEU is a high-performance nuclear fuel component which is expected to be required by a number of advanced reactor and fuel designs that are now under development for commercial and government uses. While existing reactors typically operate on LEU with the uranium-235 isotope concentration below 5%, HALEU is further enriched so that the uranium-235 concentration is between 5% and 20%. The higher U-235 concentration offers a number of potential advantages, which may include better fuel utilization, improved performance, fewer refueling outages, simpler reactor designs, reduced waste volumes, and greater nonproliferation resistance.
The lack of a domestic HALEU supply is widely viewed as a major obstacle to the successful commercialization of these new reactors. For example, in surveys conducted by the U.S. Nuclear Industry Council in 2021 and 2020, advanced reactor developers indicated that the number one issue that “keeps you up at night” was access to HALEU. As the only company with a license from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (“NRC”) to enrich up to 20% uranium-235 assay HALEU, Centrus is uniquely positioned to fill a critical gap in the supply chain and facilitate the deployment of these promising next-generation reactors.
The DOE has experienced a COVID-19 related supply chain delay in obtaining the HALEU storage cylinders. Since it is not possible to begin HALEU production without the storage cylinders, it would not be possible to complete the operational portion of the demonstration before the June 1, 2022 expiration date of the existing HALEU Contract. As a result, the DOE elected to change the scope of the HALEU Contract and move the operational portion of the demonstration to a new, competitively-awarded contract that would provide for operations beyond the term of the existing contract. On February 7, 2022, DOE issued a pre-solicitation notice for a request for proposal to complete the HALEU demonstration facility and to produce HALEU, noting that the “the Administration supports longer-term demonstration of production capability.” The pre-solicitation notice outlines a two-phase approach. Phase 1 consists of completing installation of the centrifuges - which DOE expects will take up to one year from contract signing - followed by one full year of cascade operations. The second phase consists of three optional, 3-year extensions to produce HALEU, so that the prospective contract could help support a total of one to ten years of cascade operations in addition to completing construction and centrifuge installation.
Centrus believes it is well-positioned to compete for a follow-on contract with DOE to operate the machines in Piketon but there is no assurance that the DOE will award such a contract to the Company. Congress has not yet adopted a Fiscal Year 2022 appropriations bill for the DOE, and there is no assurance that the proposed program, which would go beyond the scope and expiration of our existing contract, will be approved and funded.
The U.S. government has been operating under a series of continuing resolutions in Fiscal Year 2022. The DOE continues to support the HALEU program during the continuing resolution period, and has incrementally increased the government’s cost share ceiling as funds have become available. Currently, DOE has provided additional funding, and increased the government’s cost share ceiling to $126.7 million.
Additional COVID-19 related impacts, delays in DOE furnishing equipment, or changes to the existing scope of the HALEU Contract could result in further material increases to our estimate of the costs required to complete the existing HALEU Contract, as well as delay completion of the contract. The Company does not currently have a contractual obligation to perform work in excess of the funding provided by DOE and, therefore, no additional loss has been accrued as of December 31, 2021. If DOE does not commit to fully fund
the additional costs, and the Company nevertheless commits to a plan to complete the demonstration cascade and produce HALEU, we may incur material additional costs or losses in future periods that could have an adverse impact on our financial condition and liquidity.
We believe our investment in the HALEU technology will position the Company to meet the needs of government and commercial customers in the future as they deploy advanced reactors and next generation fuels. At present, there are a number of advanced reactors under development. For example, of the ten advanced reactor designs selected by the U.S. Department of Energy for its Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program, nine will require HALEU. In addition, the first non-light water reactor to have begun active NRC-license review requires HALEU. The U.S. Department of Defense also plans to construct a prototype HALEU-fueled mobile microreactor in the next three to four years as part of a program called “Project Pele.” The U.S. Air Force also announced plans to deploy a microreactor at Eielson Air Force Base in Alaska. While the use of HALEU is not an express requirement of the Air Force program, the vast majority of microreactor designs are expected to need HALEU.
Advanced nuclear reactors promise to provide an important source of reliable carbon-free power. By investing in HALEU technology now, and as the only American-based company currently pursuing HALEU enrichment capability, we believe the Company is well positioned to capitalize on a potential new market as the demand for HALEU-based fuels increases in the mid to late-2020s with the development of advanced reactors. However, there are no guarantees about whether or when government or commercial demand for HALEU will materialize, and there are a number of technical, regulatory, and economic hurdles that must be overcome for these fuels and reactors to come to the market. Also, foreign government-owned and government-operated competitors could seek to enter the market and offer HALEU at more competitive prices. There is one known foreign government-owned source which currently has the capability to produce HALEU although this source is currently subject to trade restrictions that limit the amount of material from this source which may be imported into the United States. Other foreign government-owned entities which are not currently subject to U.S. trade restrictions, however, may enter the market. One such foreign-government owned entity has expressed an interest in and potential capability for HALEU production but has not committed publicly to enter the market to enrich above 10% uranium-235 enrichment assays. This entity has indicated publicly that it would take six to seven years to be able to produce HALEU.
The Company continues to review opportunities to improve its capital structure and to enhance shareholder value. As a result, pursuant to a sales agreement with its agents, the Company sold at the market price an aggregate of 1,516,467 shares of its Class A Common Stock in 2021, for a total of $44.2 million. After expenses and commissions paid to the agents the Company’s proceeds total $42.4 million. Additionally, the Company recorded direct costs of $0.3 million related to the issuance. The shares of Class A Common Stock were issued pursuant to the Company’s shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-239242), which became effective on August 5, 2020, and a prospectus supplement dated December 31, 2020 to the prospectus, dated August 5, 2020. At present, the Company has $5.8 million remaining available for sale under the prospectus supplement dated December 31, 2020, and may from time to time sell additional shares through the sales agreement at the then market price. The Company currently intends to use the net proceeds from this offering for general working capital purposes, to invest in technology development, or to repay outstanding debt.
In addition and in connection with the entry into an amendment (the “Voting Agreement Amendment”) to its existing Voting and Nomination Agreement with Mr. Morris Bawabeh, Kulayba LLC and M&D Bawabeh Foundation, Inc., the Company and Kulayba LLC also entered into an Exchange Agreement, dated February 2, 2021 (the “Exchange Agreement”), pursuant to which Kulayba LLC agreed to exchange (the “Exchange”) 3,873 shares of the Company’s outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock, par value $1.00 per share, representing a $5,000,198 liquidation preference (including accrued and unpaid dividends), for (i) 231,276 shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock, priced at the closing market price of $21.62 on the date the Exchange Agreement was signed and (ii) a Centrus Energy Corp. Warrant to Purchase Common Stock (the “Warrant”), exercisable for 250,000 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $21.62 per share, which
was the closing market price on the date the Exchange Agreement was signed, subject to certain customary adjustments pursuant to the terms of the Warrant. The Company retired the 3,873 shares of Series B Senior Preferred Stock received by the Company under the Exchange Agreement.
On November 23, 2021, pursuant to a tender offer announced on October 20, 2021, the Company completed the purchase of 36,867 shares of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock at a price per share of $1,145.20, less any applicable withholding taxes, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $42.2 million. On November 23, 2021, the Company issued a Notice of Full Redemption providing for the redemption of any and all shares of the Company’s Series B Senior Preferred Stock outstanding after consummation of the Company’s tender offer to purchase all of its issued and outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock. On December 15, 2021, the Company completed the redemption of all 980 outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock for aggregate cash consideration of $1.1 million. The aggregate purchase price of $43.3 million was offset by direct costs totaling $0.9 million. For additional details, refer to Note 15, Stockholders’ Equity, of the consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Annual Report.
In the years following the 2011 Fukushima accident in Japan, the published market prices for uranium enrichment declined more than 75% through mid-2018. While the monthly price indicators have since increased, the uranium enrichment segment of the nuclear fuel market remains oversupplied and faces uncertainty about future demand for nuclear power generation. Changes in the competitive landscape affect pricing trends, change customer spending patterns, and create uncertainty. To address these changes, we have taken steps to adjust our cost structure; we may seek further adjustments to our cost structure and operations and evaluate opportunities to grow our business organically or through acquisitions and other strategic transactions.
We are also actively considering, and expect to consider from time to time in the future, potential strategic transactions, which could involve, without limitation, acquisitions and/or dispositions of businesses or assets, joint ventures or investments in businesses, products or technologies, or changes to our capital structure. In connection with any such transaction, we may seek additional debt or equity financing, contribute or dispose of assets, assume additional indebtedness, or partner with other parties to consummate a transaction.
Refer to Part I, Item 1, Business, for additional information.
COVID-19 Update
The Company has taken actions to protect its workforce and to maintain critical operations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Travel, operational, and other restrictions imposed by the U.S. and foreign governments may impact our ability to make future sales and may impact the ability of our suppliers, including our suppliers of low enriched uranium, to perform under their contracts. As of the date of this filing, our LEU segment operations have not been materially affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and we are working with our suppliers, fabricators, and customers to monitor the situation closely, including with respect to the impact of emerging variants. However, our technical solutions segment has been impacted by supply chain disruptions and increased costs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Further, the governments of states and counties in which we operate have from time to time issued orders imposing various restrictions, including prohibiting holding gatherings and closing nonessential businesses. Many of these restrictions remain in place and we continue to monitor and adjust as necessary. The Company has issued a policy requiring vaccinations subject to medical, religious and other exemptions as required by law. In some cases, state laws preclude us from fully implementing our vaccination policy. The Company has also continued other measures to protect its workforce such as expanded telework to protect our workforce, to comply with government orders, and to maintain critical operations. We are working closely with DOE and we are continuing to make progress while implementing measures to protect our workforce. Further, the actions taken by our suppliers and government regulatory agencies to protect their workforces may impact our ability to obtain the necessary supplies and governmental reviews and approvals to timely complete the HALEU
project. We are experiencing delays by our suppliers and increased costs from them as a result of the impact of the COVID-19.
For further discussion, refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - Our business, financial and operating performance could be adversely affected by epidemics and other health related issues including but not limited to the coronavirus disease 2019 (“COVID-19”) pandemic.
Market Conditions and Outlook
The global nuclear industry outlook has begun to improve after many years of decline or stagnation. The development of advanced small and large-scale reactors, innovative advanced fuel types, and the commitment of nations to begin deploying or to increase the share of nuclear power in their nations has created optimism in the market. Part of the momentum has resulted from efforts to lower greenhouse gas emissions to combat climate change and improve health and safety.
According to the World Nuclear Association, as of January 2022, there were 57 reactors under construction worldwide, almost a third of which are in China. The United States, with 93 operating reactors, remains the world’s largest market for nuclear fuel. The nuclear industry in the United States, Japan, and Europe faces headwinds as well as opportunities. In the United States, the industry is under pressure from lower cost natural gas resources and the expansion of subsidized renewable energy. Eight U.S. reactors have prematurely shut down in recent years and several others could shut down in the next few years. At the same time, there are active efforts to develop, demonstrate, and deploy next generation reactors in the United States, many of which are expected to require HALEU.
The nuclear fuel industry continues to attempt to recover from the March 2011 earthquake and tsunami which caused irreparable damage to four reactors in Fukushima. As a consequence, approximately 60 reactors in Japan and Germany were taken offline, and other countries curtailed or slowed their construction of new reactors or accelerated the retirement of existing plants. While ten reactors in Japan have restarted and more are expected to restart, supply and demand dynamics for nuclear fuel continue to be impacted.
While the market for uranium enrichment is currently oversupplied, market demand is expected to grow as the nuclear power industry expands around the world. Over the past few years, prices for nuclear fuel, especially conversion and enrichment, have risen significantly. According to the World Nuclear Association, around 10% of the world's electricity is generated by about 437 nuclear reactors, and an additional 57 or so reactors are under construction. Recently, two nations new to nuclear energy generation started their first commercial reactors. New reactor builds have added new demand for nuclear fuel suppliers.
The recent action of Russian military forces in Ukraine has escalated tensions between Russia and the U.S. The U.S. has imposed, and is likely to impose additional, financial and economic sanctions and export controls against certain Russian organizations and/or individuals. The U.S. imposed financial and economic sanctions that, in various ways, constrain transactions with Russian entities and individuals. While the current sanctions and export controls do not affect the Company’s supply agreement with TENEX, additional sanctions and trade restrictions by the U.S., as well as any actions by Russia, could adversely affect our business. The Company is monitoring the situation closely and assessing the potential impact of any new sanctions and how the impact on the Company might be mitigated.
Operating Results
Our revenues, operating results, and cash flows can fluctuate significantly from quarter to quarter and year to year. Our sales order book in the LEU segment consists primarily of long-term, fixed commitment contracts, and we have visibility on a significant portion of our revenue for 2022-2026.
In 2021 and 2020, we benefited from collections of $43.5 million and $32.6 million, respectively. In 2021, we collected $43.5 million related to the settlement of the Company’s claims for reimbursements for certain pension and postretirement benefits costs incurred in connection with a past cost-reimbursable contract performed at the Portsmouth GDP, recognized as revenue within our technical solutions segment. In 2020, we collected $32.6 million from a customer in settlement of a supply contract that was subject to the customer’s bankruptcy proceeding, recognized as revenue within our LEU segment.
Based on our current order book and under current market conditions, we anticipate fiscal year 2022 revenues and gross margins in the LEU segment to be higher than 2021. Please see Forward Looking Statements at the beginning of this Annual Report.
With respect to our technical solutions segment, work under the HALEU Contract currently remains on schedule but we have been experiencing increased delays from vendors and increased costs due to the continuing COVID pandemic. We are working with DOE to minimize the impacts and to obtain funding for these additional costs. Additional funding commitments from DOE and a contract amendment will be required to complete the project. Refer to Overview above for additional details.
Our order book of sales under contract in the LEU segment (“order book”) extends to 2029. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our order book was approximately $986 million and $960 million, respectively. The order book is the estimated aggregate dollar amount of revenue for future SWU and uranium deliveries, and includes approximately $348.2 million of deferred revenue and advances from customers as of December 31, 2021, whereby customers have made advance payments to be applied against future deliveries. We estimate that approximately 3% of our order book is at risk related to customer operations. Due to the nature of the long-term contracts and our order book, we have visibility of a significant portion of our anticipated revenue for 2022 and 2023 in the LEU segment. However, these long-term contracts are subject to significant risks and uncertainties, including existing import laws and restrictions under current contracts such as, the Russian Suspension Agreement, which limits imports of Russian uranium products into the United States and applies to our sales using material procured under the TENEX Supply Contract, as well as the potential for sanctions and other restrictions on trade with Russia or in dealings with Russian person and entities, in response to the evolving situation regarding the war in Ukraine. For further discussion of these risks and uncertainties, refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors - (1) Restrictions on imports or sales of SWU or uranium that we buy from our Russian supplier and our other sources of supply could adversely affect profitability and the viability of our business, and - (2) The dollar amount of the sales order book, as stated at any given time, is not necessarily indicative of future sales revenues and is subject to uncertainty.
Our future operating results are subject to a number of uncertainties that could affect results either positively or negatively. Among the factors that could affect our results are the following:
•Additional purchases or sales of SWU and uranium;
•Conditions in the LEU and energy markets, including pricing, demand, operations, government restrictions on imports, exports or investments, and regulations of our business and activities and those of our customers, suppliers, contractors, and subcontractors;
•Timing of customer orders, related deliveries, and purchases of LEU or components;
•Costs, future funding, and demand for HALEU;
•Financial market conditions and other factors that may affect pension and benefit liabilities and the value of related assets;
•The outcome of legal proceedings and other contingencies;
•Potential use of cash for strategic or financial initiatives;
•Actions taken by customers, including actions that might affect existing contracts;
•Market, international trade, and other conditions impacting Centrus’ customers and the industry;
•Armed conflicts, including the war in Ukraine, government actions and other events that disrupt supply chains, production, transportation, payments and importation of nuclear materials or other critical supplies or services; and,
•The length and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our operations.
Revenue
We have two reportable segments: the LEU segment and the technical solutions segment. Revenue from our LEU segment is derived primarily from:
•sales of the SWU component of LEU;
•sales of both the SWU and natural uranium components of LEU; and
•sales of natural uranium.
Our technical solutions segment reflects our technical, manufacturing, engineering, and operations services offered to public and private sector customers, including engineering and testing activities as well as technical and resource support currently being performed by the Company. This includes the HALEU Contract and a variety of other contracts with public and private sector customers.
SWU and Uranium Sales
Revenue from our LEU segment accounted for approximately 62% of our total revenue in 2021. The majority of our customers are domestic and international utilities that operate nuclear power plants, with international sales constituting over one-third of revenue from our LEU segment in recent years. Our agreements with electric utilities are primarily medium and long-term fixed-commitment contracts under which our customers are obligated to purchase a specified quantity of the SWU component of LEU from us. Contracts where we sell both the SWU and natural uranium component of LEU to utilities or where we sell natural uranium to utilities and other nuclear fuel related companies are generally shorter-term, fixed-commitment contracts.
Revenue is recognized at the time LEU or uranium is delivered under the terms of our contracts. The timing of customer deliveries is affected by, among other things, electricity markets, reactor operations, maintenance and refueling outages, and customer inventories. Based on customers’ individual needs, some customers are building inventories and may choose to take deliveries under annual purchase obligations later in the year or in subsequent years. Customer payments for the SWU component of LEU average $7.4 million per order. As a result, a relatively small shift in the timing of customer orders for LEU may cause significant variability in operating results year over year.
Utility customers, in general, have the option to defer receipt of SWU and natural uranium products purchased from Centrus beyond the contractual sale period, resulting in the deferral of costs and revenue recognition. Refer to Note 2, Revenue and Contracts with Customers, in the consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Annual Report for further details.
Our financial performance over time can be significantly affected by changes in prices for SWU and natural uranium. Since 2011, market prices for SWU and uranium significantly declined until mid-2018, when they began to trend upward. Since our sales order book includes contracts awarded to us in previous years, the average SWU price billed to customers typically lags behind published price indicators by several years. While newer sales reflect the low prices prevalent in recent years, certain older contracts included in our order book have sales prices that are significantly above current market prices.
The following chart summarizes long-term and spot SWU price indicators, and a spot price indicator for natural uranium hexafluoride (“UF6”), as published by TradeTech, LLC in Nuclear Market Review:
SWU and Uranium Market Price Indicators*
* Source: Nuclear Market Review, a TradeTech publication, www.uranium.info
Our contracts with customers are denominated primarily in U.S. dollars and although revenue has not been materially affected by changes in the foreign exchange rate of the U.S. dollar, we may have a competitive price advantage or disadvantage obtaining new contracts in a competitive bidding process depending upon the weakness or strength of the U.S. dollar. On occasion, we will accept payment in euros for spot sales that may be subject to short-term exchange rate risk. Costs of our primary competitors are denominated in other currencies. Our contracts with suppliers are primarily denominated in U.S. dollars. We have a SWU supply agreement, nominally commencing in 2023, with prices payable in a combination of U.S. dollars and euros, but with a contract defined exchange rate.
On occasion, we will accept payment for SWU in the form of natural uranium. Revenue from the sale of SWU under such contracts is recognized at the time LEU is delivered and is based on the fair value of the natural uranium at contract inception, or as the quantity of natural uranium is finalized, if variable.
Cost of sales for SWU and natural uranium is based on the amount of SWU and natural uranium sold and delivered during the period and unit inventory costs. Unit inventory costs are determined using the average cost method. Changes in purchase costs have an effect on inventory costs and cost of sales. Cost of sales includes costs for inventory management at off-site licensed locations. Cost of sales also includes certain costs related to former employees of the Portsmouth GDP and Paducah GDP.
Technical Solutions
Our technical solutions segment reflects our technical, manufacturing, engineering and operations services offered to public and private sector customers, including the American Centrifuge engineering, procurement, construction, manufacturing and operations services being performed under the HALEU Contract. With our government and private sector customers, we seek to leverage our domestic enrichment experience, engineering know-how, and precision manufacturing facility to assist customers with a range of engineering, design, and advanced manufacturing projects, including the production of fuel for next-generation nuclear reactors and the development of related facilities. We continue to invest in advanced technology because of the potential for future growth into new areas of business for the Company, while also preserving our unique workforce at our Technology and Manufacturing Center in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and our production facility near Piketon, Ohio.
Government Contracting
On October 31, 2019, we signed the cost-share HALEU Contract with DOE to deploy a cascade of centrifuges to demonstrate production of HALEU for advanced reactors. The three-year program has been under way since May 31, 2019, when the Company and DOE signed an interim HALEU letter agreement that allowed work to begin while the full contract was being finalized. The Company entered into this cost-share contract with DOE as a critical first step on the road back to the commercial production of enriched uranium, which the Company had terminated in 2013 with the closure of the Paducah GDP. The HALEU Contract, if fully implemented, is expected to result in the Company having constructed the AC100M technology and prepared the systems to enrich uranium to the 20% concentration in the uranium-235 isotope that is required by many of the advanced reactor concepts now under development. Centrus is the only company with an NRC license to enrich HALEU.
In 2019, under the HALEU Contract, DOE agreed to reimburse the Company for 80% of its costs incurred in performing the contract, up to a maximum of $115 million which was increased to $126.7 million. In addition, on March 4, 2022, the DOE informed the Company of their intent to fund an additional $9.0 million above the $126.7 million, as disclosed above. The Company’s cost share is the corresponding 20% and any costs the Company elects to incur above these amounts. Costs under the HALEU Contract include program costs, including internal labor, third-party services and materials and associated indirect costs that are classified as Cost of Sales, and an allocation of corporate costs supporting the program that are classified as Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Services to be provided over the three-year contract include constructing and assembling centrifuge machines and related infrastructure in a cascade formation. When estimates of total costs for such an integrated, construction-type contract exceed estimates of total revenue to be earned, a provision for the remaining loss on the contract is recorded to Cost of Sales in the period the loss is determined. Our corporate costs supporting the program are recognized as expense as incurred over the duration of the contract term. The accrued loss on the contract is being adjusted over the remaining contract term based on actual results, remaining program cost projections, and the Company’s anticipated cost-share. The impact to Cost of Sales for the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, is $7.2 million and $10.6 million, respectively, for previously accrued contract losses attributable to work performed in the periods. As of December 31, 2021, a total of $19.1 million of previously accrued contract losses have been realized and the accrued contract loss balance included in Accounts Payable and Accrued Liabilities is $0.5 million.
Our HALEU Contract expires June 1, 2022, and although we believe demand for HALEU will emerge over the next several years thereafter, there are no guarantees that we will be awarded a contract to operate the demonstration facility plant or about whether or when government or commercial demand for HALEU will materialize, and there are a number of technical, regulatory, and economic hurdles that must be overcome for these fuels and reactors to come to the market.
The U.S. government has been operating under a series of Continuing Resolutions in Fiscal Year 2022. The DOE continues to support the HALEU program during the continuing resolution period, and has incrementally increased the government’s cost share ceiling as funds have become available. Currently, DOE has provided incremental funding, and increased the government’s cost share ceiling to $126.7 million.
While the existing contract ends on June 1, 2022, the DOE has unilaterally changed the scope of the existing contract and plans to compete the operational portion of the demonstration in a new, competitively-awarded contract, with operations to begin in mid-2022. Centrus believes it is well-positioned to compete for a follow-on contract to operate the machines in Piketon but there is no assurance that DOE will award such a contract to the Company. Congress has not yet adopted a Fiscal Year 2022 appropriations bill for the Department, and there is no assurance that the proposed program, which would go beyond the scope and expiration of our existing contract, will be approved and funded.
Additional COVID-19-related impacts, delays in DOE furnishing equipment, or changes to the existing scope of the HALEU Contract could result in further material increases to our estimate of the costs required to complete the demonstration cascade and produce HALEU, as well as delay completion of the HALEU Contract. The Company does not currently have a contractual obligation to perform work in excess of the funding provided by DOE and, therefore, no additional costs have been accrued as of December 31, 2021. If the DOE elects not to provide funding for production and the Company nonetheless commits to a plan to complete the demonstration cascade and produce HALEU, we may incur material additional costs or losses in future periods that could have an adverse impact on our financial condition and liquidity.
Commercial Contracting
In March 2018, we entered into an initial services agreement with X-energy to provide technical and resource support for conceptual design of its TRISO fuel manufacturing process. In November 2018, we entered into a second services agreement with X-energy to proceed with preliminary design of the TRISO facility. Under both agreements, which were funded by two separate cooperative agreement awards by DOE, we provided X-energy with in-kind contributions pursuant to X-energy’s obligations under those agreements. Both of these contracts have been completed. In November 2020, the parties extended the period of performance through August 2021. In August 2021, we entered into a new services agreement with X-energy to provide design services for detailed design of the TRISO fuel manufacturing facility and various support services for establishing their TRISO Research and Development Center. X-energy is funded under the current DOE cooperative agreement titled Advanced Reactor Demonstration Program (ARDP). The task orders under the new agreement may include in-kind contributions that we are not currently, but may provide, at our discretion.
Under the X-energy agreements, Centrus performs services pursuant to separate task orders that provide for time-and-materials based pricing. The cumulative task orders issued through December 31, 2021 under the three agreements provided for payments to us of $26.3 million and in-kind contributions provided by us of $10.4 million.
Prior Site Services Work
We formerly performed sites services work under contracts with DOE and its contractors at the former Portsmouth GDP. In September 2021, the Company and DOE fully settled the Company’s claims for reimbursement of certain pension and postretirement benefit costs incurred in connection with a past cost-
reimbursable contract for work performed at the Portsmouth GDP. Under the terms of the settlement agreement, DOE paid the Company $43.5 million in September 2021, of which $33.8 million was contributed in September 2021 to the pension plan for its subsidiary United States Enrichment Corp. (“Enrichment Corp.”) and $9.7 million was deposited in October 2021 in a trust for payment of postretirement health benefits payable by Enrichment Corp. The payment of $43.5 million is included in revenue of the technical solutions segment for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our significant accounting policies are summarized in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of our consolidated financial statements, which were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. Generally accepted accounting principles in the United States and related accounting pronouncements, implementation guidelines and interpretations with regard to a wide range of matters that are relevant to our business are complex and involve many subjective assumptions, estimates and judgments that are, by their nature, subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. Critical accounting estimates are those that require management to make assumptions about matters that are uncertain at the time the estimate is made and for which different estimates, often based on complex judgments, probabilities and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable, but are inherently uncertain and unpredictable, could have a material impact on our operating results and financial condition. It is also possible that other professionals, applying their own judgment to the same facts and circumstances, could develop and support a range of alternative estimated amounts. We are also subject to risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ from estimated amounts, such as the healthcare environment, legislation and regulation. Additionally, changes in accounting rules or their interpretation could significantly affect our results of operations and financial condition.
The sensitivity analyses used below are not intended to provide a reader with our predictions of the variability of the estimates used. Rather, the sensitivities used are included to allow the reader to understand a general cause and effect of changes in estimates.
We have identified the following to be our critical accounting estimates:
Revenue Recognition - Technical Solutions
Revenue for the technical solutions segment is recognized over the contractual period as services are rendered. The Company recognizes revenue over time as it performs on these contracts because of the continuous transfer of control to the customer. For public sector contracts, this continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by clauses in the contract that allow the customer to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay the Company for costs incurred plus a reasonable profit, and assume control of any work in progress. The Company’s private sector contracts generally contain contractual termination clauses or entitle the Company to payment for work performed to date for goods and services that do not have an alternative use. With control transferring over time, revenue is recognized based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. A contract may contain one or more performance obligations. Two or more promises to transfer goods or services to a customer may be considered a single performance obligation if the goods or services are highly interdependent or highly interrelated such that utility of the promised goods or services to the customer includes integration services provided by the Company.
The Company determines the transaction price for each contract based on the consideration it expects to receive for the products or services being provided under the contract. If transaction prices are not stated in the contract for each performance obligation, contractual prices are allocated to performance obligations based on estimated relative standalone selling prices of the promised services.
The Company generally uses the cost-to-cost input method of progress for performance obligations to deliver products with continual transfer of control to the customer, because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer that occurs as the Company incurs costs. Under the cost-to-cost method, the extent of
progress towards completion is measured based on the proportion of direct costs incurred to date to the total estimated direct costs at completion of the performance obligation. Revenues are recorded proportionally as costs are incurred. For performance obligations to provide services to the customer, revenue is recognized over time based on direct costs incurred or the right to invoice method (in situations where the value transferred matches the Company’s billing rights) as the customer receives and consumes the benefits.
Use of the cost-to-cost method requires the Company to make reasonably dependable estimates of costs at completion associated with the design, manufacture and delivery of products and services in order to calculate revenue. Significant judgment is used to estimate total revenue and costs at completion, particularly in the assumptions related to internal labor hours and third-party services for which a vendor invoice or quote is not yet available. As a significant change in one or more estimates could affect the profitability of the Company’s contracts, the Company reviews and updates its contract-related estimates regularly. Adjustments in estimated profits/losses are recognized under the cumulative catch-up method. Under this method, the impact of the adjustments is recognized in the period the adjustment is recognized. When estimates of total costs at completion for an integrated, construction type contract exceed total estimates of revenue to be earned on a performance obligation related to complex equipment or related services, a provision for the remaining loss on the performance obligation is recognized in the period the loss is determined.
Asset Valuations
The accounting for SWU and uranium inventories includes estimates and judgments. SWU and uranium inventory costs are determined using the average cost method. Inventories of SWU and uranium are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value (“NRV”). NRV is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of business less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. The estimated selling price for SWU and uranium under contract is based on the pricing terms of contracts in our sales order book. For uranium not under contract, the estimated selling price is based primarily on published price indicators at the balance sheet date.
Intangible assets originated from our reorganization and application of fresh start accounting as of September 30, 2014. The intangible assets represented the fair value adjustment to the assets and liabilities for our LEU segment. The identifiable intangible assets relate to our order book and customer relationships. The order book intangible asset is amortized as the order book valued at emergence is reduced, principally as a result of deliveries to customers. The customer relationships intangible asset is amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated average useful life of 15 years, with 7 ¾ years of scheduled amortization remaining. The aggregate net balance of identifiable intangible assets was $54.7 million as of December 31, 2021.
The carrying values of the intangible assets are subject to impairment tests whenever events or changes in business circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the intangible assets may not be fully recoverable. The carrying amount of a long-lived asset is not recoverable if it exceeds the sum of the undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the asset. An impairment loss is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount of a long-lived asset, or asset group exceeds its fair value.
Inherent in our fair value determinations are certain judgments and estimates, including projections of future cash flows, the discount rate reflecting the risk inherent in future cash flows, the interpretation of current economic indicators and market valuations, and strategic plans with regard to operations. A change in these underlying assumptions would cause a change in the results of the tests, which could cause the fair value of the intangible asset to be less than its respective carrying amount.
Pension and Postretirement Health and Life Benefit Costs and Obligations
We provide retirement benefits to certain employees and retirees under defined benefit pension plans and postretirement health and life benefit plans. The valuation of benefit obligations and costs is based on provisions of the plans and actuarial assumptions that involve judgments and estimates.
Assets and obligations related to our retiree benefit plans are remeasured each year as of the balance sheet date resulting in differences between actual and projected results for the year. The Company has elected the accounting option to recognize these actuarial gains and losses in the statement of operations in the fourth quarter. The alternative would be to amortize gains and losses into operating results over time. The Company’s treatment of recognizing actuarial gains and losses immediately is intended to increase transparency into how movements in plan assets and benefit obligations impact financial results. Immediate recognition of such gains and losses in the statement of operations may cause significant fluctuations in our results of operations. In addition, an interim remeasurement and recognition of gains or losses may be required for a plan during the year if lump sum payments exceed certain levels.
Components of retirement benefit expense/income other than service cost are presented in our consolidated statement of operations as Nonoperating Components of Net Periodic Benefit Income. These components consist primarily of the return on plan assets, offset by interest cost as the discounted present value of benefit obligations nears payment. Results also reflect claims experience, changes in mortality and healthcare claim assumptions and changes in market interest rates. Service cost is recognized in Cost of Sales (for the LEU segment) and Selling, General and Administrative expense.
Nonoperating components of net periodic benefit income netted to income of $67.6 million in 2021 and $1.6 million in 2020, including a net actuarial gain of $50.5 million in 2021 and net actuarial loss of $7.2 million in 2020. In 2021, the net actuarial gain reflected an increase in interest rates from approximately 2.5% to 2.8%, favorable investment returns relative to the expected return assumption, and healthcare claims assumption, partially offset by changes in mortality, healthcare costs trend assumptions, and claims experience. In 2020, the net actuarial loss reflected a decline in market interest rates from approximately 3.3% to 2.5%, partially offset by favorable investment returns relative to the expected return assumption, changes in mortality and healthcare claim assumptions.
Changes in actuarial assumptions could impact the measurement of benefit obligations and benefit costs, as follows:
•The expected return on benefit plan assets is approximately 5.50% for 2022. The expected return is based on historical returns and expectations of future returns for the composition of the plans’ equity and debt securities. A one-half percentage point decrease in the expected return on plan assets would increase annual pension costs by $3.2 million in 2022. However, the net impact of any changes in the expected return on benefit plan assets on the final benefit cost recognized for fiscal year 2022 would be $0 since the actual return on assets would effectively be reflected at December 31, 2022, under our mark-to-market accounting methodology.
•The present value of pension obligations is calculated by discounting long-term obligations using a market interest rate. This discount rate is the estimated rate at which the benefit obligations could be effectively settled on the measurement date and is based on yields of high quality fixed income investments whose cash flows match the timing and amount of expected benefit payments of the plan. Discount rates of approximately 2.8% were used as of December 31, 2021. A one-half percentage point reduction in the discount rate would increase the valuation of pension benefit obligations by $35.5 million and postretirement health and life benefit obligations by $6.9 million, and the resulting changes in the valuations would decrease the aggregate service cost and interest cost components of annual pension costs and postretirement health and life benefit costs by $2.6 million and $0.4 million, respectively.
•The healthcare costs trend rates are 6% projected in 2022 reducing to a final trend rate of 5% by 2026. The healthcare costs trend rate represents our estimate of the annual rate of increase in the gross cost of providing benefits. The trend rate is a reflection of health care inflation assumptions, changes in healthcare utilization and delivery patterns, technological advances, and changes in the health status of our plan participants.
Income Taxes
During the ordinary course of business, there are transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. As a result, we recognize tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts that were initially recorded, such differences will impact the income tax provision in the period in which such determination is made.
Accounting standards prescribe a minimum recognition threshold that a tax position is required to meet before the related tax benefit may be recognized in the financial statements. As of December 31, 2021, the liability for unrecognized tax benefits, included in Other Long-Term Liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet in Part IV of this Annual Report was $1.0 million and accrued interest and penalties totaled less than $0.1 million.
Accounting for income taxes involves estimates and judgments relating to the tax bases of assets and liabilities and the future recoverability of deferred tax assets. In assessing the realization of deferred tax assets, we determine whether it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon generating sufficient taxable income in future years when deferred tax assets are recoverable or are expected to reverse. Factors that may affect estimates of future taxable income include, but are not limited to, competition, changes in revenue, costs or profit margins, market share, and developments related to the American Centrifuge technology. In practice, positive and negative evidence is reviewed with objective evidence receiving greater weight. If, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more likely than not that all, or some portion, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, we record a valuation allowance. The more negative evidence that exists, the more positive evidence is necessary and the more difficult it is to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed for all, or some portion, of the deferred tax assets.
All available positive and negative evidence is analyzed quarterly to determine the amount of the valuation allowance. A full valuation allowance against the federal and state net deferred assets was first recorded in the fourth quarter of 2011 because of significant losses and other negative evidence.
In the second quarter of 2020, the valuation allowance on the state net deferred tax assets for the LEU segment was released due to a return to profitability that led to cumulative income for state income tax purposes. A full valuation allowance against the federal and state net deferred tax assets for the rest of the business remained throughout 2020 because negative evidence, including cumulative losses, outweighed positive evidence.
Centrus evaluated both positive and negative evidence that was objectively verifiable to determine the amount of the federal valuation allowance that is required on Centrus’ federal deferred tax assets. As discussed in Operating Results, Centrus has visibility on a significant portion of revenue in the LEU segment through 2026, primarily from its long-term sales contracts. Centrus considered both its achievement of sustained profitability and cumulative income in 2021, as well as the forecasted income to be significant forms of positive evidence. Negative evidence included uncertainty in and the lack of objectively verifiable evidence for profitability in later years when Centrus’ existing sales order book and supply contracts reach expiration in its LEU segment. In Centrus’ technical solutions segment, negative evidence included uncertainty in the future funding of the HALEU enrichment facility and thus, no assumptions for the future funding of the HALEU enrichment facility were included in the forecast model because it was not objectively verifiable. Centrus
determined that the positive evidence outweighed the negative evidence and supported a release of the federal valuation allowance. However, due to lack of objectively verifiable information in later years, it was determined that forecasted future income was not sufficient to realize all the deferred tax assets. Therefore, the Company recorded a $40.7 million partial release of its federal valuation allowance in the fourth quarter of 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the valuation allowance against the remaining federal and state net deferred tax assets was $414.7 million.
Going forward, the Company will continue to evaluate both positive and negative evidence that would support any further changes to the remaining valuation allowances. Such evidence in its technical solutions segment may include signing new contracts which could have a significant impact on pre-tax income, follow-on work related to the HALEU program, or abandonment of the commercial deployment of the centrifuge technology. Refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors for more information. Such evidence in our LEU segment may include renewing SWU sales contracts with existing customers and/or signing new SWU sales or purchase contracts with significantly higher or lower margins than currently forecasted. Additional evidence in the LEU segment may include potential deferrals in the timing of deliveries requested by its customers, which would impact revenue recognition timing. The impact of these and other potential positive and negative events will be weighed and evaluated to determine if the valuation allowance should be increased or decreased in the future.
Results of Operations
A discussion of the results of operations from 2019 can be found in Item 7, Management Discussion and Analysis, of the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020 filed with the SEC on March 22, 2021.
Segment Information
The following table presents elements of the accompanying consolidated statements of operations that are categorized by segment (dollar amounts in millions):
Revenue
Revenue from the LEU segment decreased $4.4 million or (2%) in 2021 compared to 2020. SWU revenue increased $11.8 million or 8% in 2021 compared to 2020. The volume of SWU sales increased 64%. SWU revenue in 2020 includes $32.6 million collected from a customer in settlement of a supply contract that was subject to the customer’s bankruptcy proceeding. Excluding this payment, the average SWU price billed to customers decreased 16%, reflecting the particular contracts under which SWU were sold during the periods. Uranium revenue decreased $16.2 million or (42%) in 2021 compared to 2020. The volume of uranium sales decreased (46%).
Revenue from the technical solutions segment increased $55.5 million or 98% in 2021 compared to 2020. Revenue in 2021 included $43.5 million related to the settlement of the Company’s claims for reimbursements for certain pension and postretirement benefits costs incurred in connection with a past cost-reimbursable contract performed at the Portsmouth GDP. Excluding this payment, revenue from the technical solutions segment increased $12.0 million or 21% in 2021, due to increased work performed under the HALEU and other contracts.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales for the LEU segment increased $20.4 million or 22% in 2021 compared to 2020, reflecting the increase in SWU sales volume, partially offset by the decrease in uranium sales volume. The average cost of sales
per SWU was unchanged from 2020. Cost of sales includes legacy costs related to former employees of the Portsmouth GDP and Paducah GDP of $2.7 million in 2021 and $3.7 million in 2020.
Cost of sales for the technical solutions segment increased $13.8 million or 24% in 2021 compared to 2020, largely reflecting the increase in contract work performed. The impact to cost of sales is $7.2 million in 2021 and $10.6 million in 2020 for previously accrued contract losses attributable to work performed under the HALEU Contract. For details on HALEU Contract accounting, refer to Technical Solutions - Government Contracting above.
Gross Profit
We recognized a gross profit of $114.5 million in 2021, an improvement of $16.9 million compared to the gross profit of $97.6 million in 2020.
The gross profit for the LEU segment was $73.0 million in 2021 compared to $97.8 million in 2020. The decrease for the LEU segment of $24.8 million was primarily due to the payment of $32.6 million in 2020 from a customer in settlement of a supply contract that was subject to the customer’s bankruptcy proceeding and the decrease in the average SWU sales price, partially offset by the increase in SWU and uranium sales volumes.
For the technical solutions segment, we recognized a gross profit of $41.5 million in 2021 compared to a gross loss of $0.2 million in 2020. Excluding the settlement with DOE, gross profit (loss) from the technical solutions segment increased to a loss of $2.0 million in 2021 from a loss of $0.2 million in 2020.
Non-Segment Information
The following table presents elements of the accompanying consolidated statements of operations that are not categorized by segment (dollar amounts in millions):
Advanced Technology Costs
Advanced technology costs consist of American Centrifuge and related expenses that are outside of our customer contracts in the technical solutions segment, including costs for work at the Piketon facility prior to the commencement of the HALEU work in June 2020 and costs to continue to advance our advanced technology. Costs declined $0.7 million (or 25%) in 2021 compared to 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses were $36.0 million in each of 2021 and 2020. These expenses remained flat year over year.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets increased $1.3 million or 19% in 2021 compared to 2020. Amortization expense for the intangible asset related to the September 2014 sales order book is a function of SWU sales volume under that order book, and amortization expense for the intangible asset related to customer relationships is amortized on a straight-line basis.
Special Charges for Workforce Reductions
There were no special charges in 2021. Special charges of $0.6 million in 2020 consisted of estimated employee termination benefits of $0.6 million.
Nonoperating Components of Net Periodic Benefit Income
Nonoperating components of net periodic benefit income was ($67.6) million in 2021, compared to ($1.6) million in 2020. Nonoperating components of net periodic benefit income in 2021 consists primarily of a return on plan assets of ($58.2) million and future impacts of the change in the discount rate of ($31.0) million, offset by interest cost of $21.5 million, as the discounted present value of benefit obligations nears payment. Nonoperating components of net periodic benefit income in 2020 consists primarily of a return on plan assets of ($85.8) million offset by future impacts of the change in the discount rate of $74.0 million, interest cost of $29.1 million, as the discounted present value of benefit obligations nears payment, and other actuarial items, which includes mortality and healthcare claim assumptions which net to ($18.9) million.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $0.1 million in 2021 and 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
The income tax benefit was $39.1 million in 2021 and $1.4 million in 2020. The income tax benefit in 2021 relates to the release of the federal valuation allowance of $40.7 million offset by the effect of state rate changes of $1.2 million and state income tax expense of $0.4 million. The income tax benefit in 2020 relates to the release of the state valuation allowance against state net deferred tax assets for the LEU segment of $2.0 million offset primarily by state income tax expense of $0.6 million. The state income tax expense in 2021 and 2020, primarily relates to an accrual for a current unrecognized tax benefit offset by the reversal of a previously accrued unrecognized tax benefit.
Net Income
Net income was $175.0 million in 2021, compared to $54.4 million in 2020. The favorable variance of $120.6 million was primarily a result of a $66.0 million favorable variance in nonoperating components of net periodic benefit income, $16.9 million favorable variance in gross profit and $37.7 million favorable variance in income tax benefit.
Net Income per Share
The Company measures Net Income per Share both on a U.S. GAAP basis and adjusted to exclude deemed dividends allocable to retired preferred stock shares (“Adjusted Net Income per Share”).
On November 17, 2020, the Company completed the purchase of 62,854 shares of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock at a price per share of $954.59, less any applicable withholding taxes. (Refer below to Liquidity and Capital Resources for additional details.) The purchase price per share represented a 25% discount from the aggregate liquidation preference, including accrued but unpaid dividends, of $1,272.78 per share as of September 30, 2020. Since origination, the carrying value on the Balance Sheet was $43.80 per share based on values assigned in the originating securities exchange. The liquidation amount at origination was $1,000.00 per share.
The aggregate purchase price of approximately $60 million, less accrued but unpaid dividends attributable to the purchased and retired Series B Senior Preferred Stock, is considered for purposes of Net Income per Share to be a deemed dividend to the extent it exceeds the carrying value on the Balance Sheet, or $41.9 million.
On February 2, 2021, the Company completed the exchange of 3,873 shares of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock, par value $1.00 per share (“Preferred Stock”) for (i) 231,276 shares of Class A Common Stock and (ii) a warrant to purchase 250,000 shares of Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $21.62 per share, for an aggregate valuation of approximately $7.5 million. The carrying value of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock on the Balance Sheet was $1.00 per share par value. The aggregate liquidation preference of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock, including accrued but unpaid dividends, was $1,291.04 per share as of December 31, 2020.
On November 23, 2021, the Company completed the purchase of 36,867 shares of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock at a price per share of $1,145.20, less any applicable withholding taxes. The Company also completed the purchase of the remaining 980 shares of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock at a price per share of $1,149.99, less any applicable withholding taxes, on December 15, 2021. For more information refer to Note 15 - Stockholders’ Equity in the consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Annual Report. The aggregate purchase price of both transactions was $43.3 million. The carrying value of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock on the Balance Sheet was $1.00 per share par value.
The aggregate valuation of all 2021 preferred stock transactions of approximately $50.8 million, less accrued but unpaid dividends attributable to the acquired and retired shares of Preferred Stock, is considered for purposes of Net Income per Share to be a deemed dividend in the aggregate amount equal to the amount by which it exceeds the carrying value of the Preferred Stock on the Balance Sheet, or $37.6 million.
The Company measures Net Income and Net Income per Share both on a GAAP basis and on an adjusted basis to exclude deemed dividends allocable to retired preferred stock shares (“Adjusted Net Income” and “Adjusted Net Income per Share”). We believe Adjusted Net Income and Adjusted Net Income per Share, which are non-GAAP financial measures, provide investors with additional understanding of the Company’s financial performance as well as its strategic financial planning analysis and period-to-period comparability. These metrics are useful to investors because they reflect how management evaluates the Company’s ongoing operating performance from period-to-period after removing certain transactions and activities that affect comparability of the metrics and are not reflective of the Company’s core operations.
(a) For details related to average shares outstanding, refer to Note 14, Net Income (Loss) Per Share of the consolidated financial statements.
(b) For purposes of Adjusted Net Income per Share for the three months ended December 31, 2020, average common shares outstanding - diluted is 10,659,000 shares. No dilutive effect is recognized in a period in which a net loss has occurred.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We ended 2021 with a consolidated cash balance of $193.8 million. We anticipate having adequate liquidity to support our business operations for at least the next 12 months from the date of this report. Our view of liquidity is dependent on, among other things, conditions affecting our operations, including market, international trade restrictions, COVID-19 and other conditions, the level of expenditures and government funding for our services contracts, and the timing of customer payments. Liquidity requirements for our existing operations are affected primarily by the timing and amount of customer sales and our inventory purchases.
We believe our sales order book in our LEU segment is a source of stability for our liquidity position. Subject to market conditions, we see the potential for growing uncommitted demand for LEU during the next few years with accelerated open demand in 2025 and beyond.
Cash resources and net sales proceeds from our LEU segment fund technology costs that are outside of our customer contracts in the technical solutions segment and general corporate expenses, including cash interest payments on our debt. We believe our investment in advanced U.S. uranium enrichment technology will position
the Company to meet the needs of our customers as they deploy advanced reactors and next generation fuels. We signed the three-year HALEU Contract with DOE in October 2019. Under the HALEU Contract, the Company is contributing a portion of the program costs. The program has been under way since May 31, 2019, when Centrus and DOE signed a preliminary letter agreement that allowed work to begin while the full contract was being finalized.
In 2019, under the HALEU Contract, DOE agreed to reimburse the Company for 80% of its costs incurred in performing the contract, up to a maximum of $115 million (which was recently increased to $126.7 million). The Company’s cost share is the corresponding 20% and any costs incurred above these amounts. The Company has received aggregate cash payments of $120.3 million through December 31, 2021.
The Company entered into this cost-share contract with DOE as a critical first step on the road back to the commercial production of enriched uranium, which the Company had terminated in 2013 with the closure of the Paducah GDP. HALEU is expected to be required by many of the advanced reactor designs now under development, including nine out of the ten reactor designs that were selected in 2020 for the ARDP. Our HALEU Contract expires in 2022 and although we believe demand for HALEU will emerge over the next several years, there are no guarantees about whether or when government or commercial demand for HALEU will materialize, and there are a number of technical, regulatory and economic hurdles that must be overcome for these fuels and reactors to come to the market. Assuming that we are able to win a contract from DOE to operate the cascade, our goal is to scale up the facility in modular fashion as demand for HALEU grows in the commercial and government sectors, subject to the availability of funding and/or contracts to purchase the output of the plant. At this time, however, there is no assurance that sufficient government or commercial funding or demand for material will be timely secured, that we will be awarded a contract by the DOE to operate or that we will be permitted by DOE to expand the demonstration cascade. For further discussion, refer to Part I, Item 1A, Risk Factors.
We lease facilities and related personal property near Piketon, Ohio from DOE. In September 2021, DOE and Centrus extended the lease term through December 31, 2025. Any facilities or equipment constructed or installed in leased facilities under contract with DOE, including the HALEU Contract, will be owned by DOE. DOE-owned property may be returned to DOE in an “as is” condition at the end of the lease term and DOE would be responsible for its D&D. If we determine the equipment and facilities may benefit Centrus after completion of the HALEU Contract, we can extend the facility lease and ownership of the equipment will be transferred to us, subject to mutual agreement regarding D&D and other issues, including those impacted by DOE’s recent decision to competitively bid the contract for operations of the HALEU cascade.
In the event that funding by the U.S. government for research, development and demonstration of gas centrifuge technology is reduced or discontinued, or we are not awarded a DOE contract to operate the cascade we are now constructing under the HALEU Contract, such actions may have a material adverse impact on our ability to deploy the American Centrifuge technology and on our liquidity.
We have taken steps over the last several years to reduce the size and volatility of our defined benefit pension obligations, including offering the option for pension-eligible employees to receive a lump sum payment upon termination of their employment. In the fourth quarter of 2020, the Company entered into an arrangement with an insurance company and transferred certain future benefit obligations and administrative costs from our primary qualified pension plan. In this transaction, we transferred approximately $30 million of pension plan assets to the insurance company in order to reduce our pension plan obligations by approximately $30 million. This transaction will save administrative costs associated with the PBGC and reduce the volatility of future pension obligations.
Capital expenditures of approximately $1 million are anticipated over the next 12 months.
We are actively considering, and expect to consider from time to time in the future, potential strategic transactions, which at any given time may be in various stages of discussions, diligence, or negotiation. If we pursue
opportunities that require capital, we believe we would seek to satisfy these needs through a combination of working capital, cash generated from operations or additional debt or equity financing.
The change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash from our consolidated statements of cash flows are as follows on a summarized basis (in millions):
Operating Activities
During 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $50.0 million. Net income of $175.0 million in 2021, net of non-cash expenses, was a significant source of cash. Income included the $43.5 million recovery of claims for reimbursement for costs related to past contract services performed. The net increase is also the result of a $16.6 million increase in accounts payable and other liabilities and a $13.2 million increase in deferred revenue and advances from customers. These increases were partially offset by a $57.0 million reduction in pension and postretirement benefit liabilities and a $10.7 million increase in inventories.
During 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $67.1 million. Net income of $54.4 million in 2020, net of non-cash expenses, was a significant source of cash. Income included $32.6 million on recovery of bankruptcy court claims. The net increase is also the result of a decrease in inventories of $25.8 million and a $13.2 million increase in payables under SWU purchase agreements. These increases were partially offset by a $32.7 million reduction in pension and postretirement benefit liabilities.
Investing Activities
Investing activities consisted of capital expenditures of $1.2 million in 2021 and $1.4 million in 2020.
Financing Activities
In 2021, net cash used in financing activities included the redemption of preferred stock for $44.4 million, net of direct costs, pursuant to a tender offer and net proceeds received of $42.1 million from the issuance of common stock pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-3.
In 2020, net cash used in financing activities included the purchase of preferred stock for $61.6 million, including transaction costs, pursuant to a tender offer and net proceeds received of $23.1 million from the issuance of common stock pursuant to a Registration Statement on Form S-3. See Common Stock Issuance and 2021 Tender Offer below.
In both 2021 and 2020, payments of $6.1 million of interest classified as debt are classified as a financing activity. Refer to Note 8, Debt, of the consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Annual Report regarding the accounting for the 8.25% Notes.
Working Capital
The following table summarizes the Company’s working capital (in millions):
We are managing our working capital to seek to improve the long-term value of our LEU and technical solutions businesses and are planning to continue funding the Company’s qualified pension plans in the ordinary course because we believe that is in the best interest of all stakeholders. We expect that any other uses of working capital will be undertaken in light of these strategic priorities and will be based on the Company’s determination as to the relative strength of its operating performance and prospects, financial position, and expected liquidity requirements. In addition, we expect that any such other uses of working capital will be subject to compliance with contractual restrictions to which the Company and its subsidiaries are subject, including the terms and conditions of our debt securities and credit facilities. We continually evaluate alternatives to manage our capital structure, and may opportunistically repurchase, exchange, or redeem Company securities from time to time.
Common Stock Issuance
Pursuant to a sales agreement with its agents, the Company sold at the market price an aggregate of 1,516,467 shares of its Class A Common Stock in 2021, for a total of $44.2 million. After expenses and commissions paid to the agents, the Company’s proceeds total $42.4 million. Additionally, the Company recorded direct costs of $0.3 million related to the issuance. The shares of Class A Common Stock were issued pursuant to the Company’s shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-239242), which became effective on August 5, 2020, and a prospectus supplement dated December 31, 2020, to the prospectus. At present, the Company has $5.8 million remaining available for sale under the prospectus supplement dated December 31, 2020, and may from time to time sell additional shares through the sales agreement. The Company used the net proceeds from this offering for general working capital purposes, to invest in technology development, repay outstanding debt and retire shares of its Series B Senior Preferred Stock.
As previously disclosed in our Current Report on Form 8-K filed February 5, 2021, on February 2, 2021, the Company entered into an amendment (the “Voting Agreement Amendment”) to its existing Voting and Nomination Agreement with Mr. Morris Bawabeh, Kulayba LLC and M&D Bawabeh Foundation, Inc. (collectively, the “MB Group”) and an Exchange Agreement (as described below) whereby the MB Group agreed to support management’s recommendation on certain matters at the Company’s 2021 annual meeting of stockholders (the “Annual Meeting”) and Kulayba LLC agreed to exchange shares of Preferred Stock for shares of Class A Common Stock and a warrant to acquire additional shares of Class A Common Stock. Pursuant to the First Amendment to the Voting and Nomination Agreement, the MB Group agreed to cause all shares of Class A Common Stock owned of record or beneficially owned by the MB Group at the Annual Meeting to be voted in favor of (i) an amendment to extend the length of the term of the Company’s Section 382 Rights Agreement dated as of April 6, 2016, as amended to date, for two years from June 30, 2021, to June 30, 2023, and (ii) an increase of shares of Class A Common Stock reserved for delivery under the Company’s 2014 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended to date, of an additional 700,000 shares of Class A Common Stock.
In connection with the entry into the Voting Agreement Amendment, the Company and Kulayba LLC also entered into the Exchange Agreement, pursuant to which Kulayba LLC agreed to the Exchange, representing a $5,000,198 liquidation preference (including accrued and unpaid dividends), for (i) 231,276 shares of Class A Common Stock priced at the closing market price of $21.62 on the date the Exchange Agreement was signed and (ii) a warrant (the “Warrant”), exercisable for 250,000 shares of Class A Common Stock at an exercise price of $21.62 per share, which was the closing market price on the date the Exchange Agreement was signed, subject to certain customary adjustments pursuant to the terms of the Warrant. The Warrant is exercisable by Kulayba LLC for a period commencing on the closing date of the Exchange and ending, unless sooner terminated as provided in the Warrant, on the first to occur of: (a) the second anniversary of the closing date of the Exchange or (b) the last business day immediately prior to the consummation of a Fundamental Transaction (as defined in the Warrant) which results in the shareholders of the Company immediately prior to such Fundamental Transaction owning less than 50% of the voting equity of the surviving entity immediately after the consummation of the Fundamental Transaction. The Company retired the 3,873 shares of Preferred Stock received by the Company under the Exchange Agreement.
Capital Structure and Financial Resources
Interest on the 8.25% Notes is payable semi-annually in arrears as of February 28 and August 31 based on a 360-day year consisting of twelve 30-day months. The 8.25% Notes are guaranteed on a subordinated and limited basis by, and secured by substantially all assets of, Enrichment Corp. The 8.25% Notes mature on February 28, 2027. Additional terms and conditions of the 8.25% Notes are described in Note 8, Debt, of the consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Annual Report.
2021 Tender Offer
On October 20, 2021, the Company announced the commencement of a tender offer to purchase all of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock, par value $1.00 per share (the “Series B Senior Preferred Stock”), at a price of $1,145.20 per Series B Senior Preferred Stock (inclusive of any rights to accrued but unpaid dividends), to the sellers in cash, less any applicable withholding taxes (the “Offer”). The Offer was made pursuant to the Tender Offer Statement on Schedule TO filed by the Company on October 20, 2021, with the SEC. The aggregate liquidation preference per Series B Senior Preferred Stock (including accrued but unpaid dividends) was $1,347.29 as of September 30, 2021.
On November 23, 2021, the Company announced the results of the tender offer and the related consent solicitation (the “Consent Solicitation”) to amend the certificate of designation of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock (the “Series B Preferred Amendment”). 36,867 shares of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock were properly tendered and not properly withdrawn in the Offer, and corresponding consents have been delivered in the Consent Solicitation. Pursuant to the terms of the Offer and Consent Solicitation, the Company has accepted for purchase all of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock tendered in the Offer, for an aggregate purchase price of $42.2 million. The accepted shares represent 97.4% of the Company’s outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock as of September 30, 2021. Based on the final results, the requisite consent of at least 90% of the outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock required to approve the Series B Preferred Amendment was obtained. On November 23, 2021, the Company issued a Notice of Full Redemption providing for the redemption of any and all shares Series B Senior Preferred Stock outstanding after consummation of the Company’s tender offer to purchase all of its issued and outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock. On December 15, 2021, the Company completed the redemption of all 980 outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock for aggregate cash consideration of $1.1 million. The aggregate purchase price of $43.3 million was offset by direct costs totaling $0.9 million.
The effect of the Series B Preferred Amendment was to: (i) cease any obligation to pay dividends on Series B Senior Preferred Stock (other than the payment of accrued dividends in connection with a redemption or distribution of assets upon liquidation, dissolution or winding up), (ii) permit the Company to redeem Series B Senior Preferred Stock during the 90 days following the date of effectiveness of the Series B Preferred Amendment at a redemption price per share equal to $1,145.20 (plus any additional accrued dividends for the period from and including the date
of effectiveness of the Series B Preferred Amendment to the date of redemption), (iii) remove the prohibition on the declaration and payment of dividends on junior stock of the Company, which includes all shares of the Company’s capital stock defined as “Common Stock” in the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, or the redemption, purchase or acquisition of such junior stock, and (iv) remove the restriction on redemption, purchase or acquisition of capital stock of the Company ranking on parity with the Series B Senior Preferred Stock.
On December 16, 2021, the Company filed a Certificate of Elimination of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock of Centrus Energy Corp. with the Secretary of State of Delaware (the “Certificate of Elimination”) to eliminate the designation of the Series B Senior Preferred Stock and to return all shares of preferred stock of the Company previously designated as Series B Senior Preferred Stock to authorized but unissued and undesignated shares of preferred stock of the Company.
2020 Tender Offer
On November 17, 2020, pursuant to a tender offer announced on October 19, 2020, the Company completed the purchase of 62,854 shares of its outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock at a price per share of $954.59, less any applicable withholding taxes, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $60 million. The purchase price per share represented a 25% discount from the aggregate liquidation preference, including accrued but unpaid dividends, of $1,272.78 per share as of September 30, 2020. These shares represented approximately 60% of the Company's outstanding Series B Senior Preferred Stock as of September 30, 2020. The remaining Series B Senior Preferred Stock outstanding after the transaction was 41,720 shares.
Commitments under Long-Term SWU Purchase Agreements
The Company purchases SWU contained in LEU from Russia, supplied to us under a long-term agreement, as amended, signed in 2011 with TENEX. Under a 2018 agreement, the Company will purchase SWU contained in LEU from the French government owned company, Orano. Refer to Note 16, Commitments and Contingencies, of the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
DOE Technology License
We have a non-exclusive license in DOE inventions that pertain to enriching uranium using gas centrifuge technology. The license agreement with DOE provides for annual royalty payments based on a varying percentage (1% to 2%) of our annual revenues from sales of the SWU component of LEU produced by us using DOE centrifuge technology. There is a minimum annual royalty payment of $100,000 and the maximum cumulative royalty over the life of the license is $100 million. There is currently no commercial enrichment facility producing LEU using DOE centrifuge technology. We are continuing to advance our U.S. centrifuge technology that has evolved from DOE inventions at specialized facilities in Oak Ridge, Tennessee, and near Piketon, Ohio, with a plan to deploy a commercial enrichment facility over the long-term.
New Accounting Standards
Reference is made to New Accounting Standards in Note 1, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the consolidated financial statements in Part IV of this Annual Report for information on new accounting standards.