Item 7. MERIDA'S MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Unless the context otherwise requires, references within this section, Item 7. Merida's Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations, to “the Company,” “we,” “us” and “our” refer to Merida Merger Corp I. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We were a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on June 20, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses.
On February 4, 2022, we completed our Business Combination with Leafly Holdings, Inc.
Results of Operations
Our only activities through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the IPO, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and preparing to consummate the merger with Leafly Holdings, Inc. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $5,702,352, which consisted of operating costs of $2,699,363 and a change in fair value of warrant liability of $3,032,292, offset in part by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $29,303.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,874,080, which consisted of operating costs of $661,218, provision for income taxes of $27,112, and change in fair value of warrant liability of $1,975,156, offset in part by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $787,350 and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,056.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On November 7, 2019, we consummated the IPO of 12,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $120,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of 3,750,000 Private Warrants to Merida Holdings, LLC and EarlyBirdCapital at a price of $1.00 per warrant, generating gross proceeds of $3,750,000.
On November 13, 2019, as a result of the underwriters’ election to partially exercise their over-allotment option, the Company consummated the sale of an additional 1,001,552 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, and the sale of an additional 200,311 Private Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Warrant, generating total gross proceeds of $10,215,831.
Following the IPO, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option and the sale of the Private Warrants, a total of $130,015,520 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $3,412,939 in transaction costs, including $2,600,311 of underwriting fees and $812,628 of other costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,333,782. Net loss of $5,702,352 was affected by the change in fair value of the warrant liability of $3,032,292, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $29,303 and change in deferred tax of $432. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $1,366,013 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $610,924. Net loss of $1,874,080 was affected by change in fair value of warrant liability of $1,975,156, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $787,350, an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in our Trust Account of $2,056 and a deferred tax provision of $384. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $77,022 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $90,849,312 (including approximately $156,702 earned through interest income). Funds obtained through interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes, and up to $250,000 per 12-month period can be withdrawn for working capital needs. During years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we withdrew $538,128 and $419,894, respectively, of the interest earned on the Trust Account to pay for our franchise and income taxes and for working capital needs.
Until the consummation of the Business Combination, we used the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
We completed our Business Combination on February 4, 2022, which was the Business Combination with Leafly Holdings Inc, and have raised sufficient capital for our operations. We raised sufficient proceeds in the Business Combination transaction, including funds from the Trust Account net of redemptions and $30 million of convertible notes issued upon closing of the Business Combination, to fund operations and transaction expenses.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, lease obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $5,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company, which was terminated on October 1, 2021.
We engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with a Business Combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential Business Combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with a Business Combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the Business Combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the Business Combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of a Business Combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the IPO, or $4,550,543 (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 30% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other FINRA members that assist us in identifying and consummating a Business Combination. This amount was paid upon completion of the Business Combination in February 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrant Liability
We account for the Private Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging,” under which the Private Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities at fair value. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations. The Private Placement Warrants are valued using a binomial lattice model.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our consolidated balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of common stock is excluded from net loss per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06 - “Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40)” (“ASU 2020-06”), to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for
convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
In connection with the preparation and audit of our consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2020, a material weakness was identified in our internal controls over financial reporting. A material weakness is a deficiency, or combination of deficiencies, in internal controls over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim consolidated financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
The weakness identified was a material weakness in internal controls related to the accounting for complex financial instruments. Leafly believes that this material weakness in internal control over financial reporting was remediated following the Business Combination as the disclosure controls and procedures and internal controls over financial reporting of privately held Leafly (as the deemed accounting acquirer) became the disclosure controls and procedures and internal control over financial reporting of the combined company, and the financial reporting and accounting personnel of privately held Leafly assumed such roles and responsibilities of the combined company.
We cannot assure you that the measures we have taken to date and may take in the future will be sufficient to prevent or avoid potential future material weaknesses. The effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting is subject to various inherent limitations, including cost limitations, judgments used in decision making, assumptions about the likelihood of future events, the possibility of human error, and the risk of fraud. If we are unable to prevent or avoid future material weaknesses, our ability to record, process, and report financial information accurately, and to prepare financial statements within the time periods specified by the forms of the SEC, could be adversely affected which, in turn, may adversely affect our reputation and business and the market price of our Common Stock. In addition, any such failures could result in litigation or regulatory actions by the SEC or other regulatory authorities, loss of investor confidence, delisting of our securities, and harm to our reputation and financial condition, or diversion of financial and management resources from the operation of our business.
In addition, it is possible that control deficiencies could be identified by our management or by our independent registered public accounting firm in the future or may occur without being identified. Such a failure could result in regulatory scrutiny and cause investors to lose confidence in our reported financial results, lead to a default under our current or future indebtedness and otherwise have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, cash flows, or results of operations.