Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes that appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, the risk and uncertainties described under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by any forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
LifeStance Health Group, Inc. was formed as a Delaware corporation on January 28, 2021 for the purpose of completing an IPO and related transactions in order to carry on the business of LifeStance TopCo, L.P. (“LifeStance TopCo”) and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliated practices. LifeStance Health Group, Inc. wholly-owns the equity interest of LifeStance TopCo and operates and controls all of the business and affairs and consolidates the financial results of LifeStance TopCo and its wholly owned subsidiaries and affiliated practices. Unless the context otherwise indicates or requires, the terms "LifeStance Health Group", "LifeStance Health", "LifeStance", “we”, and “our” as used herein refer to LifeStance Health Group and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliated practices.
Our Business
We are reimagining mental health through a disruptive, tech-enabled care delivery model built to expand access, address affordability, improve outcomes and lower overall health care costs. We are one of the nation’s largest outpatient mental health platforms based on the number of clinicians we employ through our subsidiaries and our affiliated practices and our geographic scale, employing 4,790 licensed mental health clinicians across 32 states as of December 31, 2021. In 2021, our clinicians treated over 570,000 unique patients through approximately 4.6 million visits. Our patient-focused platform combines a personalized, digitally-powered patient experience with differentiated clinical capabilities and in-network insurance relationships to fundamentally transform patient access and treatment. By revolutionizing the way mental health care is delivered, we believe we have an opportunity to improve the lives and health of millions of individuals.
Our model is built to empower each of the healthcare ecosystem’s key stakeholders-patients, clinicians, payors and primary care and specialist physicians-by aligning around our shared goal of delivering better outcomes for patients and providing high-quality mental health care.
•Patients - We are the front-door to comprehensive outpatient mental health care. Our clinicians offer patients comprehensive services to treat mental health conditions across the clinical spectrum. Our in-network payor relationships improve patient access by allowing patients to access care without significant out-of-pocket cost or delays in receiving treatment. Our personalized, data-driven comprehensive care meets patients where they are, through convenient virtual and in-person settings. We support our patients throughout their care continuum with purpose-built technological capabilities, including online assessments, digital provider communication, and seamless internal referral and follow-up capabilities.
•Clinicians - We empower clinicians to focus on patient care and relationships by providing what we believe is a superior workplace environment, as well as clinical and technology capabilities to deliver high-quality care. We offer a unique employment model for clinicians in a collaborative clinical environment, employing our clinicians through our subsidiaries and affiliated practices. Our integrated platform and national infrastructure reduce administrative burdens for clinicians while increasing engagement and satisfaction.
•Payors - We partner with payors to deliver access to high-quality outpatient mental health care to their members at scale. Long-term analyses demonstrate that $1 spent on collaborative mental health care saves $6.50 in total medical costs, representing a compelling opportunity for us to drive improved health outcomes and significant cost savings. Through our validated patient outcomes and extensive scale, we offer payors a pathway to achieving these savings in the broader healthcare system.
•Primary care and specialist physicians - We collaborate with primary care and specialist physicians to enhance patient care. Primary care is an important setting for the treatment of mental health conditions-primary care physicians are often the sole contact for over 50% of patients with a mental illness. We partner with primary care physicians and specialist physician groups across the country to provide a mental healthcare network for referrals and, in certain instances, through co-location to improve the diagnosis and treatment of their patients. Our measurable patient outcomes also provide primary care and specialist physicians with a valuable, validated treatment path to improve the overall health of our mutual patients.
We have a demonstrated track record of growth. From our inception in March 2017 through December 31, 2021, we have successfully opened 226 de novo centers and completed 77 acquisitions. We increased our total number of centers from 170 as of December 31, 2019, to 370 as of December 31, 2020 and to 534 as of December 31, 2021.
TPG Acquisition and Comparability of Results
On May 14, 2020, TPG acquired a majority of the equity interests of LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc in a series of transactions that we refer to in this Annual Report as the “TPG Acquisition.” Immediately prior to the TPG Acquisition, LifeStance Health, LLC completed a reorganization pursuant to which the equity holders of LifeStance Health, LLC, including affiliates of Summit and affiliates of Silversmith received a distribution of 100% of the equity interests of LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc., a direct subsidiary of LifeStance Health, LLC, in complete redemption of their Class A common units, Class C common units, Preferred A units, and Preferred A-1 units of LifeStance Health, LLC. Pursuant to the TPG Acquisition, (i) the historic equity holders of LifeStance Health, LLC contributed a portion of their shares of LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc. to LifeStance TopCo in exchange for Class A-1 and A-2 common units of LifeStance TopCo and (ii) an indirect subsidiary of LifeStance TopCo merged with and into LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc., with shareholders of LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc. receiving cash consideration in connection with cancellation of the remainder of their shares, for aggregate equity and cash consideration of approximately $1.05 billion. In connection with the TPG Acquisition, on May 14, 2020, LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc. entered into a new credit agreement, under which LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc. borrowed $210.0 million in term loans and $50.0 million in delayed draw loans, payable in quarterly principal and interest payments, with a maturity date of May 14, 2026. At the same time, LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc. also obtained access to a revolving credit facility with a total borrowing commitment of $20.0 million in interest-only payments until the maturity date of May 14, 2025. See Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
For the year ended December 31, 2019 and for the period from January 1, 2020 to May 14, 2020, we present the financial statements of LifeStance Health, LLC and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliated practices. Affiliates of TPG formed LifeStance TopCo on April 13, 2020 for the purpose of facilitating the TPG Acquisition. For the period from April 13, 2020 (the date of formation of LifeStance TopCo) to December 31, 2020 and for the period from January 1, 2021 to June 14, 2021 (the effective date of our IPO, we present the financial statements of LifeStance TopCo and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliated practices and for the period from June 14, 2021 through December 31, 2021, we present the financial statements of LifeStance Health Group, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries and affiliated practices. For the period from April 13, 2020 through May 13, 2020, the operations of LifeStance TopCo were limited to those incident to its formation and the TPG Acquisition, which were not significant. Because it resulted in a change of control, the TPG Acquisition was accounted for as a business combination using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, that our assets and liabilities be recognized on the consolidated balance sheets at their fair value as of the acquisition date. LifeStance Health, LLC was determined to be LifeStance TopCo’s predecessor. As a result of the TPG Acquisition, the key financial metrics and historical consolidated financial data below are presented on a Successor and Predecessor basis, resulting in the 2020 historical results being presented separately for the period from January 1, 2020 through May 14, 2020 (the “Predecessor 2020 Period”) and for the period from April 13, 2020 through December 31, 2020 (the “Successor 2020 Period”). Due to the change in the basis of accounting resulting from the TPG Acquisition, the consolidated financial statements for the Predecessor and Successor periods are not necessarily comparable.
Initial Public Offering
On June 14, 2021, we completed our IPO in which we issued and sold 32,800,000 shares of common stock and the Selling Stockholders sold 7,200,000 shares of common stock, at an offering price of $18.00 per share. The Selling Stockholders granted the underwriters an option to purchase an additional 6,000,000 shares of common stock. The underwriters exercised in full their option to purchase additional shares, and the sale of the option shares was completed on June 25, 2021. We received net proceeds of $548.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $32.5 million and deferred offering costs of $9.0 million. We did not receive any proceeds from the sale of shares by the Selling Stockholders, including the option shares.
Prior to the IPO, each of the holders of partnership interests in LifeStance TopCo contributed its partnership interests to us in exchange for shares of our common stock (including shares of common stock issued as restricted stock subject to vesting) (the “Organizational Transactions”). Following the contribution of partnership interests, LifeStance TopCo became wholly owned by us. The number of shares of common stock that each such holder of partnership interests in LifeStance TopCo received was determined based on the value that such holder would have received under the distribution provisions of the limited partnership agreement of LifeStance TopCo, with shares of common stock valued by reference to the IPO price. All 1,046,195,481 of LifeStance TopCo’s outstanding redeemable and common Class A units and 152,619,565 Class B units (the “Class B Units”, “Profits Interests Units” or “Profits Interests”) were contributed in exchange for 310,082,697 shares of our common stock plus 30,765,951 shares of common stock issued as restricted stock subject to vesting. As a result of this
contribution and exchange, we reclassified $71.6 million of redeemable units and $1.0 billion of common units to additional paid in capital and $3.4 million to common stock on our consolidated balance sheets.
In connection with the voluntary prepayment of $294.0 million related to borrowings outstanding as of June 15, 2021, we recognized the extinguishment of debt charge within interest expense of $14.4 million during the second quarter of 2021 related to the prepayment charge and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs.
See further discussion related to the IPO as described in Note 1, Nature of the Business to LifeStance Health Group, Inc.'s audited consolidated financial statements.
COVID-19 Impact
With the COVID-19 pandemic placing an unprecedented strain on daily life, existing trends in mental health care have worsened dramatically since the beginning of the pandemic-41% of adults reported at least one adverse mental health condition, including symptoms of mental illness or substance abuse related to the pandemic. Quarantining and lockdown measures have resulted in furloughs and layoffs, dramatically increasing stressors and leading to poorer overall mental and physical health.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we took the following actions in 2020 and 2021 to ensure the safety of our employees and their families and to address the physical, mental and social health of our patients:
•Implemented safety protocols including all Center of Disease Control directives in addition to state and local directives. This included distributing COVID-19 guidelines to all clinicians and employees as well as regular global communication from our Chief Medical Officer.
•Provided support to clinicians and administrative employees in the event they were unable to work due to a quarantine.
•Trained all of our clinicians to meet patients virtually.
•Upgraded acquired center websites to allow patients to readily access digital services.
•Proactively communicated with patients about the availability of clinicians and treatment and appointment reminders.
While the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has increased stressors associated with mental health, we believe that a combination of factors contribute to our total patient visits and related revenue, including, among others, long-term trends in reduced stigmatization of mental health. Even before the pandemic, we saw the need to have a platform supported by leading technology to give us the ability to treat patients virtually or in-person. Our prior investment in our technology platform, most notably in our digital capabilities, became an essential component for continuing to deliver care to our patients during the pandemic. We observed an impact on appointments in mid-March 2020 as patients moved to shelter-at-home and increased cancellations. By the end of March 2020, appointments and visits had returned to normal levels. We observed an uptick in cancellations in late December and have seen that continue into the first quarter of 2022, primarily due to clinician and patient illness. Our clinician recruitment opportunities have also increased as a result of the pandemic, driven by an increase in clinician supply from those seeking more stable employment models. While we continue to take advantage of clinician recruitment opportunities, recent changes in the labor market dynamics driven by pandemic-related burnout have also impacted retention. With independent clinicians facing higher technology costs, shifting consumer behavior and challenges from the uncertain economic environment, our pipeline of acquisition targets grew and assisted in our 2020 footprint expansion.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, our payor contracts or payor policies typically provided for rate parity for our care services regardless of whether visits are conducted in-person or virtually. As a result, even if temporary rate parity provisions that were enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic are not permanently extended, we do not expect such actions to have a meaningful impact on our business.
We believe COVID-19 represents a paradigm shift in the importance of and focus on mental health care. We have seen significant increase in patient demand as well as payor and employer adoption of mental health coverage options during the pandemic and it is now integrated into health care offerings more than ever before. We feel the spotlight the pandemic has put on the need for mental health care will have a positive impact on our industry and business for years to come.
Key Factors Affecting Our Results
Expanding Center Capacity and Visits Within Existing Centers
We have built a powerful organic growth engine which enables us to drive growth within our existing footprint.
Our Clinicians
As of December 31, 2021, we employed 4,790 psychiatrists, APNs, psychologists and therapists through our subsidiaries and affiliated practices. We generate revenue on a per visit basis as clinical services are rendered by our clinicians. As our existing centers mature, we grow capacity through investments in office expansion to increase our average clinicians per center and enhance overall utilization. Recruiting new clinicians and retaining existing clinicians in our existing centers enables us to see more patients per center by expanding our patient visit capacity. We believe our dedicated employment model offers a superior value proposition compared to independent practice. Our network relationships provide clinicians with ready access to patients. We also enable clinicians to manage their own patient volumes. Our platform promotes a clinically-driven professional culture and streamlines patient access and care delivery, while optimizing practice administration processes through technology. We believe we are an employer of choice in mental health, allowing us to employ highly qualified clinicians.
We believe we have significant opportunity to grow our employed clinician base-we estimate that there are approximately 650,000 mental health clinicians in the United States, providing us with a meaningful runway to grow from our current base of 4,790 clinicians employed through our subsidiaries and affiliated practices, as of December 31, 2021. To capitalize on this opportunity, we have developed a rigorous and exclusive in-house national clinician recruiting model that works closely with our regional clinical teams to select the best candidates and fulfill capacity in a timely manner. As we grow our clinician base, we can grow our business, expand access to our patients and our payors and invest in our platform to further reinforce our differentiated offering to clinicians. We have available physical capacity to add clinicians to our existing centers, as well as an opportunity to add new clinicians with the roll-out of de novo centers and acquire additional clinicians through our acquisition strategy. Our virtual care offering also allows clinicians to see more patients without investments in incremental physical space, expanding our patient visit capacity beyond in-person only levels.
Our Patients
We believe our ability to attract and retain patients to drive growth in our visits and meet the availability of our clinician base will enable us to grow our revenue. We believe we have a significant opportunity to increase the number of patients we serve in our existing markets. In 2021, our clinicians treated more than 570,000 unique patients through approximately 4.6 million visits. We believe our ability to deliver more accessible, flexible, affordable and effective mental health care is a key driver of our patient growth. We believe we provide a superior and differentiated mental health care experience that integrates virtual and in-person care to deliver care in a convenient way for our patients, meeting our patients where they are. Our in-network payor relationships allow our patients to access care without significant out-of-pocket cost or delays in receiving treatment. We treat mental health conditions across the clinical spectrum through a clinical approach that delivers improved patient outcomes. We support our patients throughout their care continuum with purpose-built technological capabilities, including online assessments, digital provider communication, and seamless internal referral and follow-up capabilities.
We utilize multiple strategies to add new patients to our platform, including our primary care and specialist physician relationships, internal referrals from our clinicians, our payor relationships and our dedicated marketing efforts. We have established a large network of over 250 national, regional and local payors that enables their members to be referred to us as patients. Payors refer patients to our platform to drive improvement in health outcomes for their members, reduction in total medical costs and increased member satisfaction and retention. Within our markets, we partner with primary care practice groups, specialists, health systems and academic institutions to refer patients to our centers and clinicians. Our local marketing teams build and maintain relationships with our referring partner networks to create awareness of our platform and services, including the opening of new centers and the introduction of newly hired clinicians with appointment availability. We also use online marketing to develop our national brand to increase brand awareness and promote additional channels of patient recruitment.
Our Primary Care and Specialist Physician Referral Relationships
We have built a powerful patient referral network through partnerships with primary care physicians and specialist physician groups across the country. We deliver value to our provider partners by offering a more efficient referral base, delivering improved outcomes for our mutual patients, and enabling more integrated care and lower total health care costs. As we continue to scale nationally, we plan to partner with additional hospital systems, large primary care groups and other specialist groups to help streamline their mental health network needs and drive continued patient growth across our platform. Our vision over time is to further integrate our mental health care services with those of our medical provider partners. By co-locating and driving towards integration with primary care providers, we can enhance our clinician’s access to patients. We anticipate that we will continue to grow these relationships while evolving our offering toward a fully-integrated care model in which primary care and our mental health clinicians work together to develop and provide personalized treatment plans for shared patients. We believe these efforts will help to further align our model with that of other health care providers increasing our value to them and driving new opportunities to partner to grow our patient base.
Our Payors
We have over 250 payor relationships, including national contracts with multiple payors that allow access to our services through in-network coverage for their members. We believe the alignment of our model with our payor partners’ population health objectives encourages third-party payors to partner with us. We believe we deliver value to our payor partners in several ways, including access to a national clinician employee base, lower total medical costs, measurable outcomes, and stronger member and client value proposition through the offering of in-network mental health services. As a result, we have consistently expanded our payor relationships from 111 as of December 31, 2019, to 206 as of December 31, 2020 and to over 250 as of December 31, 2021. A majority of our revenue is derived from commercial in-network insurance coverage - for the year ended December 31, 2021, our payor mix by revenue was 90% commercial in-network payors, 5% government payors, 4% self-pay and 1% non-patient services revenue. The strength of our payor relationships and our value proposition allowed us to secure rate parity between in-person and virtual visits, either by contract or payor policy. To expand this network and grow access to covered patients, we continue to establish new payor relationships and national contracts while also seeking to drive regional rate improvement for our patients and clinicians. We believe our payor relationships differentiate us from our competitors and are a critical factor in our ability to expand our market footprint in new regions by leveraging our existing national payor relationships. As we continue to grow, we believe our scale, breadth and access will continue to be enhanced, further strengthening the value of our platform to payors.
Expand our Center Base Within Existing and New Markets
We believe we have developed a highly replicable playbook that allows us to enter new markets and pursue growth through multiple vectors. We typically identify new markets based on the core characteristics of patient population demographics, substantial clinician recruiting opportunities, untreated patient communities and a diverse group of payors. To enter new markets, we seek to open de novo centers or acquire high-quality practices with a track record of clinical excellence and in-network payor relationships. Once we enter a new market, our powerful organic growth engine drives our growth through de novo openings, center expansions, clinician recruiting and tuck-in acquisitions. We anticipate focusing on continued expansion, both in our existing markets and in new geographies, where mental health care remains a large unmet need.
De Novo Builds
Our de novo center strategy is a component of our organic growth engine to build our capacity and increase density in our existing management service agreements. From our inception in 2017 through December 31, 2021, we have successfully opened 226 de novo centers, including 106 de novo centers in 2021, 78 de novo centers in 2020 and 27 de novo centers in 2019. We believe there is a significant opportunity to use de novo center openings to unlock potential patient need in our existing markets and new markets that we have determined are attractive to enter. We systematically locate our centers within a given market to ensure convenient coverage for in-person access to care. We believe our successful de novo program and national clinician recruiting team can support additions of new centers and clinicians.
This year, we transitioned to a more sustainable design for all new de novo centers going forward that reimagines the mental healthcare experience for both patients and clinicians while reinforcing our commitment to sustainability.
Acquisitions
We have built a proprietary pipeline of acquisition targets, providing us with significant opportunities to scale through potential acquisitions. We believe the highly fragmented nature of the mental health market provides us with a meaningful opportunity to execute on our acquisition playbook. We seek to acquire select practices that meet our standards of high-quality clinical care and align with our mission. We believe our guiding principle of creating a national platform built with a patient and clinician focus makes us a partner of choice for smaller, independent practices. Our acquisition strategy is deployed both to enter new markets and in our existing markets. In new markets, acquisitions allow us to establish a presence with high-quality practices with a track record of clinical excellence and in-network payor relationships that can be integrated into our national platform. In existing markets, acquisitions allow us to grow our geographic reach and clinician base to expand patient access. For newly acquired centers, we typically fully integrate them into our operational and technology infrastructure within four to six months following an acquisition. As of December 31, 2021, we had completed 77 acquisitions of existing practices, since our inception.
Center Margin
As we grow our platform, we seek to generate consistent returns on our investments. See “-Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Center Margin” for our definition of Center Margin and reconciliation to (loss) income from operations. We believe this metric best reflects the economics of our model as it includes all direct expenses associated with our patients’ care. We seek to grow our Center Margin through a combination of (i) growing revenue through clinician hiring and retention, patient growth and engagement, hybrid virtual and in-person care, existing office expansion, and in-network
reimbursement levels, and (ii) leveraging on our fixed cost base at each center. For acquired centers, we also seek to realize operational, technology and reimbursement synergies to drive Center Margin growth.
Investments in Growth
We will continue to focus on long-term growth through investments in our centers and technology. In addition, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in the foreseeable future due to our planned investments in growth initiatives and public company infrastructure.
Key Metrics and Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We evaluate the growth of our footprint through a variety of metrics and indicators. The following table sets forth a summary of the key financial metrics we review to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our business plan and make strategic decisions:
Center Margin and Adjusted EBITDA are not measures of financial performance under GAAP and are not intended to be substitutes for any GAAP financial measures, including revenue, (loss) income from operations or net (loss) income and comprehensive (loss) income, and, as calculated, may not be comparable to companies in other industries or within the same industry with similarly titled measures of performance. Therefore, non-GAAP measures should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP.
Center Margin
We define Center Margin as (loss) income from operations excluding depreciation and amortization and general and administrative expenses. Therefore, Center Margin is computed by removing from (loss) income from operations the costs that do not directly relate to the delivery of care and only including center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization. We consider Center Margin to be an important measure to monitor our performance relative to the direct costs of delivering care. We believe Center Margin will be useful to investors to measure whether we are sufficiently controlling the direct costs of delivering care.
Center Margin is not a financial measure of, nor does it imply, profitability. The relationship of (loss) income from operations to center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization is not necessarily indicative of future profitability from operations. Center Margin excludes certain expenses, such as general and administrative expenses, and depreciation and amortization, which are considered normal, recurring operating expenses and are essential to support the operation and development of our centers. Therefore, this measure may not provide a complete understanding of the operating results of our Company as a whole, and Center Margin should be reviewed in conjunction with our GAAP financial results. Other companies that present Center Margin may calculate it differently and, therefore, similarly titled measures presented by other companies may not be directly comparable to ours. In addition, Center Margin has limitations as an analytical tool, including that it does not reflect depreciation and amortization or other overhead allocations.
The following table provides a reconciliation of (loss) income from operations, the most closely comparable GAAP financial measure, to Center Margin:
(1)Represents salaries, wages and employee benefits for our executive leadership, finance, human resources, marketing, billing and credentialing support and technology infrastructure and stock and unit-based compensation for all employees.
Adjusted EBITDA
We present Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP performance measure, to supplement our results of operations presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is useful in evaluating our operating performance, and may be helpful to securities analysts, institutional investors and other interested parties in understanding our operating performance and prospects. Adjusted EBITDA is not intended to be a substitute for any GAAP financial measure and, as calculated, may not be comparable to companies in other industries or within the same industry with similarly titled measures of performance. Therefore, our Adjusted EBITDA should be considered in addition to, not as a substitute for, or in isolation from, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, such as net income or loss.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net (loss) income and comprehensive (loss) income excluding interest expense, depreciation and amortization, (benefit) provision for income taxes, (loss) gain on remeasurement of contingent consideration, stock and unit-based compensation, management fees, loss on disposal of assets, transaction costs, offering related costs and other expenses. We include Adjusted EBITDA in this Annual Report because it is an important measure upon which our management assesses, and believes investors should assess, our operating performance. We consider Adjusted EBITDA to be an important measure because it helps illustrate underlying trends in our business and our historical operating performance on a more consistent basis.
However, Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, including:
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized may have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash used for capital expenditures for such replacements or for new capital expenditures;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not include the dilution that results from equity-based compensation or any cash outflows included in equity-based compensation, including from our repurchases of shares of outstanding common stock; and
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense on our debt or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments.
A reconciliation of net (loss) income and comprehensive (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA is presented below for the periods indicated. We encourage investors and others to review our financial information in its entirety, not to rely on any
single financial measure and to view Adjusted EBITDA in conjunction with net (loss) income and comprehensive (loss) income.
(1)Represents management fees paid to certain of our executive officers and affiliates of our Principal Stockholders pursuant to the management services agreement entered into in connection with the TPG Acquisition. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the management services agreement terminated in connection with the IPO and we were required to pay a one-time fee of $1.2 million to such parties.
(2)Primarily includes capital markets advisory, consulting, accounting and legal expenses related to our acquisitions and costs related to the TPG Acquisition. Of the transaction costs incurred in 2019, $1.4 million relate to the TPG Acquisition. Of the transaction costs incurred in the period from January 1, 2020 to May 14, 2020 (Predecessor), $32.9 million relate to the TPG Acquisition.
(3)Primarily includes non-recurring incremental professional services, such as accounting and legal, and directors' and officers' insurance incurred in connection with the IPO.
(4)Primarily includes costs incurred to consummate or integrate acquired centers, certain of which are wholly-owned and certain of which are affiliated practices, in addition to the compensation paid to former owners of acquired centers and related expenses that are not reflective of the ongoing operating expenses of our centers. Acquired center integration and other are components of general and administrative expenses included in our consolidated statements of income/(loss) and comprehensive income/(loss). Former owner fees and impairment on loans are components of center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization included in our consolidated statements of income/(loss) and comprehensive income/(loss). These costs are summarized for each period in the table below:
(1)Represents costs incurred pre- and post-center acquisition to integrate operations, including expenses related to conversion of compensation model, legacy system costs and data migration, consulting and legal services, and overtime and temporary labor costs.
(2)Represents short-term agreements, generally with terms of three to six months, with former owners of acquired centers, to provide transition and integration services.
(3)Represents write-off of advances provided to clinicians of acquired entities.
(4)Primarily includes severance expense unrelated to integration services.
Components of Revenue and Expenses
Total Revenue
Total revenue consists primarily of consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for all patient activities. We bill each patient or third-party payor on a fee-for-service basis as medical services are rendered. Revenue is recognized as performance obligations are satisfied. Performance obligations are determined based on the nature of the services provided, and generally each individual counselling session is a performance obligation.
We have relationships with over 250 third-party payors. We determine the transaction price under these contracts based on standard charges for services provided net of price concessions related to contractual adjustments provided to third-party payors, discounts provided to uninsured patients in accordance with our policy and/or implicit price concessions provided to patients. The differences between the price at which we expect to receive from patients and the standard billing rates are accounted for as contractual adjustments or discounts, which are deducted from gross revenue to arrive at net revenues. Contractual adjustments and discounts are based on contractual agreements, discount policies and historical experience. We use historical patient visit rates, our historical mix of services performed and current reimbursement rates to help us analyze and explain historical patient service revenue. To achieve efficiencies and provide consistent access to care for patients across the country, we may negotiate regional or national contracts with certain payors in lieu of location specific agreements. Some of our third-party payor contracts are inherited through acquisitions of practices with existing contracts where we did not have an existing relationship with that payor in the market. During each of the year ended December 31, 2019 (Predecessor), the Predecessor 2020 Period and the Successor 2020 Period three payors individually exceeded 10% of our revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), two payors individually exceeded 10% of our revenue. Our payor relationships generally operate across multiple independent regional contracts. We have patients covered by third-party payors, which include commercial health insurers and governmental payors under programs such as Medicare, and uninsured patients. Governmental payors and uninsured patients account for a small portion of our total revenue.
Operating Expenses
Center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization
Center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization includes the costs we incur to operate our centers, consisting primarily of salaries, wages and employee benefits for clinicians and patient support, occupancy costs such as rent and utilities, medical supplies, insurance and other operating expenses. Center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization do not include an allocation of general and administrative expenses noted below, as they are not directly related to the act of seeing patients or providing care at our centers. Clinicians include psychiatrists, APNs, psychologists and therapists. Patient
support employees include welcome coordinators and clinical technicians. We expect our center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization to continue to increase in the short- to medium-term as we strategically invest to expand our business and to potentially capture more of our market opportunity.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, wages and employee benefits for our executive leadership, finance, human resources, marketing, billing and credentialing support and technology infrastructure and stock and unit-based compensation for all employees. In addition, general and administrative expenses include insurance and corporate occupancy costs.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense consists primarily of depreciation on leasehold improvements and other fixed assets as well as amortization on trade name and non-competition agreement intangibles.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of gains and losses on remeasurement of a contingent consideration liability where the performance condition was not met or likelihood of payment increases, transaction costs related to legal, consulting and other expenses, related party management fees, interest expense on our credit facilities and amortization of debt issue costs. We expect our interest expense and transaction costs to increase in the short- to medium-term as we strategically invest to expand our business.
Income Tax Benefit (Provision)
We account for income taxes using an asset and liability approach. Deferred income taxes reflect the net tax effects of temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities for financial reporting purposes and the amounts used for income tax purposes. Valuation allowances are provided when necessary to reduce net deferred tax assets to an amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
In determining whether a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets is necessary, we analyze both positive and negative evidence related to the realization of deferred tax assets and inherent in that, assess the likelihood of sufficient future taxable income. We also consider the expected reversal of deferred tax liabilities and analyze the period in which these would be expected to reverse to determine whether the taxable temporary difference amounts serve as an adequate source of future taxable income to support the realizability of the deferred tax assets. No valuation allowance was recognized as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (Successor). In addition, we consider whether it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), the Successor 2020 Period, and the Predecessor 2020 Period
The following table sets forth a summary of our financial results for the periods indicated:
Total Revenue
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), total revenue was $667.5 million. For the Successor 2020 Period and the Predecessor 2020 Period, total revenue was $265.6 million and $111.7 million, respectively. Total revenue was composed of $660.2 million of patient service revenue and $7.3 million of nonpatient revenue.
We anticipate revenue growth to continue to be driven by our de novo and acquisition strategy as well as our ability to increase patient visits at existing centers through our ability to accommodate virtual sessions in addition to our in-person visits.
Operating Expenses
Center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization was $466.0 million, primarily consisting of $406.1 million of center-based compensation. In addition, occupancy costs consisting of center rent and utilities and other operating expenses consisting of office supplies and insurance totaled $59.9 million. For the Successor 2020 Period, center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization was $179.3 million, primarily consisting of $159.7 million of center-based compensation. In addition, occupancy costs consisting of center rent and utilities and other operating expenses consisting of office supplies and insurance totaled $19.6 million. For the Predecessor 2020 Period, center costs, excluding depreciation and amortization was $78.8 million, primarily consisting of $70.3 million center-based compensation. In addition, occupancy costs consisting of center rent and utilities and other operating expenses consisting of office supplies and insurance totaled $8.5 million.
General and administrative
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), general and administrative expenses were $433.7 million, consisting primarily of $357.9 million in salaries, wages and employee benefits, which included $259.4 million of stock and unit-based compensation expense primarily relating to the modifications to covert the Class B Profits Interests Units to restricted stock, acceleration of vesting terms, and the additional RSUs granted at the time of IPO, as well as $17.1 million in occupancy costs and $58.7 million in other operating expenses, including professional services, directors' and officers' insurance and the endowment to the LifeStance Health Foundation. For the Successor 2020 Period, general and administrative expenses were $51.8 million, consisting primarily of $35.6 million in salaries, wages and employee benefits, as well as $6.3 million in occupancy costs and $9.9 million in other operating expenses, including professional services and insurance. For the Predecessor 2020 Period, general and administrative expenses were $20.9 million, consisting primarily of $14.6 million in salaries, wages and employee benefits as well as $2.5 million in occupancy costs and $3.8 million in other operating expenses, including professional services and corporate insurance.
Depreciation and amortization
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), depreciation and amortization expense was $54.1 million. For the Successor 2020 Period, depreciation and amortization expense was $27.7 million. For the Predecessor 2020 Period, depreciation and amortization expense was $3.3 million. This was primarily due to the amortization of intangibles and depreciation during the periods.
Other Income (Expense)
(Loss) gain on remeasurement of contingent consideration
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), loss on remeasurement of contingent consideration was $2.6 million. For the Successor 2020 Period, loss on remeasurement of contingent consideration was $0.6 million. For the Predecessor 2020 Period, gain on remeasurement of contingent consideration was $0.3 million. This was primarily due to changes in the weighted probability of achieving the performance and operational targets.
Transaction costs
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), transaction costs were $3.8 million, primarily consisting of legal, consulting and other expenses. For the Successor 2020 Period and the Predecessor 2020 Period, transaction costs were $3.9 million and $33.2 million, respectively, primarily consisting of $32.9 million of costs related to the TPG Acquisition and legal, consulting and other expenses in connection with other acquisitions that closed in the Predecessor 2020 Period.
Interest expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), interest expense was $38.9 million, primarily consisting of $14.4 million related to our voluntary prepayment of borrowings outstanding with IPO proceeds, in connection with which we incurred an extinguishment of debt charge within interest expense consisting of the $8.8 million prepayment charge and the write-off of unamortized debt issuance costs of $5.6 million. For the Successor 2020 Period and the Predecessor 2020 Period, interest expense was $19.1 million and $3.0 million, respectively. Interest in the Successor 2020 Period consisted of interest expense under our May 2020 Credit Agreement and a write-off of unamortized debt issue costs related to the debt modification. Interest expense in the Predecessor 2020 Period primarily consisted of interest on our term loans under our Prior Credit Agreement (as defined below).
Other income (expense)
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), other expense was $1.5 million, primarily consisting of the management termination fee incurred of $1.2 million as a result of our IPO. For the Successor 2020 Period, other expense was $0.3 million and primarily consisted of related party management fees of $0.2 million. For the Predecessor 2020 Period, other expense was $14 thousand and consisted of related party management fees.
Income Tax Benefit
For the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), income tax benefit was $25.9 million. For the Successor 2020 Period and the Predecessor 2020 Period, the income tax benefit was $4.0 million and $2.3 million, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the increase in taxable loss for the period.
Comparison of the Successor 2020 Period, the Predecessor 2020 Period, and the Year Ended December 31, 2019 (Predecessor)
See discussion of the comparison of the Successor 2020 Period, the Predecessor 2020 Period and the year ended December 31, 2019 (Predecessor) in the Final Prospectus, section “-Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition-Results of Operations”.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We measure liquidity in terms of our ability to fund the cash requirements of our business operations, including working capital needs, capital expenditures, including to execute on our de novo strategy, contractual obligations, debt service, acquisitions, settlement of contingent considerations obligations, and other commitments with cash flows from operations and other sources of funding. Our principal sources of liquidity to date have included cash from operating activities, cash on hand and amounts available under the credit agreement, dated August 28, 2018, with Capital One, National Association (the “Prior Credit Agreement”) and the May 2020 Credit Agreement executed simultaneously with the TPG Acquisition on May 14, 2020. We had cash and cash equivalents of $148.0 million and $18.8 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund our operating and capital needs for at least the next 12 months. Our assessment of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could vary because of, and our future capital requirements will depend on, many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to acquire new centers and expand into new markets and the expansion of marketing activities. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, or if we cannot expand our operations or otherwise capitalize on our business opportunities because we lack sufficient capital, our business, results of operations and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Our future obligations primarily consist of our debt and lease obligations. We expect our cash generation from operations and future ability to refinance or secure additional financing facilities to be sufficient to repay our outstanding debt obligations and lease payment obligations. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was an aggregate principal amount of $161.2 million and $373.8 million, respectively, outstanding under the May 2020 Credit Agreement. As of December 31, 2021, our non-cancellable future minimum operating third-party lease payments totaled $251.1 million, and our non-cancellable future minimum operating related-party lease payments totaled $12.2 million.
Debt
Prior Credit Agreement
On August 28, 2018, we entered into the Prior Credit Agreement, which provided for term loans of $15.0 million and revolving credit commitments of $20.0 million. On March 15, 2019, we executed the First Amendment to the Prior Credit Agreement, which added delayed draw term loan commitments of $40.0 million, and increased the outstanding term loans and revolving credit commitments to $65.0 million and $25.0 million, respectively. On March 13, 2020, we executed the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement to further secure $50.0 million of delayed draw term loan commitments. On May 14, 2020, in connection with the TPG Acquisition, the Prior Credit Agreement, including the delayed draw term loan commitments, was repaid.
Borrowings under the Prior Credit Agreement were subject to an interest rate of a base rate plus 3% or LIBOR plus 4.00%, or 4.25% if the leverage ratio as determined under the Prior Credit Agreement (“Prior Credit Agreement Total Net Leverage Ratio”) exceeded 3.50:1.00. We were required to make interest only payments through June 30, 2019 and were required to make equal installments of 0.25% of the aggregate principal of the Term Loans (as defined in the Prior Credit Agreement) on the last business day of each March, June, September, and December thereafter. Under the terms of the Prior Credit Agreement, we were subject to a requirement to maintain a Prior Credit Agreement Total Net Leverage Ratio of less than 5.00:1.00 through 2020, stepping down to 4.00:1.00 by the end of 2021. We were in compliance with the financial covenants since the inception of the Prior Credit Agreement through payoff. The borrowings under the Prior Credit Agreement were collateralized by substantially all of our equity interests in subsidiaries and debt securities.
May 2020 Credit Agreement
On May 14, 2020 and in connection with the TPG Acquisition, LifeStance Health Holdings, Inc., one of our subsidiaries, entered into the May 2020 Credit Agreement. The May 2020 Credit Agreement provides for senior secured credit facilities (the “Credit Facilities”) in the form of (i) $37.5 million original and delayed draw principal amount of Closing Date Term B-1 Loans and $222.5 million original and delayed draw principal amount of Closing Date Term B-2 Loans (“Closing Date Term Loans”), and (ii) $20.0 million of Revolving Commitments. On November 4, 2020, we entered into the First Amendment to the May 2020 Credit Agreement which, among other things, provided for incremental Credit Facilities in the form of $16.6 million original principal amount of First Amendment Term B-1 Loans and $98.4 million original principal amount of First Amendment Term B-2 Loans (“First Amendment Term Loans”). On February 1, 2021, we entered into the Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement (“Second Amendment”). The Second Amendment provides for
incremental delayed draw term loans in the aggregate principal amount of $50.0 million. The Second Amendment delayed draw term loans are subject to the same terms and conditions set forth in the May 2020 Credit Agreement. On April 30, 2021, we entered into the Third Amendment to the Credit Agreement (the “Third Amendment”). The Third Amendment provides for incremental delayed draw term loans in the aggregate principal amount of $70.0 million. The Third Amendment delayed draw term loans are subject to the substantially same terms and conditions as those set forth in the May 2020 Credit Agreement. In connection with the voluntary prepayment of $294.0 million related to borrowings outstanding as of June 15, 2021, we recognized the extinguishment of debt charge within interest expense of $14.4 million during the second quarter of 2021 related to the prepayment charge and the write-off of unamortized debt issue costs.
The Closing Date Term Loans and First Amendment Term Loans are scheduled to mature on May 14, 2026, and the Revolving Commitments are scheduled to mature on May 14, 2025. The loans under the Credit Facilities bear interest at a rate per annum equal to adjusted LIBOR plus an applicable margin (i) in the case of Closing Date Term B-1 Loans, ranging from 3.25% to 3.75% per annum (depending on our first lien net leverage), (ii) in the case of Closing Date Term B-2 Loans, ranging from 8.22% to 8.72% per annum (depending on our first lien net leverage), (iii) in the case of loans under the Revolving Commitments, ranging from 4.50% to 4.75% per annum (depending on our first lien net leverage), (iv) in the case of the First Amendment Term B-1 Loans, of 3.00% per annum and (v) in the case of the First Amendment Term B-2 Loans, of 7.09% per annum. In addition, we are required to pay a quarterly undrawn commitment fee of 2.0% per annum on the undrawn delayed draw term loan commitments under the Closing Date Term B-1 Loans and Closing Date Term B-2 Loans (increasing to 3.0% per annum following May 14, 2021), and we are required to pay a quarterly undrawn commitment fee of 1.0% per annum on the undrawn delayed draw term loan commitments under the First Amendment Term B-1 Loans and First Amendment Term B-2 Loans (increasing to 2.0% per annum following the first anniversary of the First Amendment Date).
Our obligations under the Credit Facilities are guaranteed by Lynnwood Intermediate Holdings, Inc. and certain of our direct and indirect subsidiaries. We are subject to certain affirmative and negative covenants until maturity, including limitations on our ability to incur additional debt or make capital expenditures and to pay dividends. The Credit Facilities also contain a maximum Total Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the May 2020 Credit Agreement) financial maintenance covenant that requires our consolidated Total Net Leverage Ratio as of the last day of each fiscal quarter to not exceed 8.00:1.00, which maximum level steps down to 7.25:1.00 beginning with the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2022 and to 7.00:1.00 beginning with the fiscal quarter ending June 30, 2023. Total Net Leverage Ratio means the ratio of (a) Consolidated Total Debt (as defined in the May 2020 Credit Agreement) outstanding as of the last day of the test period, minus the Unrestricted Cash Amount (as defined in the May 2020 Credit Agreement) on such last day, to (b) Consolidated EBITDA (as defined in the May 2020 Credit Agreement) for such Test Period, in each case on a pro forma basis (“Credit Agreement Consolidated EBITDA”). These restrictive covenants utilize Credit Agreement Consolidated EBITDA, which reflects further adjustments beyond those included in Adjusted EBITDA.
Credit Agreement Consolidated EBITDA includes a cap for de novo start up costs of $1.5 million for each such new de novo facility, not to exceed 10% of Credit Agreement Consolidated EBITDA, in the aggregate, and allows for the adjustment of retention, relocation, recruiting or completion bonuses or recruiting costs, severance costs, transition costs, curtailments or modifications to pension and post-employment employee benefit plans costs in connection with the establishment or acquisition of a new practice, as well as certain pro forma acquisition run rate adjustments. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we were in compliance with all financial covenants under the Credit Facilities.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows Provided by (Used in) Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), operating activities provided $9.4 million of cash, primarily impacted by our $307.2 million net loss and offset by net cash provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.1 million and non-cash charges of $314.5 million. During the Successor 2020 Period, operating activities used $22.0
million of cash, primarily impacted by a $13.1 million net loss, net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $38.3 million and offset by non-cash charges of $29.4 million. During the Predecessor 2020 Period, operating activities provided $13.4 million of cash, primarily impacted by our $24.9 million net loss and net cash from the TPG Acquisition.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), investing activities used $194.1 million, primarily resulting from our business acquisitions totaling $99.6 million and purchases of property and equipment of $94.5 million. During the Successor 2020 Period, investing activities used $836.1 million of cash, primarily impacted by $646.7 million used in connection with acquisition of the Predecessor, $164.1 million used in business acquisitions and purchases of property and equipment of $25.3 million. During the Predecessor 2020 Period, investing activities used $25.1 million of cash, primarily resulting from $12.8 million of property and equipment purchases and business acquisitions of $12.3 million.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 (Successor), financing activities provided $313.9 million of cash, resulting primarily from our IPO of net proceeds of $548.9 million, borrowings of $98.8 million under the May 2020 Credit Agreement, partially offset by payments of loan obligations of $311.4 million, payments of debt issue costs of $2.4 million, a prepayment for the debt paydown of $8.8 million and payments of contingent consideration of $12.3 million. During the Successor 2020 Period, financing activities provided $876.9 million of cash, primarily impacted by contributions from members related to the acquisition of the Predecessor of $633.6 million, proceeds from the May 2020 Credit Agreement of $392.1 million and contributions from members of $21.0 million. This was partially offset by payments of loan obligations of $156.8 million, payments of debt issue costs of $8.7 million and payments of contingent consideration of $4.3 million. During the Predecessor 2020 Period, financing activities provided $35.4 million of cash, primarily resulting from additional borrowings under the Prior Credit Agreement of $74.4 million, partially offset by payments of loan obligations of $18.2 million, payments of debt issue costs of $0.7 million and payments of contingent consideration of $19.1 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report include the results of (i) LifeStance Health, LLC, its wholly-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities consolidated by LifeStance Health, LLC in which LifeStance Health, LLC has an interest and is the primary beneficiary for the Predecessor periods, (ii) LifeStance TopCo, L.P., its wholly-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities consolidated by LifeStance TopCo, L.P. in which LifeStance TopCo, L.P. has an interest and is the primary beneficiary for the Successor periods and (iii) LifeStance Health Group, Inc., its wholly-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities consolidated by LifeStance Health Group, Inc. in which LifeStance Health Group, Inc. has an interest and is the primary beneficiary for the periods subsequent to the completion of the IPO and related transactions. Preparation of the consolidated financial statements requires our management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that impact the reported amount of total revenue and expenses, assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical when (1) the estimate made in accordance with GAAP is complex in nature or involves a significant level of estimation uncertainty and (2) the use of different judgments, estimates and assumptions have had or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial condition or results of operations in our consolidated financial statements. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our critical accounting estimates are described below.
Total Revenue
Total revenue is reported at the amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled to in exchange for providing patient care. These amounts are due from patients, third-party payors (including health insurers and government programs) and others and include variable consideration for retroactive adjustments due to settlement of audits, reviews and investigations. Generally, we bill patients and third-party payors several days after the services are performed. Revenue is recognized as performance obligations are satisfied. We have elected the practical expedient not to adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of a significant financing component as we expect the period between when service is transferred to a customer and when the customer pays for the service will be one year or less.
In patient revenue, the patient is our customer, and a signed patient treatment consent generally represents a written contract between us and the patient. Performance obligations are determined based on the nature of the services we provide. Generally, our performance obligations are satisfied over time and relate to counselling sessions that are discrete in nature and commence and terminate at the discretion of the patient and thus each individual counselling session is a performance obligation. Revenue for performance obligations satisfied over time is recognized when the services are rendered based on
the amount to which we expect to be entitled for the services provided to the patient. We believe this method provides a faithful depiction of the transfer of services.
We report revenue net of price concessions related to contractual adjustments provided to third-party payors, discounts provided to uninsured patients in accordance with our policy and/or implicit price concessions provided to patients. The differences between the price at which we expect to receive from patients or third-party payors and the standard billing rates are accounted for as contractual adjustments or discounts, which are deducted from gross revenue to arrive at net revenues. We determine our estimates of contractual adjustments and discounts based on contractual agreements, its discount policies, and its historical experience. Agreements with third-party payors provide for payments at amounts less than the established charges billed to patients. In substantially all of our patient encounters, services are paid for based upon established fee schedules which reflect reductions for contractual adjustments provided to third-party payors.
Settlements with third-party payors for retroactive adjustments due to audits, review or investigations and disputes by either us or the third-party payors within the allowable specific timeframe are considered variable consideration and are included in the determination of estimated transaction price for providing patient services. These settlements are estimated based on the terms of the payment agreement with the payor, correspondence from the payor and our historical settlement activity, including an assessment to ensure that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the retroactive adjustment is subsequently resolved. Estimated settlements are adjusted in future periods as new information becomes available, or as years are settled or are no longer subject to such audits, reviews and investigations.
Generally, patients who are covered by third-party payors are responsible for related deductibles and coinsurance, which vary in amount. We also provide services to uninsured patients, and offer those uninsured patients a discount, either by policy or law, from standard charges. We estimate the transaction price for patients with deductibles and coinsurance and for those who are uninsured based on historical experience and current market conditions. The initial estimate of the transaction price is determined by reducing the standard charge by any contractual adjustments, discounts, and implicit price concessions. Subsequent changes to the estimate of the transaction price are generally recorded as adjustments to patient service revenue in the period of the change. Adjustments arising from a change in the estimate of the transaction price were not material for all periods presented. Subsequent changes that are determined to be the result of an adverse change in the patient’s or third-party payor’s ability to pay are recorded as bad debt expense.
Services are occasionally provided to patients with a reduced ability to pay for their care. Therefore, we have recognized implicit price concessions to patients who may be in need of financial assistance. The implicit price concessions included in estimating the transaction price represent the difference between amounts billed to patients and the amounts we expect to collect based on its collection history with those patients. Patients who meet our criteria for discounted pricing are provided care at amounts less than established rates. Such amounts determined to be financial assistance are not reported as revenue.
We have determined that the nature, amount and timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by the payor mix with third-party payors, which have different reimbursement rates.
Business Combinations
We utilize the acquisition method of accounting for business combinations and allocate the purchase price of an acquisition to the various tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. We primarily establish fair value using the income approach based upon a discounted cash flow model. The income approach requires the use of many assumptions and estimates including future revenues and expenses, as well as discount factors and income tax rates. Other estimates include:
•The use of carrying value as a proxy for fair values of assets and liabilities assumed from the target; and
•Fair values of intangible assets and contingent consideration.
When determining the fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed, management makes significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Critical estimates in valuing intangible assets include, but are not limited to, expected future cash flows, which includes consideration of future growth rates and margins, attrition rates, and discount rates. Fair value estimates are based on the assumptions management believes a market participant would use in pricing the asset or liability. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available.
Stock and Unit-Based Compensation
ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”) requires the measurement of the cost of the employee services received in exchange for an award of equity instruments based on the grant-date fair value or, in certain
circumstances, the calculated value of the award. Following the IPO, we account for stock-based compensation awards approved by our Board of Directors based on their estimated grant date fair value. We estimate the fair value of RSUs based on the fair value of the underlying common stock.
As part of the Organizational Transactions, the unvested Class B Profits Interests Units that were subject to vesting upon the sale of LifeStance TopCo were converted to restricted stock that were modified to add both a market and service condition.
To determine the fair value of the market condition of the restricted stock based awards, we make highly subjective and complex input assumptions, including the expected term, volatility, the price of the underlying stock and the risk-free rate. Changes to these input assumptions to the valuation of the modification can materially affect the fair value estimates and, ultimately, how much we recognize as stock-based compensation expense in future periods. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of non-competition agreements and trade names acquired through business acquisitions and the purchase accounting applied for the TPG Acquisition. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price paid over the fair value of net assets acquired and liabilities assumed through business acquisitions. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment at least annually.
We test goodwill for impairment annually or more frequently if triggering events occur or other impairment indicators arise which might impair recoverability. These events or circumstances would include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, disposition of a significant portion of the business or other factors. Effective in 2021, on a prospective basis, we changed our annual goodwill impairment testing date from December 31 to October 1 to better align the testing date with our financial planning process. Management has determined that the change in the testing date does not represent a material change to a method of applying an accounting principle as this change does not accelerate, delay, avoid or cause an impairment charge, nor does this change result in adjustments to previously issued financial statements.
ASC 350, Intangibles-Goodwill and Other (“ASC 350”) allows entities to first use a qualitative approach to test goodwill for impairment. ASC 350 permits an entity to first perform a qualitative assessment to determine whether it is more-likely-than-not (a likelihood of greater than 50%) that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Management's annual goodwill impairment analyses in 2021 and 2020 indicated that goodwill was not impaired.
The determination of fair values and useful lives require us to make significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired arrangements from a market participant perspective, discount rates, industry data and management’s prior experience. Unanticipated events or circumstances may occur that could affect the accuracy or validity of such assumptions, estimates or actual results.
Recently Adopted and Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Recently adopted and issued accounting pronouncements are described in Note 2 to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that we (i) are no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier to occur of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of the IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of $1.07 billion or more, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer; and (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.