Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
All share and price per share information in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section has been adjusted to reflect our one-for-ten reverse stock split of our outstanding Common Stock and Series C Preferred Stock, which became effective on October 15, 2021.
Overview
LogicMark, Inc. (formerly known as Nxt-ID, Inc.) provides PERS, health communications devices, and IoT technology that creates a connected care platform. The Company’s devices provide people with the ability to receive care at home and age independently and to check, manage and monitor a loved one’s health and safety remotely. The Company’s PERS devices incorporate two-way voice communication technology directly in the medical alert pendant and providing life-saving technology at a consumer-friendly price point aimed at everyday consumers. The Company is focused on modernizing remote monitoring to help people stay safe and live independently longer. The PERS technologies are sold through dealers and distributors, as well as through the VHA. The Company enjoys a strong base of business with the VHA and plans to expand to other government services after being awarded the five-year GSA Agreement in 2021.
Recent Developments of the Company
Name Change
Effective February 28, 2022, the Company changed its name to LogicMark, Inc. pursuant to an amendment to its Certificate of Incorporation, filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Delaware on February 28, 2022.
Appointment of Chief Financial Officer and Amendment Agreement
Effective February 15, 2022, the Board appointed Mark Archer as the Company’s Chief Financial Officer. In connection with the appointment, the Company and FLG Partners, LLC (“FLG Partners”), of which Mr. Archer is a partner, entered into an amendment, effective as of July 15, 2021 (the “Amendment”), pursuant to which the Company agreed to amend the fee payable to FLG Partners to $10,000 per week, to permit Mr. Archer to separately invoice the Company $2,000 per month, payable to Mr. Archer only and to issue 129,384 restricted shares of Common Stock to Mr. Archer and 6,810 to FLG Partners; a quarter of each issuance will vest on July 15, 2022, with subsequent vesting at 6.25% for each three-month period thereafter.
Appointment of Directors
On February 21, 2022, the Board appointed Sherice R. Torres as a director and on March 15, 2022, the Board appointed John Pettitt as a director, increasing the Board membership to seven.
Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue, Cost of Revenue, and Gross Profit
We experienced a 12% decrease in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver of this decrease is related to the continued effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 restrictions in 2020 and 2021 led to hospital and clinic closures and their refocus away from patient long-term care to dealing with the immediacy of COVID-19 infections. In 2022, we expect the smaller clinics from which we derive much of our revenue to shift their focus back to quality-of-life support and to continue to expand their relationship with us. In 2022, we intend to build a durable business model, a recurring revenue base to generate significant cash flow, to invest in efficient growth and to develop innovative software and services solutions to expand into the broader Caring Economy. We are investing in a number of new verticals in the consumer, pro-care/Healthcare, corporate benefits lines of business and intend to expand further into our established government line of business.
In addition to the decrease in revenue, profit margin also decreased. This change was due to the upgrade from 3G to more costly 4G technology in late 2020 and an increased cost of freight to move products from Asia to our fulfillment center in Louisville, KY resulting from our change from shipping cargo by container ship to shipping by air. The decision to change shipping methods was due to delays at U.S. ports causing products to arrive later than needed. In addition, we wrote down inventory in the third quarter totaling $314,000. The impacts of the Company’s revenue decline and additional costs, ultimately led to the decrease in profit margin.
Operating Expenses
As mentioned above, we made a series of strategic business decisions in 2021 to deal with the continued impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic. We also underwent a change in management, as well as personnel changes to support renewed efforts in product development and selling and marketing, and completed a series of financings to help prepare for the future.
General and Administrative
In 2021, we made investments to strengthen our capital and corporate structure. The changes we made to our corporate structure drove the increase in general and administrative costs for the year.
Upon the termination of our former CEO and CFO, Vincent Miceli, we hired Chia-Lin Simmons as CEO and Mark Archer as our interim CFO. We also hired regional accounting firm Armanino LLP to provide accounting and SEC reporting support. As part of our October 2021 one-for-ten stock split, we incurred legal, proxy solicitation and shareholder communication costs to ensure sufficient shareholders participated in the vote. In addition to these costs, the Company incurred $0.3 million in severance costs for Mr. Miceli. The total increase in general and administrative expenses related to these activities was approximately $2.4 million. These increased costs were partially offset by lower legal expenses compared to the prior year and the closure of our offices and warehouses in Connecticut and Florida.
Selling and Marketing
Given the limitations placed on the Company by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the reduction of sales opportunities with the VHA hospitals and clinic, the Company curtailed its sales and marketing activity in 2021. In addition, with the focus on corporate transactions in the last half of 2021, sales and marketing activities will not begin to ramp us again until 2022.
Research and Development
Beginning with the termination of the Company’s Chief Technology Officer in the Spring of 2021 and a change in focus on new product development initiated by the Ms. Simmons in July 2021, research and development costs were down year-over-year. We expect research and development costs to exceed historical levels beginning in 2022 as the Company ramps up new product development.
Goodwill Impairment
The Company performed a goodwill impairment analysis in 2021 and determined that the carrying value of its goodwill exceeded its fair value by approximately $4,521,000. As a result, the Company recorded a non-cash, impairment charge to write down goodwill by that amount. Management believes the Company continues to have significant strategic value after the changes and financings in 2021, despite the write-off of goodwill caused by the current economic environment.
As of December 31, 2020, the Company determined that there were no indicators present to suggest that it was more likely than not that the fair value of goodwill was less than the carrying amount. The Company will continue to monitor its goodwill on a quarterly basis for indicators of impairment including, but not limited to, further declines in the stock price. Accordingly, there may be further impairments.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled a tax expense of $204,269, or (1.77)% of the loss before income taxes, which differed from the tax benefit at the 21% statutory rate of $2,421,578 primarily due to the valuation allowances on the Company’s deferred tax assets, as it is more likely than not that the Company’s deferred tax assets will not be realized. The provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled a tax expense of $24,886, or (0.88)% of the loss before income taxes, which differed from the tax benefit at the 21% statutory rate of $596,421, primarily due to the valuation allowance on the Company’s deferred tax assets, as it is more likely than not that the Company’s deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Other Income and Expenses
The interest expense on our CrowdOut loan decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 due to the termination of and final payments on the loan in 2021. In 2021, we also received full forgiveness of our Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) loan under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). Finally, we recorded warrant modification expense in 2021 resulting from the issuance of replacement warrants that were exercised in January and February.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
The Company generated an operating loss of $7,547,456 and a net loss of $11,707,889 for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and stockholders’ equity of $12,044,415 and $26,589,171. At December 31, 2021, the Company had working capital of $13,098,049 compared to a working capital deficit as of December 31, 2020 of $578,795. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company received net proceeds of $26,669,788 from the issuance of Common Stock, warrants and preferred stock, and the exercise of Common Stock purchase warrants.
Given our cash position at December 31, 2021 and our projected cash flow from operations, we believe we will have sufficient capital to sustain operations for the next year. We may also raise funds through equity or debt offerings to accelerate the execution of our long-term strategic plan to develop and commercialize our new products.
Cash Flows
Cash Used in Operating Activities
Our primary ongoing uses of operating cash relate to payments to vendors, salaries and related expenses for our employees and consulting and professional fees. Our vendors and consultants generally provide us with normal trade payment terms (net 30). During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $5,913,920. During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $312,959.
In the Fall of 2021, we paid down a significant amount of out-of-term accounts payable, and incurred additional one-time costs associated with corporate activities and the potential Nasdaq delisting.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not use cash in investing activities.
Cash Provided by Financing Activities
In 2021, we completed a Preferred Series E offering, Preferred Series F offering, a registered public offering and received proceeds from the exercise of Common Stock warrants. Additionally, we paid back our term loan prior to its maturity date and were required to pay an exit fee of $1.1 million that was included in the initial agreement. Finally, we received full forgiveness from the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) for our PPP loan.
Financings
September 2021 Offering
On September 15, 2021, the Company closed an underwritten public offering (the “September Offering”) pursuant to which the Company issued an aggregate of (i) 2,788,750 shares of Common Stock, including 363,750 shares of Common Stock issued upon the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option and (ii) accompanying warrants to purchase up to an aggregate of 2,788,750 shares of Common Stock, at an exercise price of $4.95 per share, subject to certain adjustments, including warrants issued upon the full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option to purchase up to an additional 363,750 shares of Common Stock, at a combined public offering price of $4.50 per share and accompanying warrant. The September Offering resulted in gross proceeds, inclusive of proceeds from the full exercise of the over-allotment option, of approximately $12.5 million, before deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of 7% of the gross proceeds (or 3.5% of the gross proceeds in the case of certain identified investors) and estimated offering expenses.
Such warrants were not immediately exercisable, as the Company did not have a sufficient number of shares of Common Stock to reserve for issuance for the warrants until the date (the “Initial Exercise Date”) that the Company’s stockholders approved an amendment to the Certificate of Incorporation to effect a reverse stock split of the shares of Common Stock so that there were a sufficient number of authorized shares of Common Stock for issuance upon exercise of the warrants. The warrants became exercisable on the Initial Exercise Date (the effective date of the reverse stock split) and will terminate five years after the Initial Exercise Date. The exercise price of the warrants is subject to customary adjustments for stock dividends, stock splits and other subdivisions, combinations and re-classifications, and was reset on the date of the Company’s reverse stock split to $3.956 per share. The warrants are also exercisable on a cashless basis under certain circumstances, any time after the Initial Exercise Date, pursuant to the formula set forth in the warrants. The reverse stock split and exercise price was retroactively reported in accordance with ASC 260-10-55-12, Restatement of EPS Data.
August 2021 Offering
On August 13, 2021, the Company closed a private placement offering on August 16, 2021 (the “August Offering”), which was conducted pursuant to a securities purchase agreement, dated as of August 13, 2021, whereby the Company issued (i) an aggregate of 1,333,333 shares of Series F Preferred Stock and (ii) warrants exercisable for up to 666,667 shares of Common Stock at an exercise price of $7.80 per share, subject to customary adjustments thereunder, which are exercisable six months from the date of issuance and have terms of five and a half years. The August Offering resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $4 million, before deducting any offering expenses. The Company used the net proceeds from this offering for working capital and liability reduction purposes. As of the year ended December 31, 2021, 1,160,000 shares of Series F preferred stock have been converted into 656,604 shares of Common Stock. On October 15, 2021, after shareholder and Board approval of the reverse stock split, the exercise price for the warrants issued in the August Offering was adjusted to $4.95 per share, and was retroactively reported in accordance with ASC 260-10-55-12, Restatement of EPS Data.
February 2021 Offering
On February 2, 2021, the Company closed concurrent registered direct and private placement offerings (collectively, the “February Offering”) pursuant to a securities purchase agreement, dated as of January 29, 2021, in which the Company issued to certain institutional investors an aggregate of 1,476,016 shares of Series E Preferred Stock and Common Stock purchase warrants exercisable for an aggregate of 295,203 shares of Common Stock. Such warrants were exercisable at an exercise price of $12.30 per share, subject to customary adjustments thereunder, which were exercisable immediately upon issuance and had five-year terms. The February Offering resulted in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $4 million, before deducting any offering expenses. The Company used the net proceeds from this offering for working capital and liability reduction purposes. In February 2021, 1,476,016 shares of Series E preferred stock were converted into 295,203 shares of Common Stock. Also, in February 2021 the Company recorded a deemed dividend of $1,480,801 from the beneficial conversion feature associated with the issuance of the Series E convertible preferred stock and warrants.
January 2021 Warrant Exchange
On January 8, 2021, the Company entered into a warrant amendment and exercise agreement (the “Amendment Agreement”) with a warrant holder with respect to a common stock purchase warrant, dated April 4, 2019, previously issued by the Company to such holder (the “Original Warrant”). In consideration for each exercise of the Original Warrant that occurred within 45 calendar days of the date of the Amendment Agreement, in addition to the issuance of shares of Common Stock upon such exercise, the Company agreed to deliver to such holder a new warrant to purchase a number of shares of Common Stock equal to the number of shares of Common Stock issued upon such holder’s exercise of the Original Warrant, at an exercise price of $15.25 per share (the “New Warrant”). Such holder held an Original Warrant exercisable for up to 246,914 shares of Common Stock and fully exercised such warrant, resulting in aggregate proceeds to the Company of $3,765,432 and the issuance of New Warrants exercisable for an equivalent number of shares of Common Stock.
In 2020, we completed a Series D preferred stock offering, received proceeds from the exercise of Common Stock warrants, and made the scheduled payments on our term loan. Additionally, we received funds from the PPP loan.
COVID-19 Considerations on Our Business and Operations
Like most US-based businesses, the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to deal with it began to impact our business in March 2020. During the period April 1, 2020 through December 31, 2021, we have experienced decreases in demand from certain key customers, primarily our VHA clinics.
Given that our products are sold through a variety of distribution channels, including VHA hospitals and clinics we expect our sales will experience continued volatility as a result of the changing focus at those locations, away from care management to COVID-19 treatment. We believe this change in focus has significantly impacted the demand for our products, and we are not certain how quickly demand may improve over time as the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic may go through additional phases of varying severity and duration.
To date, travel restrictions and border closures have not materially impacted our ability to obtain inventory or deliver products or services to customers. Travel restrictions impacting people can restrain our ability to assist our customers and distributors as well as impact our ability to develop new distribution channels, but at present we do not expect these restrictions on personal travel to be material to our business operations or financial results. We have taken steps to restrain and monitor our operating expenses and therefore we do not expect any such impacts to materially change the relationship between costs and revenues.
Like most companies, we have taken a range of actions with respect to how we operate to assure we comply with government restrictions and guidelines as well as best practices to protect the health and well-being of our employees and our ability to continue operating our business effectively. To date, we have been able to operate our business effectively using these measures and to maintain internal controls as documented and posted. We also have not experienced challenges in maintaining business continuity and do not expect to incur material expenditures to do so. However, the impacts of COVID-19 and efforts to mitigate the same have remained unpredictable and it remains possible that challenges may arise in the future.
The actions we have taken so far during the pandemic include, but are not limited to:
● Requiring all employees who can work from home to work from home;
● Increasing our IT networking capability to best assure employees can work effectively outside the office;
● For employees who must perform essential functions in one of our offices:
○ Having employees maintain a distance of at least six feet from other employees whenever possible;
○ Requiring all employees to be fully vaccinated.
○ Having employees stay segregated from other employees in the office with whom they require no interaction; and
○ Requiring employees to wear masks while they are in the office whenever possible.
On May 6, 2020 and May 8, 2020, we received loans from Bank of America, NA totaling $346,390, pursuant to the PPP under the CARES Act. Under the terms of the PPP, loans and accrued interest are forgivable after twenty-four weeks as long as we used the loan proceeds for eligible purposes, including payroll, benefits, rent and utilities, and maintain our payroll levels. The amount of loan forgiveness will be reduced if we terminate employees or reduce salaries during the eight-week period. As of December 31, 2021, we used the entirety of the loan proceeds for purposes consistent with the PPP.
On March 2, 2021, the Company received notification from the SBA that repayment of its loan under the PPP in the amount of $301,390 plus accrued interest of $2,320 had been forgiven. On May 20, 2021, the Company received notification from the SBA that repayment of its loan under the PPP in the amount of $45,000 plus accrued interest of $466 had been forgiven. The income resulting from the forgiveness of both PPP loans and the related accrued interest is included in other income in the Company’s statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Business Outlook
Our future financial performance depends, in large part, on conditions in the markets that we serve and on conditions in the U.S. in general. During the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic significantly affected our results of operations as we experienced meaningful reductions in customer demand for our products and services. During this period, the Company continued to identify and assess risks and modify operating plans following guidance from national, state and local governmental and health authorities. Although we continued to experience minimal supply chain disruption, customer demand was noticeably weaker. During this time period, we took several proactive measures to protect the Company’s balance sheet and strengthen its liquidity position, including making additional cost reductions through selected headcount reductions, discretionary spending reductions, corporate travel suspension, and service provider and other expense reductions.
In 2022, we expect the smaller clinics from which we derive much of our revenue to shift their focus back to quality-of-life support and to continue to expand their relationship with us. In 2022, we intend to build a durable business model, a recurring revenue base to generate significant cash flow, to invest in efficient growth and to develop innovative software and services solutions to expand into the broader Caring Economy. We are investing in a number of new verticals in the consumer, pro-care/Healthcare, corporate benefits lines of business and intend to expand further into our established government line of business.
Looking forward, as the Company accelerates new product development, additional costs will be incurred in product development engineering, sales and marketing. As we fill the product pipeline, expenses will be incurred before sales of these new products are realized.
Impact of Inflation
We believe that our business has not been affected to a significant degree by inflationary trends during the past two fiscal years. However, the recent spike in the domestic inflation rate may increase our cost of fulfillment through higher labor and shipping costs, as well as our operating and overhead expenses. Should inflation become a factor in the worldwide economy, it may increase the cost of purchasing products from our contract manufacturers in Asia, as well as the cost of certain raw materials, component parts and labor used in the production of our products. We have generally been able to maintain our profit margins through productivity and efficiency improvements, and cost reduction programs, avoiding the need to take price increases for many years, although it may be necessary to increase our prices in 2022.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any relationships with entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes. In addition, we do not have any undisclosed borrowings or debt, and we have not entered into any synthetic leases. We are, therefore, not materially exposed to any financing, liquidity, market or credit risk that could arise if we had engaged in such relationships.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Items subject to such estimates and assumptions could include: the carrying amount and estimated useful lives of long-lived assets; assumptions used in the preparation of the goodwill impairment test; the valuation allowance for credit losses; the fair value of financial instruments; contingent considerations arising from business combinations; income tax recoverability of deferred tax assets, and provisions, among others.
Valuation and Goodwill Impairment
Goodwill represents the excess of consideration paid over the net assets acquired. The Company conducts an annual impairment test of goodwill in the fourth quarter, and in between evaluates if events or circumstances indicate whether fair value may be less than its carrying value. If an initial assessment indicates it is more likely than not goodwill may be impaired, it is evaluated by comparing estimated fair value to carrying value. An impairment charge would be recorded for the amount by which the carrying value exceeds estimated fair value. Estimated fair values are developed primarily under an income approach that discounts estimated future cash flows using risk-adjusted interest rates, as well as earnings multiples or other techniques as warranted. Estimating short-term revenue growth and the discount rates used to determine the fair value requires management judgement and estimation of uncertainties.
Critical Accounting Policies
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the U.S. Certain accounting policies and estimates are particularly important to the understanding of our financial position and results of operations and require the application of significant judgment by our management or can be materially affected by changes from period to period in economic factors or conditions that are outside of our control. As a result, they are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. In applying these policies, our management uses their judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. Those estimates are based on our historical operations, our future business plans and projected financial results, our observance of trends in the industry and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. Please see Note 4 to our financial statements for a more complete description of our significant accounting policies.
Revenue Recognition
The Company’s revenues consist of product sales to either end customers or to distributors. The Company’s revenues are derived from contracts with customers, which are in most cases customer purchase orders. For each contract, the promise to transfer the control of the products, each of which is individually distinct, is considered to be the identified performance obligation. As part of the consideration promised in each contract, the Company evaluates the customer’s credit risk. Our contracts do not have any financing components, as payment terms are generally due Net 30 days after the invoice date. The Company’s products are almost always sold at fixed prices. In determining the transaction price, we evaluate whether the price is subject to any refunds, due to product returns or adjustments due to volume discounts, rebates or price concessions to determine the net consideration we expect to be entitled to. The Company’s sales are recognized at a point-in-time under the core principle of recognizing revenue when control transfers to the customer, which generally occurs when the Company ships or delivers the product from its fulfillment center to our customers, when our customer accepts and has legal title of the goods, and the Company has a present right to payment for such goods. Based on the respective contract terms, most of our contract revenues are recognized either (i) upon shipment based on free on board (“FOB”) shipping point, or (ii) when the product arrives at its destination. For the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, none of our sales were recognized over time.
Inventory. The Company performs regular reviews of inventory quantities on hand and evaluates the realizable value of its inventories. The Company will adjust the carrying value of the inventory as necessary with the estimated valuation reserves for excess, obsolete, and slow-moving inventory by comparing the individual inventory parts to forecasted product demand or production requirements. The inventory is valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value with cost determined using the first-in, first-out method.
Convertible Instruments. The Company applies the accounting standards for derivatives and hedging and for distinguishing liabilities from equity when accounting for hybrid contracts that feature conversion options. The accounting standards require companies to bifurcate conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as free-standing derivative financial instruments according to certain criteria. The criteria includes circumstances in which (i) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (ii) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable generally accepted accounting principles with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (iii) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument. The derivative is subsequently marked to market at each reporting date based on current fair value, with the changes in fair value reported in the results of operations.
Conversion options that contain variable settlement features such as provisions to adjust the conversion price upon subsequent issuances of equity or equity linked securities at exercise prices more favorable than that featured in the hybrid contract generally result in their bifurcation from the host instrument.
The Company accounts for convertible debt instruments when the Company has determined that the embedded conversion options should not be bifurcated from their host instruments in accordance with ASC 470-20 “Debt with Conversion and Other Options”. The Company records, when necessary, discounts to convertible notes for the intrinsic value of conversion options embedded in debt instruments based upon the differences between the fair value of the underlying Common Stock at the commitment date of the note transaction and the effective conversion price embedded in the note. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized over the term of the related debt.