Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) will help readers understand our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. It is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes. Comparisons under this heading refer to twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, unless otherwise indicated.
Our MD&A is organized as follows:
•Results of Operations. Detailed discussion of our revenue and expenses for twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. A comparison of our results of operations for twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 can be found under “Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 24, 2021.
•Liquidity and Capital Resources. Discussion of key aspects of our consolidated statements of cash flows, changes in our financial position, and our financial commitments.
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. Discussion of significant changes we believe are important to understand the assumptions and judgments underlying our consolidated financial statements.
•Recent Accounting Pronouncements. For summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (1), Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”
Results of Operations
Financial results for the year ended December 31, 2021 in this report differ from those included in our earnings release issued February 17, 2022 in that the earnings did not reflect an adjustment to the income tax benefit of $0.4 million that we identified subsequent to the issuance of our earnings release.
Revenue
Royalty revenue is a function of our partners' product sales and the applicable royalty rate. Kyprolis royalty rate is under a tiered royalty rate structure with the highest being 3.0%. Evomela has a fixed royalty rate of 20%. Royalty revenue increased in 2021 as compared to 2020 driven primarily by increases in sales of Evomela and Kryprolis plus the additional royalties from the sale of drugs using the Pelican platform - Rylaze, Pneumosil and Teriparatide. Captisol sales increased year over year in 2021 primarily due to shipments to Gilead for manufacturing Veklury (remdesivir). Contract revenue increased year over year in 2021 due to the continued growth in the OmniAb discovery platform as well as milestone revenue from the acquisitions of Icagen in April 2020 and Pfenex in October 2020.
The following table represents royalty revenue by program:
Operating Costs and Expenses
Total operating costs and expenses for 2021 increased $20.6 million or 12% compared with 2020.
Cost of Captisol increased year over year in 2021 primarily due to higher sales of Captisol during 2021.
Amortization of intangibles increased year over year in 2021 primarily due to the acquisition of Pfenex in October 2020.
At any one time, we are working on multiple programs. As such, we generally do not track our R&D expenses on a specific program basis. Our R&D expenses increased year over year in 2021 due to the acquisitions of Icagen in April 2020 and Pfenex in October 2020, which primarily consisted of salaries and lab costs associated with Icagen ($16.5 million) and Pfenex ($22.7 million).
General and administrative expenses increased year over year in 2020 primarily due to $20.7 million acquisition and integration related expenses associated with the Pfenex acquisition.
Other operating income in 2021 was due to reducing the fair value of the CVR liability associated to the acquisition of Pfenex to zero, as the CVR payment expiration date passed on December 31, 2021 without achieving the triggering event. We did not have any other operating income in 2020.
We do not provide forward-looking estimates of costs and time to complete our ongoing research and development projects as such estimates would involve a high degree of uncertainty. Uncertainties include our inability to predict the outcome of research and clinical studies, regulatory requirements placed upon us by regulatory authorities such as the FDA and EMA, our inability to predict the decisions of our partners, our ability to fund research and development programs, competition from other entities of which we may become aware in future periods, predictions of market potential for products that may be derived from our work, and our ability to recruit and retain personnel or third-party contractors with the necessary knowledge and skills to perform certain research. Refer to “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for additional discussion of the uncertainties surrounding our research and development initiatives.
Other income (expense)
The fluctuation in the gain (loss) from short-term investments is primarily driven by the changes in the fair value of our ownership in Viking common stock (an unrealized loss of $9.6 million in 2021 as compared to an unrealized loss of $19.0 million in 2020).
Interest income consists primarily of interest earned on our short-term investments. The year over year decrease in 2021 resulted from the decrease in our short-term investment balances due to the usage of funds for the 2023 Notes repurchases.
Interest expense includes the 0.75% coupon cash interest expense in addition to the non-cash accretion of discount (including the amortization of debt issuance costs) on our 2023 Notes. The year over year decrease in 2021 was primarily due to lower average debt outstanding balance as compared to the prior year. The 2019 Notes were paid off upon the maturity date in August 2019. During 2021, we repurchased $152.0 million in principal of the 2023 Notes for $156.0 million in cash, including accrued interest of $0.3 million. See “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (7), Convertible Senior Notes.”
Other expense, net, increased year over year in 2021 primarily due to a $7.3 million loss on our debt extinguishments compared to $2.5 million loss on debt extinguishments in 2020. See additional information in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (1), Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Commercial License and Other Economic Rights.”
Income tax benefit (expense)
Our effective tax rate for 2021 and 2020 was (21)% and 72%, respectively. Our tax rate is affected by recurring items, such as the U.S. federal and state statutory tax rates and the relative amounts of income we earn in those jurisdictions, which we expect to be fairly consistent in the near term. It is also affected by discrete items that may occur in any given year, but are not consistent from year to year. In 2021, the variance from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% was primarily attributable to the mix of earnings in jurisdictions with lower statutory rates than the U.S. federal statutory tax rate, primarily due to excess benefits from shared-based compensation. In 2020, the variance from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% was primarily attributable to the mix of earnings in jurisdictions with lower statutory rates than the U.S. federal statutory tax rate, primarily the United Kingdom. The items below also had an impact on the difference between our statutory U.S. rate.
•$11.9 million (25.2%) decrease due to excess tax benefits from share-based compensation which are recorded as a discrete item within the provision for income tax pursuant to ASU 2016-09
•$8.2 million (17.3%) decrease due to the revaluation of contingent value rights
•$3.2 million (6.8%) increase from Section 162(m) limitation
•$2.7 million (5.7%) decrease from research and development tax credits
•$2.4 million (22.9%) increase from Section 162(m) limitation
•$1.7 million (15.7%) decrease from the foreign-derived intangible income deduction
•$1.5 million (13.8%) increase from state income taxes
•$0.9 million (8.3%) increase due to non-deductible transaction costs primarily related to the acquisition of Pfenex
•$0.7 million (6.6%) decrease from research and development tax credits
•$0.3 million (3.4%) decrease due to excess tax benefits from share-based compensation which are recorded as a discrete item within the provision for income tax pursuant to ASU 2016-09
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $341.1 million in cash, cash equivalents, and short-term investments. Cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments decreased by $70.1 million from last year, due to factors described in the “Cash Flow Summary” below. Our primary source of liquidity, other than our holdings of cash, cash equivalents, and investments, which decreased during 2021 primarily from extinguishment of debt, has been cash flows from operations. Our ability to generate cash from operations provides us with the financial flexibility we need to meet operating, investing, and financing needs.
Historically, we have liquidated our short-term investments and/or issued debt and equity securities to finance our business needs as a supplement to cash provided by operating activities. Our short-term investments include U.S. government debt securities, investment-grade corporate debt securities, mutual funds and certificates of deposit. We have established guidelines relative to diversification and maturities of our investments in order to provide both safety and liquidity. These guidelines are periodically reviewed and modified to take advantage of trends in yields and interest rates. Additionally, we own certain securities which are classified as short-term investments that we received as a result of a milestone and an upfront license payment as well as 6.7 million shares of common stock in Viking.
In August 2014, we issued the 2019 Notes with aggregate principal amount of $245.0 million. During 2018, $217.7 million in principal of the 2019 Notes were converted into cash. In June 2019, we received notices for conversion of $1.0 million of principal amount of the 2019 Notes, which were settled in cash upon the 2019 Notes' maturity date in August 2019. On August 15, 2019, the 2019 Notes maturity date, we paid the noteholders the remaining $26.3 million principal amount.
In May 2018, we issued the 2023 Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $750.0 million. A portion of the proceeds from such issuance totaling $49.7 million were used to repurchase 260,000 shares of our common stock. During 2020, we repurchased $254.7 million in principal of the 2023 Notes for $222.8 million in cash, including accrued interest of $0.6 million. During 2021, we repurchased $152.0 million in principal of the 2023 Notes for $156.0 million in cash, including accrued interest of $0.3 million. After the repurchases, $343.3 million in principal amount of the 2023 Notes remain outstanding as of December 31, 2021. During February 2022, we repurchased additional $125.5 million in principal of the 2023 Notes for $123.9 million in cash, including accrued interest of $0.3 million.
We may continue to use cash on hand to repurchase additional 2023 Notes through open-market transactions, including through Rule 10b5-1 trading plan to facilitate open-market repurchases, or otherwise, from time to time. The timing and amount of repurchase transactions will be determined by management based on the evaluation of market conditions, trading price of the 2023 Notes, legal requirements and other factors. The 2023 Notes were not convertible as of December 31, 2021. It is our intent and policy to settle conversions through combination settlement, which essentially involves payment in cash equal to the principal portion and delivery of shares of common stock for the excess of the conversion value over the principal portion. See detail in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (7), Convertible Senior Notes.”
We are obligated to make payments to operating leases, including rental commitments on leases that have not yet commenced. For information on these obligations, see detail in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (6), Leases.”
We also have commitments under our supply agreement with Hovione for Capitsol purchases. Total purchase obligation as of December 31, 2021 was $40.9 million, of which $24.0 million is expected to be paid within a year and the remain amount is expected to be paid between 1 to 3 years.
In September 2018, our Board of Directors authorized us to repurchase up to $200.0 million of our common stock from time to time over a period of up to three years. On January 23, 2019, our Board of Directors increased the share repurchase authorization by $150.0 million. The available amount under the $350.0 million repurchase plan was fully utilized during the third quarter of 2019.
On September 11, 2019, our Board of Directors approved a stock repurchase program authorizing the repurchase of up to $500.0 million of our common stock from time to time over the next three years. We expect to acquire shares primarily through open-market transactions and have entered into a Rule 10b5-1 trading plan, and may enter into additional Rule 10b5-1 trading plans in the future, to facilitate open-market repurchases. The timing and amount of repurchase transactions will be determined by management based on our evaluation of market conditions, share price, legal requirements and other factors. Our prior $350.0 million stock repurchase program mentioned above was terminated in connection with the approval of the new stock repurchase program. Authorization to repurchase $248.8 million of our common stock remained available as of December 31, 2021. See “Item 5. Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters, and Issuer Purchase of Equity Securities.”
We believe that existing funds, cash generated from operations and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our needs for working capital; capital expenditure and debt service requirements; continued advancement of research and development efforts; potential stock repurchases; and other business initiatives we plan to strategically pursue, including acquisitions and strategic investments.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $11.1 million in fair value of contingent consideration liabilities associated with the acquisitions to be settled in future periods.
Cash Flow Summary
In 2021, we generated cash from operations, primarily from issuance of common stock under employee stock plans. During the year we generated cash from investing activities due to the proceeds from the sale and maturity of short-term investments. We used cash for financing activities, including the payments related to the extinguishment of certain 2023 Notes.
In 2020, we generated cash from operations, from the sale of Vernalis R&D business and from issuance of common stock under employee stock plans. During the year we used cash for investing activities, including the acquisition of Pfenex, Icagen, xCella and Taurus. We also used cash for financing activities, including the payments related to the extinguishment of certain 2023 Notes and stock repurchases.
In 2019, we generated $827 million from the sale of the Promacta license (including $14.2 million recorded to revenue related to the Promacta royalty for the period between January 1, 2019 and March 6, 2019), used cash for net purchases of short-term investments, used $453.0 million to repurchase our common stock, used $103.8 million to pay federal and state estimated income taxes, paid off the remaining balance of the 2019 Notes in the amount of $27.3 million, paid $12.0 million for the purchase of Novan economic rights and paid $11.8 million for the Ab Initio acquisition (net of cash acquired).
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. The SEC has defined a company’s critical accounting policies as the ones that are most important to the portrayal of the company’s financial condition and results of operations, and which require the company to make its most difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Based on this definition, we have identified the critical accounting policies and judgments addressed below. We also have other key accounting policies, which involve the use of estimates, judgments, and assumptions that are significant to understanding our results. For additional information, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (1), Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.” Although we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based upon information presently available. Actual results may differ significantly from these estimates under different assumptions, judgments, or conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We apply the following five-step model in accordance with ASC 606 in order to determine the revenue: (i) identification of the promised goods or services in the contract; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations, including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation.
We receive royalty revenue on sales by our partners of products covered by patents that we or our partners own under contractual agreements. We do not have future performance obligations under these license arrangements. We generally satisfy our obligation to grant intellectual property rights on the effective date of the contract. However, we apply the royalty recognition constraint required under the guidance for sales-based royalties which requires a royalty to be recorded no sooner than the underlying sale occurs. Therefore, royalties on sales of products commercialized by our partners are recognized in the quarter the product is sold. Our partners generally report sales information to us on a one quarter lag. Thus, we estimate the expected royalty proceeds based on an analysis of historical experience and interim data provided by our partners including their publicly announced sales. Differences between actual and estimated royalty revenues, which have not been material, are adjusted in the period in which they become known, typically the following quarter.
Our contracts with customers often will include variable consideration in the form of contingent milestone-based payments. We include contingent milestone based payments in the estimated transaction price when it is probable a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. These estimates are based on historical experience,
anticipated results and our best judgment at the time. If the contingent milestone based payment is sales-based, we apply the royalty recognition constraint and record revenue when the underlying sale has taken place. Significant judgments must be made in determining the transaction price for our sales of intellectual property. Because of the risk that products in development with our partners will not reach development based milestones or receive regulatory approval, we generally recognize any contingent payments that would be due to us upon the development milestone or regulatory approval. Depending on the terms of the arrangement, we may also defer a portion of the consideration received if we have to satisfy a future obligation, which typically occurs with our contracts for R&D services.
For R&D services we recognize revenue over time and we measure our progress using an input method. The input methods we use are based on the effort we expend or costs we incur toward the satisfaction of our performance obligation. We estimate the amount of effort we expend, including the time it will take us to complete the activities, or the costs we may incur in a given period, relative to the estimated total effort or costs to satisfy the performance obligation. This results in a percentage that we multiply by the transaction price to determine the amount of revenue we recognize each period. This approach requires us to make numerous estimates and use significant judgement. If our estimates or judgements change over the course of the collaboration, they may affect the timing and amount of revenue that we recognize in the current and future periods.
Revenue from Captisol sales is recognized when control of Captisol material or intellectual property license rights is transferred to our customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive from our customers in exchange for those products. A performance obligation is considered distinct from other obligations in a contract when it provides a benefit to the customer either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and is separately identified in the contract. For Captisol material, we consider our performance obligation is satisfied at a point in time, once we have transferred control of the product, meaning the customer has the ability to use and obtain the benefit of the Captisol material or intellectual property license right. We recognize revenue for satisfied performance obligations only when we determine there are no uncertainties regarding payment terms or transfer of control. Sales tax and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. We have elected to recognize the cost of freight and shipping when control over Captisol material has transferred to the customer as an expense in Cost of Captisol. We expense incremental costs of obtaining a contract when incurred if the expected amortization period of the asset that we would have recognized is one year or less or the amount is immaterial. We did not incur any incremental costs of obtaining a contract during the periods reported.
We occasionally have sub-license obligations related to arrangements for which we receive license fees, milestones and royalties. We evaluate the determination of gross as a principal versus net as an agent reporting based on each individual agreement.
Intangible Assets and Other Long-Lived Assets - Impairment Assessments
We regularly perform reviews to determine if an event occurred that may indicate the carrying values of our intangible and other long-lived assets are impaired. If indicators of impairment exist, we assess the recoverability of the affected long-lived assets by comparing its carrying amounts to its undiscounted cash flows. If the affected assets are not recoverable, we estimate the fair value of the assets and record an impairment loss if the carrying value exceeds the fair value. Factors that may indicate potential impairment include a significant decline in our stock price and market capitalization compared to net book value, significant changes in the ability of an asset to generate positive cash flows and the pattern of utilization of a particular asset.
In order to estimate the fair value of identifiable intangible assets and other long-lived assets, we estimate the present value of future cash flows from those assets. The key assumptions that we use in our discounted cash flow model are the amount and timing of estimated future cash flows to be generated by the asset over an extended period of time and a rate of return that considers the relative risk of achieving the cash flows, the time value of money, and other factors that a willing market participant would consider. Significant judgment is required to estimate the amount and timing of future cash flows and the relative risk of achieving those cash flows.
Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives are complex and often subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts. For example, if our future operating results do not meet current forecasts or if we experience a sustained decline in our market capitalization that is determined to be indicative of a reduction in fair value of our reporting unit, we may be required to record future impairment charges for purchased intangible assets. Impairment charges could materially decrease our future net income and result in lower asset values on our balance sheet.
Contingent Liabilities
In connection with our acquisition of Metabasis in January 2010, we issued Metabasis stockholders four tradable CVRs, one CVR from each of four respective series of CVR, for each Metabasis share. The CVRs entitle Metabasis stockholders to
cash payments as proceeds are received by us from the sale or partnering of any of the Metabasis drug development programs. The fair values of the CVRs are remeasured at each reporting date through the term of the related agreement. Changes in the fair values are reported in the statement of operations as income (decreases) or expense (increases). The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly based upon quoted market prices and actual amounts paid under the agreements may be materially different than the carrying amount of the liability.
On April 1, 2020, we acquired the core assets, including its partnered programs and ion channel technology from Icagen and certain of its affiliates for total cash consideration of $15.1 million, and a contingent earn-out payment of up to $25.0 million based on certain revenue milestones with an estimated fair value upon acquisition of $4.8 million. The fair value of the earn-out liability was determined using a probability weighted income approach incorporating the estimated future cash flows from expected future milestones. These cash flows were then discounted to present value using a discount rate based on the market participants' cost of debt reflective of Icagen. The fair value of the liability is assessed at each reporting date and the change in fair value is recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. The carrying amount of the liability may fluctuate significantly and actual amounts paid may be materially different than the carrying amount of the liability. The fair value of the contingent consideration liability as of December 31, 2021 was $7.4 million.
On October 1, 2020, we acquired Pfenex, which develops next-generation and novel protein therapeutics to improve existing therapies and create new therapies for biological targets linked to critical, unmet diseases using a protein expression technology platform. The purchase price of $465.1 million included $429.6 million cash consideration paid upon acquisition, and a CVR payment of up to $77.8 million of cash payments based on certain specified milestones with an estimated initial fair value of $37.0 million, net of $1.5 million recorded as post-acquisition expenses based on double trigger accelerate feature. The fair value of the CVR liability was determined using a probability adjusted income approach. These cash flows were then discounted to present value using a discount rate based on the market participants' cost of debt reflective of Pfenex. The liability is periodically assessed based on events and circumstances related to the underlying milestone, and any change in fair value is recorded in our consolidated statements of operations. The fair value of the CVR liability as of December 31, 2021 was reduced to zero as the CVR payment expiration date passed on December 31, 2021 without achieving the payment triggering event.
See additional information in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (5), Fair Value Measurement.”
Income Taxes
Our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and reserves for unrecognized tax benefits reflect our best assessment of estimated future taxes to be paid. Significant judgments and estimates based on interpretations of existing tax laws or regulations in the United States are required in determining our provision for income taxes. Changes in tax laws, statutory tax rates, and estimates of our future taxable income could impact the deferred tax assets and liabilities provided for in the consolidated financial statements and would require an adjustment to the provision for income taxes.
Deferred tax assets are regularly assessed to determine the likelihood they will be recovered from future taxable income. A valuation allowance is established when we believe it is more likely than not the future realization of all or some of a deferred tax asset will not be achieved. In evaluating our ability to recover deferred tax assets within the jurisdiction which they arise, we consider all available positive and negative evidence. Factors reviewed include the cumulative pre-tax book income for the past three years, scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, our history of earnings and reliability of our forecasts, projections of pre-tax book income over the foreseeable future, and the impact of any feasible and prudent tax planning strategies.
We recognize the impact of a tax position in our financial statements only if that position is more likely than not of being sustained upon examination by taxing authorities, based on the technical merits of the position. Tax authorities regularly examine our returns in the jurisdictions in which we do business and we regularly assess the tax risk of our return filing positions. Due to the complexity of some of the uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in payments that are materially different from our current estimate of the tax liability. These differences, as well as any interest and penalties, will be reflected in the provision for income taxes in the period in which they are determined.
Share-Based Compensation
We incur share-based compensation expense related to restricted stock, ESPP, and stock options.
Restricted stock unit (RSU) and performance stock unit (PSU) are all considered restricted stock. The fair value of restricted stock is determined by the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. We recognize share-based compensation expense based on the fair value on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, taking into consideration of forfeitures as they occur. PSU generally represents a right to receive a certain number of shares of common stock based on the achievement of corporate performance goals and continued employment during the vesting period. At each reporting period, we reassess the probability of the achievement of such corporate performance goals and any expense change resulting from an adjustment in the estimated shares to be released are treated as a cumulative catch-up in the period of adjustment. A limited amount of PSUs contain a market condition dependent upon the Company’s relative and absolute total stockholder return over a three-year period, with a range of 0% to 200% of the target amount granted to be issued under the award. Share-based compensation expense for these PSUs is measured using the Monte-Carlo simulation valuation model and is not adjusted for the achievement, or lack thereof, of the market conditions.
We use the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model to estimate the fair value of stock purchases under ESPP and stock options granted. The model assumptions include expected volatility, term, dividends, and the risk-free interest rate. We look to historical and implied volatilities of our stock to determine the expected volatility. The expected term of an award is based on historical forfeiture experience, exercise activity, and on the terms and conditions of the stock awards. The expected dividend yield is determined to be 0% given that except for 2007, during which we declared a cash dividend on our common stock of $2.50 per share, we have not paid any dividends on our common stock in the past and currently do not expect to pay cash dividends or make any other distributions on common stock in the future. The risk-free interest rate is based upon U.S. Treasury securities with remaining terms similar to the expected term of the share-based awards.
We grant options, RSUs and PSUs to employees and non-employee directors. Non-employee directors are accounted for as employees. Options and RSUs granted to certain non-employee directors typically vest one year from the date of grant. Options granted to employees typically vest 1/8 on the six month anniversary of the date of grant, and 1/48 each month thereafter for forty-two months. RSUs and PSUs granted to employees vest over three years. All option awards generally expire ten years from the date of grant.
Share-based compensation expense for awards to employees and non-employee directors is recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period until the last tranche vests.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For the summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements, see “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data-Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements-Note (1), Basis of Presentation and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.”