ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K including, without limitation, statements under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. When used in this Form 10-K, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on July 14, 2021, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities through December 31, 2021, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering and, after our Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance).
For the period from July 14, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of ($138,439), which consisted of operating costs of $162,602, offset by Investment income on Trust Account of $24,163.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $1,100,031 in cash, and a working capital balance of $1,432,742.
The Company’s liquidity needs prior to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering were satisfied through the payment of $25,000 from our initial stockholder exchange for issuance of Founder Shares (as defined in Note 5), and loan proceeds from Eric Rosenfeld, the Company’s Chief SPAC Officer, of $65,000 under the Note (as defined in Note 5). The Note balance was settled on November 26, 2021, shortly after the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The facility is no longer available. Subsequent to the consummation of the Public Offering, the Company’s liquidity has been satisfied through the net proceeds held outside of the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account (excluding deferred underwriting commissions and interest to pay taxes) to acquire a target business or businesses and to pay our expenses relating thereto. To the extent that our common stock is used in whole or in part as consideration to affect our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account as well as any other net proceeds not expended will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses.
Until the consummation of a Business Combination, the Company will be using funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination. If the Company’s estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, the Company may have insufficient funds available to operate its business prior to a Business Combination. Moreover, the Company may need to obtain additional financing either to complete a Business Combination or because it becomes obligated to redeem a significant number of its public shares upon completion of a Business Combination, in which case the Company may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our officers, directors and initial stockholders and their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use any funds available to it outside of the Trust Account to repay any such loaned amounts.
If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of the financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. There have been no significant changes in our critical accounting policies as discussed in the Form 8-K and the final prospectus filed by us with the SEC on December 1, 2021 and November 23, 2021, respectively.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Debt - debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’ Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’ Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on July 14, 2021 (inception) using a modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statement.
Related Party Transactions
Founders Shares
In July 2021, the Company issued an aggregate of 5,750,000 shares of common stock (the “Founder Shares”) for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000. On November 22, 2021, the Company effected a stock dividend of 0.2 shares for each share outstanding, resulting in 6,900,000 Founder Shares and 240,000 representative shares being issued and outstanding. The Founder Shares include an aggregate of up to 900,000 shares subject to forfeiture by the holders to the extent that the over-allotment is not exercised in full or in part, so that the holders will collectively own 20% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering (assuming the initial stockholders do not purchase any Public Shares in the Public Offering and excluding the Representative Shares (as defined in Note 7)). On December 1, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option. As a result of the underwriters’ election to fully exercise their over-allotment option, a total of 900,000 Founder Shares are no longer subject to forfeiture.
The holders of the Founder Shares have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares (except to certain permitted transferees) until (i) the earlier of 180 days after the completion of a Business Combination and the date on which the closing price of the common shares equals or exceeds $12.50 per share (as adjusted for share splits, share capitalizations, reorganizations and recapitalizations) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing after a Business Combination and (ii) if, subsequent to a Business Combination, the Company completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction which results in all of the Company’s stockholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Administrative Service Fee
The Company presently occupies office space provided by an entity controlled by Crescendo Advisors II, LLC. Such entity agreed that until the Company consummates a Business Combination, it will make such office space, as well as general and administrative services including utilities and administrative support, available to the Company as may be required by the Company from time to time. The Company has agreed to pay an aggregate of $15,000 per month to Crescendo Advisors II, LLC, an entity controlled by a related party, for such services commencing on the effective date of the Public Offering. $19,500 has been paid as of December 31, 2021.
Note - Related Party
On August 23, 2021, Eric Rosenfeld, the Company’s Chief SPAC Officer, issued a $65,000 principal amount unsecured promissory note to the Company. The note is non-interest bearing and became payable on the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. Due to the short-term nature of the note, the fair value of the note approximates the carrying amount. The Note balance was settled on November 26, 2021, shortly after the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The facility is no longer available
On November 5, 2021, Eric Rosenfeld, the Company’s Chief SPAC Officer, issued a $31,500 principal amount unsecured promissory note to the Company. The note is non-interest bearing and became payable on the consummation of the Public Offering. Due to the short-term nature of the note, the fair value of the note approximates the carrying amount. The Note balance was settled on November 26, 2021, shortly after the consummation of the Initial Public Offering. The facility is no longer available
Working Capital Loans
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Initial Shareholders, the Company’s officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds from time to time or at any time, as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). Each Working Capital Loan would be evidenced by a promissory note. The Working Capital Loans would either be paid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of the proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, no Working Capital Loans were outstanding.
Investments held in Trust Account
The Company’s portfolio of investments is comprised solely of U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, with a maturity of 185 days or less, or investments in money market funds that invest in U.S. government securities, or a combination thereof. The Company’s investments held in the Trust Account are classified as trading securities. Trading securities are presented on the balance sheet at fair value at the end of each reporting period. Gains and losses resulting from the change in fair value of these securities is included in investment income on Trust Account in the accompanying unaudited condensed statement of operations. The estimated fair values of investments held in the Trust Account are determined using available market information.
Accounting for Warrants
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the instruments’ specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the instruments are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the instruments meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the instruments are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the instrument holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, was conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the instruments are outstanding. The Company has concluded that the Public Warrants and Private Warrants issued pursuant to the warrant agreement qualify for equity accounting treatment.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
We recognize changes in redemption value as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount. The change in the carrying value of redeemable shares of common stock resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss per Common Share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per share is computed by dividing net income applicable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 27,600,000 shares of Public Shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted earnings per share is the same as basic earnings per share for the periods.
The following table reflects the calculation of basic and diluted net income (loss) per common share (in dollars, except per share amounts):