ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Consolidated Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on October 23, 2020 for the purpose of entering into a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
As previously announced on July 15, 2021, the Company entered into a business combination agreement with HF Halo Merger Sub, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Merger Sub”) and HeartFlow Holding, Inc. (“HeartFlow”) (the “Business Combination Agreement”). Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, Merger Sub would merge with and into HeartFlow (the “Merger”), with HeartFlow surviving the Merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company. In addition, the Company would be renamed HeartFlow Group, Inc. (“New HeartFlow”) following the consummation of the transactions.
On February 4, 2022, Longview, HeartFlow and Merger Sub entered into a Termination of the Business Combination Agreement (the “Termination Agreement”), pursuant to which the parties mutually agreed to terminate the Business Combination Agreement, effective immediately. As per Longview’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on November 15, 2021, Longview requested that HeartFlow management undertake a thorough analysis of its financial projections. Following the conclusion of that process, and extensive mutual efforts to negotiate an appropriate valuation adjustment, both parties agreed to terminate the Business Combination Agreement.
As a result of the termination of the Business Combination Agreement, the Business Combination Agreement is of no further force and effect, and certain transaction agreements entered into in connection with the Business Combination Agreement, including, but not limited to, the Investors’ Rights Agreement, dated as of July 15, 2021 and to be effective as of the closing of the Business Combination, by and among Longview, the sponsor, and certain holders, will either be terminated or no longer be effective, as applicable, in accordance with their respective terms.
Longview intends to continue to pursue the consummation of a Business Combination with an appropriate target.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from October 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on investments held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $7,401,495, which consists of a change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $13,136,000, change in the fair value of the FPA of $9,902,957, change in fair value of convertible note-related party of $65,344, and interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $148,899, offset by operating costs of $4,947,619, reversal of initial classification of FPA liability of $9,902,957, and transaction costs allocated to derivative liabilities of $1,001,129.
For the period from October 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $1,519, which consisted of operating and formation costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
On March 23, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 69,000,000 units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $690,000,000, which is described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 9,800,000 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per private placement warrant in a private placement to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $14,700,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option and the sale of the private placement warrants, a total of $690,000,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $35,566,388 in transaction costs related to our Initial Public Offering, including $12,700,000 of underwriting fees, $22,225,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $641,388 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $3,377,030. Net income of $7,401,495 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the trust account of $148,899, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $13,136,000, change in fair value of the convertible note-related party of $65,344, reversal of initial classification of FPA liability of $9,902,957, change in the fair value of the FPA of $9,902,957 and transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $1,001,129. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $1,570,589 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from October 23, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $19. Net loss of $1,519 was affected by changes in operating assets and liabilities which provided $1,500 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the trust account of $690,148,899 (including $148,899 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. Interest income on the balance of the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the trust account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $6,563. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
We are party to a loan agreement with our sponsor pursuant to which we may borrow up to $2,000,000 in order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination. Our sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us additional funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $2,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we drew down $2,000,000 under the sponsor loan.
On February 15, 2022, the Company and our sponsor further amended the Sponsor Loan to increase the aggregate principal amount of the Sponsor Loan from $2,000,000 to $3,000,000. All other terms of the Sponsor Loan remain in full force and effect.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
The Company intends to complete a Business Combination by March 23, 2023. However, in the absence of a completed Business Combination, the Company may require additional capital. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, suspending the pursuit of a Business Combination. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all.
We have until March 23, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after March 23, 2023. The Company intends to complete their Business Combination before the mandatory liquidation date.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and administrative and support services. We began incurring these fees on March 18, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit (except with respect to units purchased by funds affiliated with Glenview Capital Management, LLC and an investment vehicle controlled by individuals affiliated with Glenview Capital Management, LLC), or $22,225,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be forfeited by the underwriters solely in the event that the Company fails to complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of consolidated financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies.
Warrants
The Company accounts for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40, under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants and to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheets date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity (deficit) section of our balance sheets. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security.
Net Income (Loss) Per Share of Common Stock
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company has two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income (loss) is allocated pro rata between the two share classes. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. We have two classes of stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, FASB issued ASU 2020-06 to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issues, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.