Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and related notes thereto and other financial information appearing elsewhere in this 10-K. This 10-K contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” Readers are also urged to carefully review and consider these and other disclosures made by us which attempt to advise interested parties of the factors which affect our business.
Introduction and Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company developing cellular therapies for aging-related and life-threatening conditions. Our lead investigational product is Lomecel-B, which is derived from culture-expanded MSCs that are sourced from bone marrow of young healthy adult donors. We believe that by using the same cells that promote tissue repair, organ maintenance, and immune system function, we can develop safe and effective therapies for some of the most difficult disorders associated with the aging process.
We are currently sponsoring Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials in the following indications: Aging Frailty, AD, the Metabolic Syndrome, ARDS, and HLHS. Our mission is to advance Lomecel-B and other cell-based product candidates into Phase 3 (i.e. pivotal) trials for multiple indications, with the goal of achieving regulatory approvals, subsequent commercialization, and broad use by the healthcare community.
As of March 10, 2022, we have completed four U.S. clinical studies of Lomecel-B: Phase 1 AD, Phase 1 HLHS, Phase 1/2 Aging Frailty (“HERA Trial”) and Phase 2b Aging Frailty, as well as a sub-study of Aging Frailty with Metabolic Syndrome. We currently have three clinical trials actively enrolling patients: Phase 2a HLHS (“ELPIS II” trial), Phase 2a AD and Phase 1 ARDS. Japan’s PMDA approved a CTN submitted by the NCGG to conduct a Phase 2 study of Lomecel-B infusion in Japanese Aging Frailty subjects, and we expect this study to initiate in the first quarter of 2022. Additionally, we sponsor a registry in The Bahamas under the approval and authority of the National Stem Cell Ethics Committee. The Bahamas Registry Trial administers Lomecel-B to eligible participants at two private clinics in Nassau for a variety of indications. While Lomecel-B is considered an investigational product in The Bahamas, under the approval terms from the National Stem Cell Ethics Committee, we are permitted to charge a fee to participate in the Registry Trial.
Since our founding in 2014, we have focused the majority of our time and resources on the following: organizing and staffing our company, building, staffing and equipping a GMP manufacturing facility with research and development labs, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, generating clinical safety and efficacy data in our selected disease conditions and indications, and developing and expanding our manufacturing processes and capabilities.
We manufacture all of our own product candidates for clinical trials. In 2017 we opened a manufacturing facility comprised of eight clean rooms, two research and development laboratories, and warehouse and storage space. We have supply contracts with multiple third parties for fresh bone marrow, which we use to produce our product candidate for clinical testing and research and development. From time to time, we enter into contract development and manufacturing contracts or arrangements with third parties who seek to utilize our product development capabilities.
On February 12, 2021, as part of our IPO, our Class A Common Stock began to trade on the NASDAQ under the stock symbol “LGVN”. Pursuant to our IPO, we sold 2,910,000 shares of Class A Common Stock at an IPO price of $10.00 per share, inclusive of a partial exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment, for aggregate gross proceeds of $29,100,000 prior to deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering expenses. On December 3, 2021 we completed a private placement of our Class A Common Stock (the “2021 PIPE Offering”), for gross proceeds of $20,462,540, discussed below, whereby we sold 1,169,288 shares of our Class A Common Stock and warrants to purchase 1,169,288 shares of Class A Common Stock at an initial exercise price of $17.50 per share, at a combined purchase price of $17.50 per share of common stock and warrant and issued warrants exercisable for 46,772 shares of Class A Common Stock at an initial exercise price of $17.50 per share to affiliates of the Placement Agent. The shares of Class A Common Stock issued pursuant to the 2021 PIPE Offering and underlying the warrants were subsequently registered by us on a Form S-1 Registration Statement, which was declared effective on December 22, 2021.
When appropriate funding opportunities arise, we routinely apply for grant funding to support our ongoing research and since 2016 we have received approximately $16.0 million in grant awards ($11.9 million of which has been directly awarded to us and is recognized as revenue when the performance obligations are met) from the National Institute on Aging (NIA) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) of the NIH, the Alzheimer’s Association, and the Maryland Stem Cell Research Fund (MSCRF) of the Maryland TEDCO.
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
We continue to monitor how the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting our employees, business, and clinical trials. In response to the spread of COVID-19, employees who can perform their essential employment duties from home may continue to do so at their choice. Some of these employees are using a hybrid approach, with some days in the office and some days working remotely. Our laboratory scientists, cell processing scientists and other manufacturing personnel continue to work from our GMP facility on a day-to-day basis, and as such cell production has been minimally impacted. When the pandemic began to emerge in the U.S., some of our ongoing clinical trials had completed enrollment. However, a few subjects that were currently on study and in follow-up experienced some difficulties in adhering to the protocol schedule. Because we primarily enroll elderly subjects in our trials, who are at particular risk for poor outcomes related to COVID-19 infection, we have experienced some disruption in executing the follow-up visits in our protocols. These disruptions were due to a number of reasons that include an unwillingness of the subject to leave their residence to visit the hospital or clinic, the inability to leave their residence due to regional “stay-at-home” orders, and temporary clinical site closures. We have attempted to mitigate this disruption by conducting remote visits where feasible (telemedicine), arranging for in-home visits for phlebotomy in order to collect blood samples and perform protocol-specific assessments if feasible, and amending protocols to increase the window of time for follow-up visits. In spite of these efforts, several subjects either missed their scheduled follow up visit, had their follow up visit outside of the protocol-defined window of time, or dropped out of the trial prior to completing. While we believe the number of instances where a visit was missed completely is small, we cannot predict whether this will have a material impact on our clinical results until the data from the trials are analyzed. If too many subjects drop-out or the protocol is no longer effective, we may have to restart the clinical trial entirely. For ongoing studies, and studies we intend to initiate, at this time we cannot predict the impact of the COVID pandemic on enrollment rates and the ability to fully enroll trials or to complete other trial-related tasks or activities, and therefore our study completion timelines may be subject to change as a result.
In July 2020 the Bahamian government halted travel from the U.S. into The Bahamas, which resulted in the temporary cessation of participation in The Bahamas Registry Trial. While this travel restriction has now been lifted, there still exists at this time a Level 4 Do Not Travel Advisory from the Bahamian government currently still exists with respect to travelers from the U.S. due to increased COVID infection rates, so participation in the Registry Trial remains lower than anticipated, due in part to pandemic-related effects on international travel. We expect that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact our business, results of operations, clinical development timelines and financial condition. At this time, there is significant uncertainty relating to the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic and impact of related responses. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic concentration and continued spread of the disease, the duration of the pandemic, travel restrictions to and social distancing within the U.S. and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the continued impact on financial markets and the global economy, and the effectiveness of the global response to contain and treat the disease.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenue
We have generated revenue from three sources:
● Grant awards. Extramural grant award funding, which is non-dilutive, has been a core strategy for supporting our ongoing clinical research. Since 2016 we have been directly awarded approximately $11.9 million in grants, with details of these awards provided under the heading “Grant Awards” below.
● The Bahamas Registry Trial. Participants in The Bahamas Registry Trial pay us a fee to receive Lomecel-B, imported by us into The Bahamas, and administered at one of two private medical clinics in Nassau. While Lomecel-B is considered an investigational product in The Bahamas, under the approval terms received from the National Stem Cell Ethics Committee, we are permitted to charge a fee for participation in the Registry Trial. The fee is recognized as revenue, and is used to pay for the costs associated with manufacturing and testing of Lomecel-B, administration, shipping and importation fees, data collection and management, biological sample collection and sample processing for biomarkers and other data, and overall management of the Registry, including personnel costs. Lomecel-B is considered investigational treatment in The Bahamas and not licensed for commercial sale.
● Contract development and manufacturing services. From time to time, we enter into fee-for-service agreements with third parties for our product development and manufacturing capabilities.
Cost of Revenues
We record cost of revenues based on expenses directly related to revenue. For Grants we record allocated expenses for Research and development costs to a grant as a cost of revenues. For the Clinical trial revenue directly related expenses for that program are allocated and accrued as incurred. These expenses are similar to those described under “Research and development expense” below.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of royalty and license fees associated with our agreements with the University of Miami (“UM”), as well as attending and sponsoring industry, investment, organization and medical conferences and events.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development costs are charged to expense when incurred in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 730 Research and Development, ASC 730 addresses the proper accounting and reporting for research and development costs. It identifies: 1. Those activities that should be identified as research and development, 2. The elements of costs that should be identified with research and development activities, and the accounting for these costs, and 3. The financial statement disclosures related to them. Research and Development. Research and development include costs such as clinical trial expenses, contracted research and license agreement fees with no alternative future use, supplies and materials, salaries, share-based compensation, employee benefits, property and equipment depreciation and allocation of various corporate costs. We accrue for costs incurred by external service providers, including CROs and clinical investigators, based on estimates of service performed and costs incurred. These estimates include the level of services performed by the third parties, subject enrollment in clinical trials, administrative costs incurred by the third parties, and other indicators of the services completed. Based on the timing of amounts invoiced by service providers, we may also record payments made to those providers as prepaid expenses that will be recognized as expense in future periods as the related services are rendered.
We currently do not carry any inventory for our product candidates, as we have yet to launch a product for commercial distribution. Historically our operations have focused on conducting clinical trials, product research and development efforts, and improving and refining our manufacturing processes, and accordingly, manufactured clinical doses of product candidates were expensed as incurred, consistent with the accounting for all other research and development costs. Once we begin commercial distribution, all newly manufactured approved products will be allocated either for use in commercial distribution, which will be carried as inventory and not expensed, or for research and development efforts, which will continue to be expensed as incurred.
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support increased research and development activities relating to our clinical programs, as well as incur additional expenses related to our clinical trials.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include public company related expenses; legal fees relating to corporate matters; insurance costs; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support increased administrative activities relating to our becoming a public company. We also expect to incur additional expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with Nasdaq and SEC requirements; director and officer insurance costs; and investor and public relations costs.
Other Income and Expenses
Interest income consists of interest earned on cash equivalents and short-term investments. We expect our interest income to increase due to the current cash and short-term investment balances. Other income consists of funds earned that are not part of our normal operations. In past years they have been primarily a result of tax refunds received for social security taxes as part of a research and development tax credit program.
Income Taxes
As of December 31, 2021, we are treated as a C corporation for federal and state income tax purposes. Prior to February 12, 2021, we were treated as a partnership for federal and state income tax purposes, whereby we passed our earnings and losses through to our members based on the terms of our Operating Agreement. No provision for income taxes has been recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We may incur income taxes in the future if we have earnings. At this time the Company has not evaluated the impact of any future profits.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
COMPARISON OF THE YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 AND 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in those items in dollars (in thousands):
Revenues, Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit: Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1.3 million and $5.6 million, respectively. The $4.3 million, or 77%, decrease when compared to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in clinical trial and grant revenue year-over-year. Grant revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.6 million and $4.3 million, respectively. The $3.7 million, or 86% decrease when compared to 2020 was primarily due to the completion of several grant-funded clinical trials and associated exhaustion of grant revenue. Clinical trial revenue, which derives from the Bahamas Registry Trial, for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.7 million and $1.3 million, respectively. Clinical trial revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.6 million, or 46%, lower when compared to 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, clinical trial revenue was negatively impacted by COVID-19 travel restrictions, as participants continued to have concerns and complications with respect to international travel.
Related cost of revenues was $0.7 million and $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $3.1 million, or 81%, decrease when compared to 2020, was primarily due to lower cost of revenues for grants incurred in 2021 and lower costs related to the Bahamas Registry Trial. This resulted in a gross profit of approximately $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $1.2 million, or 68%, when compared with a gross profit of approximately $1.8 million for 2020.
General and Administrative Expense: General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to approximately $10.7 million, compared to $2.7 million for the same period in 2020. The increase of approximately $8.0 million, or 293%, was primarily related to an increase for compensation, insurance and professional expenses incurred during the current period; including $4.2 million of equity-based compensation recorded for the RSUs and stock options granted. The increase was also due to an increase in insurance costs of $0.7 million and investor relation costs of $0.9 million. For 2021, general and administrative expenses consisted primarily of rent (total rent is included in general and administrative expenses including the clinical laboratory space), professional fees, insurance, and paid and accrued compensation costs.
Research and Development Expenses: Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, increased to approximately $7.1 million, from approximately $2.7 million for the same period in 2020. The increase of $4.4 million, or 165%, was primarily due to an increase in research and development expenses that were not reimbursable by grants; including $2.2 million of equity-based compensation recorded for the RSUs and stock options granted. Research and development expenses consisted primarily of the following items (less those expenses allocated to the cost of revenues for the grants)(in thousands):
Selling and Marketing Expenses: Selling and marketing expenses for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0.2 million. Selling and marketing expenses consists primarily of marketing fees recorded for our clinical programs.
Forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program loan: Forgiveness of Paycheck Protection Program loan for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.3 million, compared to $0 for the same period in 2020. The increase of $0.3 million, or 100% was due to the non-recurring nature of the forgiveness of the PPP loan.
Other Income: Other income for each of the year ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 was approximately $0.1 million. Other income for 2021 was primarily the result of $125,000 received in rental payments recorded from a sublease, $60,000 from recorded investment income, $58,000 from federal research tax credits, $17,000 from a gain resulting from an equity exchange, $85,000 unrealized loss on short-term investments and $60,000 for a loss on disposal of equipment.
Net Loss: Net loss increased to approximately $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, from a net loss of $3.7 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in the net loss of $13.3 million, or 358%, was for reasons outlined above.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for the period presented for the (in thousands):
Operating Activities. We have incurred losses since inception. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $9.6 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $17.0 million as we incurred expenses associated with research activities for our lead product candidates and incurred general and administrative expenses, including an aggregate of $6.4 million of equity-based compensation recorded for RSUs and stock options granted and $1.3 million for non-cash stock payments to consultants. Net cash used in operating activities for year ended December 31, 2020 was $2.4 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $3.7 million as we incurred expenses associated with research activities for our lead product candidates and incurred general and administrative expenses.
Investing Activities. Net cash used in investing activities for year ended December 31, 2021 was $10.7 million, consisting primarily of an increase of $9.4 million in short-term investments, recorded CRADA license agreement to intangibles of $0.8 million, and purchases of equipment of $0.3 million. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $0.3 million, consisting of purchases of property and equipment and capitalized intangible costs.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $45.2 million consisting primarily of $26.7 million in net proceeds received from our IPO and $18.6 million in net proceeds received from the 2021 PIPE Offering. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.6 million consisting primarily of $1.1 million in net proceeds received from subscription of our Series C membership units issued prior to our conversion from a Delaware limited liability company to a Delaware corporation (the “Corporate Conversion”), and proceeds from the SBA’s PPP loan of $0.3 million and Disaster Recovery Plan loan of $0.1 million.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses as we advance the preclinical and clinical development of our programs. We expect that our sales, research and development and general and administrative costs will increase in connection with conducting additional preclinical studies and clinical trials for our current and future programs and product candidates, contracting with CROs to support preclinical studies and clinical trials, expanding our intellectual property portfolio, and providing general and administrative support for our operations. As a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain from additional equity or debt financings, collaborations, licensing arrangements, or other sources.
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through our IPO, private equity financings, grant awards, and fees generated from the Bahamas Registry Trial and contract manufacturing services. Since we were formed, we have raised approximately $77.2 million in gross proceeds from the issuance of equity. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash, and cash equivalents of $25.7 million, short-term investments of $9.4 million and working capital of approximately $32.7 million. Revenue from our Bahamas Registry Trial, after the Bahamas lifted its COVID-19 travel restrictions, has been slowed due to continued concerns and complexities with respect to international travel.
Capital Raising Efforts
In our IPO, we sold 2,910,000 shares of Class A Common Stock at a public offering price of $10.00 per share for aggregate gross proceeds of $29.1 million, inclusive of the underwriter’s partial exercise of its over-allotment option, prior to deducting underwriting discounts, commissions, and other offering expenses.
The underwriter received warrants to purchase 106,400 Class A Common Stock shares. The warrants are exercisable at any time and from time to time, in whole or in part, during the four and a half-year period commencing August 12, 2021, at a price of $12.00 per Class A Common Stock share. During 2021, the underwriters assigned 95,760 of the warrants to its employees. As of December 31, 2021, 51,061 warrants have been exercised, that provided net proceeds to the Company of $0.6 million.
On December 3, 2021, we closed our 2021 PIPE Offering, whereby we undertook a private purchase and sale to certain accredited investors of an aggregate of 1,169,288 shares of our Class A Common Stock and Purchase Warrants to purchase 1,169,288 shares of Class A Common Stock at an initial exercise price of $17.50 per share, resulting in aggregate gross proceeds of $20.5 million prior to deducting fees and offering expenses. We also issued Representative Warrants, exercisable for 46,772 shares of Class A Common Stock to affiliates of Placement Agent with an exercise price of $17.50 per share.
Grant Awards
From inception through December 31, 2021, we have been awarded approximately $11.9 million in governmental and non-profit association grants, which have been used to fund our clinical trials, research and development, production and overhead. Grant awards are recognized as revenue, and depending on the funding mechanism, are deposited directly in our accounts as lump sums, which are staggered over a predetermined period, or drawn down from a federal payment management system account for reimbursement of expenses incurred. Revenue recognition occurs when the grant related expenses are incurred, or supplies and materials are received. As of December 31, 2021, and 2020, the amount of unused grant funds that were available for us to draw was approximately $0.8 million and $1.4 million, respectively. The following table summarizes the grants awarded.
(1) SBIR=Small Business Innovation Research programs; STTR=Small Business Technology Transfer programs; DHHS=Department of Health and Human Services; NIA = National Institute on Aging; NHLBI=National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
(2) Under the grant award agreement with the Alzheimer’s Association, we may be required to make revenue sharing or distribution of revenue payments for products or inventions generated or resulting from this clinical trial program. The potential payments, although not currently defined, could result in a maximum payment of five times (5x) the award amount.
(3) The HLHS Phase 2b clinical trial grant was awarded to Sunjay Kaushal, MD, PhD, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago, and the trial will be conducted under our IND and will test Lomecel-B. The total award was $4.6 million, and we have received $0.2 million of the approximately $0.5 million apportioned to us.
(4) MSCRF - TEDCO has sent the first tranche of $325,000.
Terms and Conditions of Grant Awards
Grant projects are typically divided into periods (e.g., a three-year grant may have three one-year periods), and the total amount awarded is divided according to the number of periods. At pre-specified time points, which are detailed in the grant award notifications, we are required to submit interim financial and scientific reports to the granting agency totaling funds spent, and in some cases, detailing use of proceeds and progress made during the reporting period. After funding the initial period, receipt of additional grant funds is contingent upon satisfactory submission of our interim reports to the granting agency.
Grant awards arise from submitting detailed research proposals to granting agencies, and winning a highly competitive and rigorous application review and process that is judged on the merits of the proposal. There are typically multiple applicants applying and competing for a finite amount of funds. As such we cannot be sure that we will be awarded grant funds in the future despite our past success in receiving such awards.
Funding Requirements
Our operating costs will continue to increase substantially for the foreseeable future in connection with our ongoing activities. In past years we have been able to fund a large portion of our clinical programs and our administrative overhead with the use of grant funding.
Specifically, our expenses will increase as we:
● advance the clinical development of Lomecel-B for the treatment of several disease states and indications;
● pursue the preclinical and clinical development of other current and future research programs and product candidates;
● in-license or acquire the rights to other products, product candidates or technologies;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional personnel in research, manufacturing and regulatory and clinical development as well as management personnel;
● seek regulatory approval for any product candidates that successfully complete clinical development; and
● expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our operations as a public company.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements through 2022. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be imprecise, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of our product candidates, it is difficult to estimate with certainty the amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the progress, costs and results of our clinical trials for our programs for our cell-based therapies;
● the progress, costs and results of additional research and preclinical studies in other research programs we initiate in the future;
● the costs and timing of process development and manufacturing scale-up activities associated with our product candidates and other programs we advance through preclinical and clinical development;
● our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other agreements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● the extent to which we in-license or acquire rights to other products, product candidates or technologies; and
● the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and protecting our intellectual property rights and defending against any intellectual property-related claims.
Further, our operating results may change in the future, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. Until such time, if ever, that we can generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, grant awards, collaboration agreements, other third-party funding, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and marketing and distribution arrangements.
We currently have no credit facility or committed sources of capital. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other third-party funding, collaboration agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our biologic drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market products or product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
In order to meet our operational goals, we will need to obtain additional capital, which we will likely obtain through a variety of means, including through public or private equity, debt financings or other sources, including up-front payments and milestone payments from strategic collaborations. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of convertible debt or equity securities, your ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights as a stockholder. Such financing may result in dilution to stockholders, imposition of debt covenants, increased fixed payment obligations or other restrictions that may affect our business. If we raise additional funds through up-front payments or milestone payments pursuant to strategic collaborations with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, or grant licenses on terms that are not favorable to us. In addition, we may seek additional capital due to favorable market conditions or strategic considerations even if we believe we have sufficient funds for our current or future operating plans.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, we have $3.1 million in operating lease obligations and $4.3 million in contract research organization obligations. We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with third-party contract organizations for clinical trials, preclinical studies, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination following a certain period after notice and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
We have not included milestone or royalty payments or other contractual payment obligations if the timing and amount of such obligations are unknown or uncertain.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition, results of operations and liquidity are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, judgements and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may materially differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an on-going basis, we review our estimates to ensure that they appropriately reflect changes in our business or new information as it becomes available.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our financial statements included in this 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical due to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Intangible assets. Intangible assets include payments on license agreements with our co-founder and Chief Science Officer and the University of UM and legal costs incurred related to patents and trademarks. License agreements have been recorded at the value of cash consideration and/or estimated value of membership units transferred to the respective parties when acquired. Payments on license agreements are amortized using the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of 20 years. Patents are amortized over their estimated useful life, once issued. We consider trademarks to have an indefinite useful life and evaluate them for impairment on an annual basis. Amortization expense is recorded in the research and development line of the Statement of Operations as the assets are primarily related to our clinical programs.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. We evaluate long-lived assets for impairment, including property and equipment and intangible assets, when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Upon the occurrence of a triggering event, the asset is reviewed to assess whether the estimated undiscounted cash flows expected from the use of the asset plus the residual value from the ultimate disposal exceeds the carrying value of the asset. If the carrying value exceeds the estimated recoverable amounts, the asset is written down to the estimated fair value. Any resulting impairment loss is reflected on the statements of operations. Management determined that there was no impairment of long-lived assets during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Deferred revenue. The unearned portion of advanced grant funds and prepayments for clinical trial revenue, which will be recognized as revenue when we meet the respective performance obligations, has been presented as deferred revenue in our balance sheets. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized $0 and $0.5 million, respectively, of funds that were previously classified as deferred revenue.
Revenue recognition. Effective January 1, 2018, we adopted ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which establishes a single and comprehensive framework on how much revenue is to be recognized, and when. The core principle is that a vendor should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the vendor expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Revenue will be recognized by a vendor when control over the goods or services is transferred to the customer.
We recognize revenue when performance obligations related to respective revenue streams are met. For Grant Revenue, we consider the performance obligation met when the grant related expenses are incurred, or supplies and materials are received. For clinical trial revenue, we consider the performance obligation met when the participant has received the therapy. For Contract Manufacturing Revenue, we consider the performance obligation met when the contractual obligation and / or statement of work has been satisfied.
Cost of revenues. We record cost of revenues based on expenses directly related to revenue. For grant revenue, we record allocated expenses for research and development costs to a grant as a cost of revenues. Expenses directly related to clinical trial revenue are allocated and accrued as incurred. These expenses are similar to as described in the Research and development expense note.
Research and development expense. Research and development costs are charged to expense when incurred in accordance with FASB ASC 730, Research and Development. Research and development include costs such as clinical trial expenses, contracted research and license agreement fees with no alternative future use, supplies and materials, salaries, share-based compensation, employee benefits, property and equipment depreciation and allocation of various corporate costs. We accrue for costs incurred by external service providers, including contract research organizations and clinical investigators, based on estimates of service performed and costs incurred. These estimates include the level of services performed by the third parties, subject enrollment in clinical trials, administrative costs incurred by the third parties, and other indicators of the services completed. Based on the timing of amounts invoiced by service providers, we may also record payments made to those providers as prepaid expenses that will be recognized as expense in future periods as the related services are rendered.
Equity-based compensation. We account for equity-based compensation expense by the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for unit-based awards based on estimated fair values on the date of grant. The fair value of incentive awards are estimated at the date of the grant using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
The Black-Scholes option-pricing model requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, the most significant of which are the expected unit price volatility, the expected life of the option award, the risk-free rate of return, and dividends during the expected term. Because the option-pricing model is sensitive to changes in the input assumptions, different determinations of the required inputs may result in different fair value estimates for the incentive awards.
The Company estimates the fair value of its units by using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Volatility is a measure of the amount by which a financial variable, such as a unit price, has fluctuated (historical volatility) or is expected to fluctuate (expected volatility) during a period. Given the Company’s limited historical data, the Company utilizes the average historical volatility of publicly traded companies that are similar in the same industry. The risk-free interest rate is the average U.S. treasury rate (having a term that most closely approximates the expected life of the option) for the period in which the option was granted. The expected life is the period of time that the options granted are expected to remain outstanding. Incentive awards have a maximum term of ten years. The Company had insufficient historical data to utilize in determining its expected life assumptions and, therefore, uses the simplified method for determining expected life.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act, or JOBS Act, which is a law intended to encourage funding of small businesses in the U.S. by easing many of the country’s securities regulations, and we may take advantage of reduced reporting requirements that are otherwise applicable to public companies. Section 107 of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies are required to comply with those standards. We have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards; and as a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates. The JOBS Act also exempts us from having to provide an auditor attestation of internal control over financial reporting under Sarbanes-Oxley Act Section 404(b).
We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (1) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenues of $1.07 billion or more, (2) the last day of the fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (3) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the previous three years or (4) the date on which we are deemed to be a large accelerated filer under the rules of the SEC, which generally is when a company has more than $700 million in market value of its reported class of stock held by non-affiliates and has been a public company for at least 12 months and have filed at least one Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recent accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our audited financial statements included in Item 8 of this 10-K.