Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions, that are based on the beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in or implied by these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the section of this Annual Report titled “Risk Factors.”
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including a year-to-year comparison between 2021 and 2020, is presented below.
Overview
We are a medical technology company on a mission to bring central laboratory quality testing for infectious diseases into the home and point of care settings. We aim to have disposable, single use test kit platform replace central lab testing for accurately diagnosing infectious diseases leading to faster treatment and better disease control outcomes. We believe that society benefits from real-time and accurate disease detection in order to deploy time-sensitive therapeutic treatments for the individual and reduce spread of infection in the community. Currently, the United States relies on centralized lab testing for accurate disease detection. We believe testing labs are too geographically centralized, rely too heavily on instrumented equipment, and are expensive and difficult to access. With our PCR-quality technology, we offer decentralized and accessible single-use testing for infectious diseases. Our test kits are coupled with our digital platform, LUCI PASS, which is designed to securely deliver a clinically relevant test result to users, healthcare providers, and to required public health authorities. We plan on developing and commercializing lab quality single-use test kits for several infectious diseases and have started by commercializing our PCR-quality COVID-19 test kits.
The COVID-19 pandemic has placed unprecedented pressure on the current U.S. healthcare system. We believe the pandemic demonstrated that the infectious disease testing infrastructure in the United States was too quickly overwhelmed to efficiently and reliably detect COVID-19 early enough to drive effective treatment and better patient outcomes. To suppress the spread of infection in the population, we believe testing should be fast, accurate, and away from other people so as to reduce potential transmission. While PCR lab testing for COVID-19 is trusted and accurate, it is slow, inconvenient and centralized. Rapid at-home antigen testing for COVID-19 is fast and decentralized but the test method has accuracy challenges, especially in the face of variants. There are widespread reports of people receiving negative test results from rapid antigen test kits only to receive a positive PCR result days later from the lab. We believe false negative results from rapid antigen testing can create a false sense of security, confuse the public, and lead to increased infection rates.
With our platform, we are reimagining current infectious disease testing through innovative test kits that are designed to deliver on-the-spot testing with PCR-quality in a single-use, portable, and easy-to-use format. Our platform is designed to produce assays that combine the accuracy and reliability of PCR tests and the accessibility and ease of use of antigen tests. Our molecular test kits are designed to be diagnostically definitive, unlike the antigen tests on the market today. Importantly, our tests also provide a platform for both symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals to easily check their COVID-19 infection status in 30 minutes or less, thus providing a testing solution that can be utilized at high scale as we begin navigating a new normal living with COVID-19 as an endemic disease.
While people have tested to prevent spread of infection through isolation and hoped for recovery, we believe that moving forward, people will seek PCR-quality at-home tests to treat infection as quickly as possible. We believe this new “test to treat” paradigm will become increasingly important as COVID-19 becomes endemic. This is because new therapies for COVID-19 infection are now available contingent upon accurate and early testing. We believe our test kits can play an important role in facilitating a “test to treat” paradigm because our tests are PCR-quality and therefore able to detect infection early, which can lead to early therapy and potentially better outcomes. This is because PCR lab testing is understood to detect viral genetic material at the earliest stages of
infection because it amplifies trace amounts of virus DNA. Rapid antigen tests are understood to be less sensitive because antigen tests do not amplify the virus. A person must have first produced enough antigens in their body to return a positive result, which could be up to seven days into their infectious stage and mostly past the time for an anti-viral to be effective. We believe this leads to potential delays in detection and a potential loss of trust in rapid antigen test results.
Our first commercially available PCR-quality diagnostic test was the LUCIRA COVID-19 All-In-One Test Kit, which received EUA from the FDA for prescription use in at-home and POC settings. Our COVID-19 test kit was the first at-home self-test to receive FDA EUA authorization, and remains the only FDA EUA authorized single-use molecular test for at-home use. On April 9, 2021, we received our first FDA EUA authorization for OTC non-prescription use among symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals aged 14 and older (with self-collection) and children aged 2-13 (with parent collection) and launched LUCI PASS, our digital platform designed to securely record and share verified test results via text messaging. The LUCIRA CHECK IT COVID-19 Test Kit utilizes identical components to the LUCIRA COVID-19 All-In-One Test Kit and both are referred to as test kits or COVID-19 test kits. We have since received authorization from Health Canada, PSAR approval by Singapore’s Health Sciences Authority, approval from the Taiwan Ministry of Health and Welfare for emergency use, and approved registration from Israel. In the second half of 2022, we hope to obtain several new regulatory approvals including extending our EUA authorization into full FDA approval via de novo application, CE Mark, and submissions to the United Kingdom and Australia to further extend access to international markets.
Our PCR-quality platform is designed with a flexible assay architecture in which we can largely leverage all these components to accelerate the development of new test kits for additional indications, including other infectious diseases such STIs and other respiratory infections. We plan on seeking EUA authorization from FDA for prescription use, authorization from Health Canada and European Medicines Agency, and CE Mark, to commercialize a COVID/flu combo test in the first half of 2022.
Since inception through December 31, 2021, we generated $93.4 million of revenue from the sales of our test kits. Prior to the closing of our IPO, we had financed our operations principally from net proceeds of approximately $137.3 million from sales of our preferred stock, issuances of convertible debt and common stock issuances. On February 9, 2021, we closed our IPO of 10,350,000 shares of common stock, including 1,350,000 shares issued pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares, at a price to the public of $17.00 per share. The net proceeds to us from the IPO were $159.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.3 million and offering expenses of $3.7 million.
On February 4, 2022, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, or Loan Agreement, with Hercules Capital, Inc., or Hercules and Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB. The Loan Agreement provides for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $80.0 million available in four tranches with the first tranche for $30.0 million funded to us at closing. The term loans will mature on February 1, 2026. In connection with the entry into the Loan Agreement, we issued a warrant for 59,642 shares of common stock to each of Hercules and SVB. Each warrant is exercisable for a period of seven years from issuance at a per-share exercise price equal to $5.03. For a more detailed description of the Loan Agreement and warrants, see Note 13 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We have historically incurred substantial net losses as we continue to develop and begin commercializing our COVID-19 test kit and we may incur additional losses and increases expenses in future periods. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $128.5 million.
Since the second quarter of 2020, we have primarily devoted our resources to the research, development, manufacturing and commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit. Research and development activities related to our test kits, including the COVID-19 test kit, include clinical, regulatory and manufacturing process initiatives. We expect that our sales and marketing, research and development, regulatory and other expenses will continue to increase as we expand our marketing efforts to promote adoption of our COVID-19 test kit, build relationships with our customers, obtain regulatory clearances or approvals for current and any future test kits, qualify manufacturing expansion, and conduct clinical trials. In addition, we expect our general and administrative expenses to continue to increase due to the additional costs associated with scaling our business operations,
including personnel costs related to increased headcount for administrative, accounting, information technology, legal and compliance functions as well as facilities related costs. As a result, we will require substantial capital to fund manufacturing expansion, inventory purchases and expenses related to our operating activities, including selling, general and administrative expenses, as well as research and development.
In 2020, we entered into several license and manufacturing and services agreements, and in 2021, we entered into several distribution agreements. For a more detailed description of our license and manufacturing, services and distributions agreements, see Part I, Item 1, “Business- Intellectual Property- License Agreement with Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd.,” “Business-Manufacturing and Supply,” “Business-Intellectual Property-Distribution Agreement with Switch” and Note 2 and Note 5 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Factors Affecting Our Business
We believe the following significant factors affect our business:
•
Approval and Market Adoption of Our Test Kits. Our commercial success, including acceptance and use of our test kits, will depend upon a number of factors, some of which are beyond our control, including the receipt of regulatory approvals for additional indications of our COVID-19 test kit and new products and timing thereof, size of the market opportunity, demand from the public and members of the medical community for our test kits and rate of adoption of our test kits. The commercial success of our test kits will be dependent upon sales to physicians and healthcare providers, businesses, consumers and international markets. Our ability to successfully execute on this strategy, and thereby increase our revenue, will in part drive our results of operations and impact on our business.
•
Cost of Revenue. The results of our business will depend in part on our ability to establish and increase our gross margins by effectively managing our costs to produce our test kits. To better meet the market demand for decentralized diagnostic testing, a key part of our growth strategy includes expanding our current manufacturing capacity and adding automation to the manufacturing process. Our test kits have been designed for automated production. We plan to expand manufacturing to additional locations to further our manufacturing capacity and reach.
•
Status of COVID-19 Pandemic. Given the unpredictable nature of the COVID-19 pandemic, the size of the COVID-19 diagnostic testing market and the timing of its development are highly uncertain. There are currently three COVID-19 vaccines authorized for emergency use or FDA-approved. Although breakthrough cases occur with highly transmissible COVID-19 variants, such as Omicron, the widely administered use of efficacious vaccines or new therapeutic treatment for COVID-19 may reduce the demand for COVID-19 diagnostic tests and, as a result, the COVID-19 diagnostic testing market may not substantially grow. However, we believe COVID-19, like influenza, will remain endemic for the foreseeable future and there will be a continued need for COVID-19 testing. We believe this is largely due to the COVID-19 pandemic resulting in hyper-sensitivity to symptoms, breakthrough cases and broader awareness of the disease. Our future success with our COVID-19 test kit is substantially dependent on the manner in which the market for COVID-19 diagnostics develops and grows.
•
Seasonality. Our ability to accurately forecast demand for our test kits could be negatively affected by many factors, including seasonal demand. We anticipate that we will experience fluctuations in customer and user demand based on seasonality, which for COVID-19, remains unknown. However, for example, because influenza typically occurs in the fall and winter seasons, we expect our forecasts of inventory for these seasons to reflect a significant increase in inventory relative to our forecasts for the spring and summer seasons. Inventory levels in excess of customer and user demand may result in inventory write-downs or write-offs, which would cause our gross margin to be adversely affected.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth the significant components of our results of operations for the years presented.
Net Sales
We currently derive all of our revenue from the sales of our COVID-19 test kits, which we account for in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Codifications, or ASC, Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Product revenue is recognized upon the transfer of control of our test kits to the customer, which occurs at a point in time, typically upon shipment to the customer, unless terms of contractual arrangements with customers state otherwise in which case the control is transferred upon completion of delivery and customer acceptance of products.
The increase in revenue in 2021 was primarily due to increased volume in units sold driven primarily by increased manufacturing output as demand continued to be strong. We did not commence revenue generating activities until December 2020, following receipt of our first EUA for our test kit in November 2020. We generated net sales of $0.3 million from the sale of COVID-19 test kits in 2020.
Our commercial strategic objective is to deploy our COVID-19 test kit to new and existing customers who will continue to require accurate and immediate diagnoses as COVID-19 moves to the endemic stage. Throughout 2021 we discovered that customers specifically sought our testing solution.
We believe these customers will be durable, repeat long-term customers of our testing solutions because of their need for accuracy, immediacy, and portability of COVID-19 testing. In the future we expect their needs will evolve into a combo COVID-19/flu PCR-quality test. We believe these durable customers fall into four customer
segments: (1) U.S. healthcare systems and providers; (2) sophisticated business and governments; (3) self-directed consumers in the home; and (4) international customers with local market needs.
In April 2021, we received an EUA for an OTC indication for our COVID-19 test kit. We generated net revenue of $93.1 million from the sale of COVID-19 test kits during 2021.
We may experience fluctuations in net sales as a result of changes in customer and user demand for our test kits based on seasonality, which for COVID-19 remains unknown. Our revenue may also fluctuate from quarter-to-quarter due to a variety of factors, including our ability to successfully expand our commercial sales function to meet anticipated customer demand, the number of businesses and healthcare providers who are aware of and use our test, and the availability of reimbursement.
Cost of Products Sold
Costs of products sold includes cost of raw materials and supplies for our finished test kits, direct labor, contract manufacturing fees, in-bound and internal shipping and handling costs incurred in manufacturing our test kits, royalties, allocated overhead, and depreciation expense.
Much like our revenue, we began to generate cost of products sold in December 2020, after we received an EUA from the FDA for POC and prescription-at-home use of our COVID-19 test kit. The increase in cost of products sold was due to increased volume in units sold. We did not commence revenue generating activities until December 2020. For 2021, we sold $1.0 million of inventory that was previously written off prior to the receipt of the EUA.
We expect that cost of products sold will increase on an absolute basis as the number of COVID-19 test kits we sell increases. On a per unit basis, the cost of our test kit may decrease over time due to anticipated volume discounts on outsourced manufacturing costs, materials and shipping costs, and through other volume efficiencies we may gain as the number of test kits manufactured increases. We may experience fluctuations in our cost of products sold, which similar to net sales volumes, may be impacted by changes in customer and user demand for our test kits based on seasonality, which for COVID-19 remains unknown.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
During 2021, certain facts and circumstances indicated that costs of certain assets, primarily those associated with dry room facilities affixed to the Auburn Hills Michigan manufacturing facility, may not be recoverable before the end of their previously estimated useful life. Based on these facts and circumstances, we conducted an impairment analysis, which resulted in recording an impairment charge of $1.4 million during 2021, related to these assets.
Gross Profit (Loss)
Gross profit increased during 2021 as compared to 2020, as a result of the increase in net sales of our COVID-19 test kit following the EUA approval received in November 2020 and efficiencies resulting from increased manufacturing output.
We expect our gross profit to be affected by a variety of factors, including sales volume of our test kit, pricing pressures, the success of our cost-reduction strategies, the cost of test kit materials, manufacturing costs, and headcount. We expect our margin to increase to the extent we are successful in our ability to lower the costs associated with the production of our test kits, that includes increasing our production output in a lower cost environment and utilizing high volume manufacturing equipment in much of the production process. If these efforts are successful, we believe we will lower production costs and will be able to increase our gross margin. While our gross margin may increase, we also anticipate it will likely fluctuate from quarter to quarter.
Research and Development Expenses
We primarily perform our own research and development while obtaining supplemental resources from third parties to conduct our pre-clinical studies, clinical trials and manufacturing of test batches of test kits. The costs of these activities consist primarily of personnel related expenses, including stock-based compensation expense, third-party consultants, costs associated with regulatory compliance and laboratory supplies and materials, along with other direct and allocated expenses such as facility costs, depreciation, and other shared expenses. We expense research and development costs in the periods in which they are incurred. At any one time, we may be working on the development of multiple test kits. Our internal resources, employees and allocated expenses are not directly tied to any one test kit and are typically deployed across multiple test kits. As such, we do not track internal costs on a specific test kit basis.
Research and development expenses increased $15.2 million, or 62%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily due to increased expenses related to continued development and clinical activities to support new products and to support manufacturing activities, including the redevelopment of our manufacturing and quality release process in the Dominican Republic. We supported research and development activities such as test kit development, testing, and validation of manufacturing activities related to our COVID-19 test kit through increased personnel-related expenses of $3.8 million, third-party professional services of $3.4 million, depreciation expense of $1.0 million, and supplies and materials of $3.9 million.
We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in absolute dollars, but will vary as a percentage of revenue, as we continue to invest in development activities related to our current and future test kits and as our revenue increases as a result of sales of our COVID-19 test kits.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of personnel costs, including stock-based compensation expense, accounting and legal expenses, consulting costs, insurance and allocated overhead including rent, depreciation and utilities.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $29.9 million, or 531%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was primarily due to commercially launching our COVID-19 test kit and being a public company. We had higher headcount and personnel-related expenses of $13.9 million which includes an expense of $4.3 million related to the departure of a former executive, professional expenses of $5.9 million to support our commercial activities, office related expenses of $1.8 million, which primarily relate to additional leased locations, and public company compliance and insurance of $4.6 million.
We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase as we invest in the infrastructure of our commercial and sales organization to support the commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit. We expect our general and administrative expenses will increase in support of our expanding operations including increased headcount and related personnel costs, investments in corporate and research facilities, information technology, increased compliance related costs accounting, audit, legal and consulting services expenses.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of grant income, offset by interest expense and adjustment upon remeasurement of derivative liabilities and convertible notes.
Grant Income
We earn grant income for performing tasks under research and development agreements with governmental agencies, such as the National Institutes of Health, or NIH, in respect of work performed on STI developments. Income derived from reimbursement of direct out-of-pocket expenses, overhead allocations and fringe benefits for research costs associated with government contracts are recorded within grant income. Grant
income is recorded at the gross amount of the reimbursement. The direct costs associated with these reimbursements are reflected as a component of Research and development expense in our Statements of Operations.
Grant income decreased $1.5 million, or 72%, in 2021 compared to 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the stoppage of BARDA billing in June 2020 as we shifted our near-term business strategy from the development of influenza test kits to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Income (Expense), net
Interest income consists of interest earned on our invested cash balances following our IPO. Interest expense consists of contractual and effective interest incurred on our bank financing arrangements and outstanding convertible notes during the relevant periods.
Interest income (expense), net increased during 2021 resulting from interest earned on invested cash balances following the IPO in the first quarter of 2021, as compared to interest expense for 2020, resulting from interest incurred on our outstanding convertible notes.
We expect our interest income (expense), net may fluctuate depending on the amount of interest income earned on available invested cash balances and the degree offset by interest expense incurred on outstanding balances under our bank financing arrangement.
Remeasurement of Derivative Liabilities and Convertible Notes
During 2020 and portions of 2021, prior to our IPO, we issued certain convertible notes which contained embedded features that met the definition of embedded derivatives. Accordingly, we classify the convertible notes and related embedded features as liabilities on our Balance Sheets and record changes in fair value at each balance sheet date with the corresponding change recorded as Other income (expense), net on the Statement of Operations.
For 2021, we recorded a change in the fair value related to the remeasurement of derivative liabilities and convertible notes upon conversion of the notes to common stock at the closing of our IPO in the first quarter of 2021. For 2020, we recorded a change in the fair value related to the remeasurement of derivative liabilities and convertible notes related to the conversion of certain of these notes to shares of our preferred stock.
Provision for Income Taxes
The increase in provision for income taxes in 2021 was due to an increase in state franchise taxes. The effective tax rate for 2021 and 2020 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to no federal taxable income for both fiscal years.
Our effective annual tax rate may increase if we generate higher federal and state pretax income or establish nexus in additional states as we continue to expand our operations and sales into markets.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our existing cash, cash generated from revenue, and cash draws from the bank financing arrangement (see Note 13 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report) will enable us to fund our business operations for at least 12 months from the date hereof. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could exhaust our available capital resources sooner than we expect.
Sources of Liquidity
Our primary source of operating cash is cash collected from customers related to sales of our COVID-19 test kit, which we expect will increase as we expand to meet customer demand for our test kits. We may supplement
our cash operating needs by entering into additional loan and other financing arrangements, additional public offerings of our common stock or convertible notes. There can be no assurance that such sources of cash will be readily available during times required to meet our cash operating requirements or at terms favorable to us.
We have incurred net losses since our inception. For 2021 and 2020, we incurred a net loss of $64.8 million and $37.3 million, respectively. We may incur additional losses and increased operating expenses in future periods. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $128.5 million. To date, we have generated only limited grant income and product revenue, and we may never achieve revenue sufficient to offset our expenses or at all. As of December 31, 2021, we had $106.0 million in cash.
In December 2020, we issued and sold convertible notes, or the 2020B Notes, in the aggregate principal amount of $20.0 million in a private placement, which, in addition to the accrued interest thereon, automatically converted into shares of our common stock at a conversion price equal to 80% of the IPO price per share. On February 9, 2021, we closed our IPO of 10,350,000 shares of common stock, including 1,350,000 shares issued pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase additional shares in the IPO, at a price to the public of $17.00 per share. The net proceeds to us from the IPO were $159.9 million, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of $12.3 million and offering expenses of $3.7 million.
In February 2022, we entered into the Loan Agreement with Hercules and SVB providing for term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $80.0 million available in four tranches with the first tranche for $30.0 million funded to us at closing. The term loans will mature on February 1, 2026. In connection with the entry into the Loan Agreement, we issued a warrant for 59,642 shares of common stock to each of Hercules and SVB. Each warrant is exercisable for a period of seven years from issuance at a per-share exercise price equal to $5.03. Subject to certain conditions as required under the Loan Agreement, we will draw upon these term loads to fund our operations as needed to support our planned growth and expansion to support the expected increase in demand for our test kits. See Note 13 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Uses of Liquidity
Our primary uses of cash are to fund our operations as we continue to grow our business. We may require a significant amount of cash to fund capital expenditures, inventory purchases and timing of accounts receivable as we grow our commercial infrastructure. We may continue to incur operating losses in the near term as our operating expenses will be increased to support the growth of our business. We expect that our selling, general and administrative expenses, and research and development expenses will continue to increase as we seek additional regulatory approvals and further develop test kits, increase our test kit manufacturing volume, expand our marketing efforts and increase our internal sales force to drive increased adoption of our test kits.
We may also have cash requirements related to capital expenditures to support the planned growth of our business, including investments in corporate facilities and equipment.
In January 2015, we entered into a lease for office, research and development space located in Emeryville, California that expires in March 2022. Pursuant to the same lease agreement, we leased additional square feet of office and development space in Emeryville, California that expires in January 2024. In July 2021, we leased an additional 13,267 square feet of office, research and development space in Emeryville, California that expires in June 2024, and in August 2021, we leased an additional 14,835 square feet of office and laboratory space in San Jose, California which serves as our quality headquarters. Pursuant to the same lease agreement, in December 2021, we leased additional square feet of office and laboratory space in San Jose, California. In March 2022, we leased an 82,000 square foot facility in Vista, California for office, development, research and laboratory space and expect to assume full occupancy by August 2022 after completing tenant improvements. For the 12 month period ending December 31, 2022, we project that our fixed commitments will include $1.7 million of lease payments.
Pursuant to the Eiken Agreement we entered into in July 2020, we are obligated to make milestone payments upon the achievement of specified regulatory milestones as well as royalty payments. In April 2021, we paid the first installment of the world-wide license in the amount of $9 thousand. The second installment for the world-wide license of $9 thousand was paid in July 2021. See Part I, Item 1, “Business-Intellectual Property-
License Agreement with Eiken Chemical Co., Ltd.” and Note 5 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. On March 8, 2022, we provided notice of termination of the Eiken Agreement. Termination will be effective May 12, 2022. We terminated the Eiken Agreement because certain Eiken Licensed Patents have expired, all of which are locations in which we operate. Following termination of the Eiken Agreement, we will not be required to make any future royalty payments under the Eiken Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had non-cancellable purchase commitments of $95.0 million, consisting primarily of $68.5 million of raw material purchase commitments and fixed assets related to expanding our manufacturing capacity, and $26.5 million pursuant to the Jabil MSA and Jabil TSA. Under the Jabil MSA, we are obligated to provide, on a monthly basis, a rolling 12-month forecast to Jabil as well as 12-months of historical aggregate end customer demand at the finished product level, when available, which will be used to constitute written purchase orders from us, and we are obligated to purchase the quantity of products that is required by the first four months of each forecast.
In July 2021, we entered into the Distribution Agreement with Switch, as amended in December 2021, under which we appointed Switch as a non-exclusive distributor for our CHECK IT test kit in Canada and agreed to provide more than two million test kits in 2022. Under the Distribution Agreement, Switch is required to provide us with forecasts of the quantity of test kits that Switch expects to order for each of the coming 12 calendar months through December 2022 and each six-month period following December 2022, each, a Rolling Forecast. For each calendar month in the Rolling Forecast, Switch is required to purchase at least the quantity of test kits set forth in the Rolling Forecast for such month. The on-going purchases of our test kits and subsequent sale under the Switch distribution agreement is expected to support our cash operating needs as we expand our sales efforts. See Part I, Item 1, “Business-Intellectual Property-Distribution Agreement with Switch” and Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
We also enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various vendors that generally provide for contract termination following a certain notice period. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided, expenses incurred up to the date of cancellation and de minimis termination penalties.
We expect that our near and longer-term liquidity requirements will continue to consist of working capital and general corporate expenses associated with the growth of our business. Based on our current planned operations, we expect that our existing cash, cash generated from revenue, and cash draws from the bank financing arrangement (see Note 13 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report) will enable us to fund our operating expenses for at least 12 months from the date of this filing. We have based our estimates as to how long we expect we will be able to fund our operations on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we would use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect, in which case we would be required to obtain additional financing, which may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Furthermore, we may elect to raise additional capital on an opportunistic basis to fund operations. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We may raise additional capital through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, including potentially collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our existing stockholders’ rights. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through other third-party funding, collaborations agreements, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements or marketing and distribution arrangements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or test kits or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us.
Our ability to raise additional funds may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the disruptions to, and volatility in, the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, including severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth,
increases in unemployment rates, and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. If we are not able to secure adequate additional funding when needed, we will need to re-evaluate our operating plan and may be forced to make reductions in spending, extend payment terms with suppliers, liquidate assets where possible, limit, suspend or curtail planned test kit development programs and commercialization efforts, cease operations entirely. Having insufficient funds may also require us to relinquish rights to technology that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves, or on less favorable terms than we would otherwise choose. The foregoing actions and circumstances could materially adversely impact our business, results of operations and future prospects.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the years indicated:
Cash Flows Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for 2021 was $100.9 million, consisting of our net loss of $64.8 million and changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $57.2 million, partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $21.2 million. The non-cash charges were primarily driven by $8.1 million in stock-based compensation expense, $3.7 million in depreciation and amortization, $1.4 million in impairment on long-lived assets, $6.5 million in inventory obsolescence adjustment, $0.4 million of allowance for doubtful accounts, $0.8 million in noncash lease expense and the loss incurred of $0.3 million on the remeasurement to fair value of the 2020B Notes. The net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by $52.4 million of inventory purchases, $27.3 million of accounts receivable as we entered our first full year of commercialization and $8.4 million of prepaid expenses and other assets, partially offset by $39.1 million increases in accounts payable, accrued liabilities, and customer deposits. The increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities were largely due to increased expenditures in operations, research and development, and selling, general and administrative activities.
Net cash used in operating activities for 2020 was $32.5 million, consisting primarily of our net loss of $37.3 million and changes in our net operating assets and liabilities of $3.8 million, partially offset by adjustments for non-cash charges of $8.5 million. The non-cash charges were primarily driven by the loss incurred of $7.5 million on the remeasurement to fair value of the 2020B Notes and to a lesser extent by $0.7 million in stock-based compensation expense and depreciation and amortization expense. The net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by $4.9 million of inventory purchases and $6.4 million of prepaid expenses and deferred costs related to our IPO, partially offset by collections of $1.6 million in grant income receivable and $6.5 million increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities. The increases in accounts payable and accrued liabilities were largely due to increased expenditures in research and development and selling, general and administrative activities.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for 2021 and 2020 was $15.4 million and $18.8 million, respectively, consisting of purchases of property and equipment. The decrease was primarily due to investing in our manufacturing capabilities to support the commercialization of our COVID-19 test kit.
Cash Flows Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was $161.7 million, consisting primarily of $159.9 million in proceeds from the issuance and sale of shares of our common stock as part of our IPO on February 9, 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was $107.8 million, consisting primarily of $76.1 million in proceeds from the issuance and sale of shares of our preferred stock and $31.1 million from the issuance of convertible debt.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Management Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report that have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, equity, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures. An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it requires an accounting estimate to be made based on assumptions about matters that are highly uncertain at the time the estimate is made, and if different estimates that reasonably could have been used, or changes in the accounting estimates that are reasonably likely to occur periodically, could materially impact our financial condition and results of operations. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates including, but not limited to: those related to revenue recognition, including determining the nature and timing of satisfaction of performance obligations, and determining the standalone selling price of performance obligations, and variable consideration such as rebates, chargebacks, sales returns and sales allowances; recoverability of inventory; the accrual for certain liabilities including certain research and development expenses; and valuations of equity awards used to determine stock-based compensation; and the amounts of deferred tax assets and liabilities including the related valuation allowance. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other market-specific and other relevant assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates.
We believe our critical accounting policies relating to revenue recognition, inventory, stock-based compensation and income taxes reflect the more significant estimates and assumptions used in the preparation of our Balance Sheets and Statements of Operations.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our audited financial statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe that the accounting policies discussed below are critical to understanding our historical and future performance, as these policies relate to the more significant areas involving management’s judgments and estimates.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that an entity determines are within the scope of ASC Topic 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)
identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)
identify the performance obligations in the contract;
(iii)
determine the transaction price;
(iv)
allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
(v)
recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
Under ASC 606, assuming all other revenue recognition criteria have been met, we recognize revenue for arrangements upon the transfer of control of our products to our customers, which is upon the shipment of the product to the customer under our standard terms and conditions, unless underlying customer agreements specify otherwise. There are no further performance obligations by us to the customer after shipment of the product. Control of our products is transferred at a point in time.
Revenue is measured based on the amount of consideration that we expect to receive as reduced by estimated discounts and allowances.
Inventories Produced in Preparation for Product Launches
We capitalize our inventories produced in preparation for product launches sufficient to support estimated initial market demand. Typically, capitalization of such inventory begins when positive results have been obtained for the clinical trials that we determine are necessary to support regulatory approval, uncertainties regarding ultimate regulatory approval have been significantly reduced and we determine it is probable that these capitalized costs will provide future economic benefit in excess of capitalized costs. The factors considered by us in evaluating these uncertainties include the receipt and analysis of positive clinical test results for the underlying product, results from meetings with the relevant regulatory authorities prior to the filing of regulatory applications, and the submission of the regulatory application. We closely monitor the status of each respective product within the regulatory approval process, including all relevant communication with regulatory authorities. If we are aware of any specific material risks or contingencies other than the normal regulatory review and approval process or if there are any specific issues identified relating to safety, efficacy, manufacturing, marketing or labeling, the related inventory would generally not be capitalized.
For inventories that are capitalized in preparation of product launch, anticipated future sales, expected approval date and shelf lives are evaluated in assessing realizability. The shelf life of a product is determined as part of the regulatory approval process; however, in evaluating whether to capitalize pre-launch inventory production costs, we consider the product stability data of all of the pre-approval production to date to determine whether there is adequate expected shelf life for the capitalized pre-launch production costs. Prior to obtaining the EUA for our COVID-19 test kit on November 17, 2020, we charged $2.3 million of preapproval inventory to research and development expense. After the receipt of the EUA in November 2020, we account for all production item purchases as inventory in accordance with its standard inventories policy. Preapproval inventories previously recorded as research and development expense that are subsequently sold had zero cost of product. As of December 31, 2021, we utilized all of the preapproval inventory.
Inventories
We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value and determine the cost of inventory using the first-in, first-out method. Lower of cost or net realizable value is evaluated by considering obsolescence, excessive levels of inventory, deterioration and other factors.
In order to assess the ultimate realization of inventories, we are required to make judgments as to future demand requirements compared to current or committed inventory levels. We periodically review our inventories for shelf life, excess or obsolescence and write-down obsolete or otherwise unmarketable inventory to its estimated net realizable value. If the actual net realizable value is less than that estimated us, or if it is determined that inventory utilization will further diminish based on estimates of demand, additional inventory write-downs may be required. Amounts written-down due to unmarketable inventory are recorded in cost of revenue and a new lower-cost basis for the inventory is established.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and other service providers based on their fair value on the date of grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We recognize the
impact of forfeitures on stock-based compensation expense as forfeitures occur. We apply the straight-line method of expense recognition to all awards with only service-based vesting conditions.
We estimate the fair value of each stock option grant on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which requires the use of highly subjective assumptions including:
•
Expected Term-We have opted to use the “simplified method” for estimating the expected term of plain-vanilla options, whereby the expected term equals the arithmetic average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option (generally 10 years). The expected term may have a significant effect on the value of the option, as the longer the term, the more time the option holder has to allow the stock price to increase, without a cash investment and thus, the more valuable the option.
•
Risk-Free Interest Rate-The risk-free rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury instruments with maturities similar to the expected term of our stock options.
•
Expected Dividend-We have not issued any dividends and do not anticipate to issue dividends on our common stock. As a result, we have estimated the dividend yield to be zero.
•
Expected Volatility-Due to our limited operating history and a lack of company-specific historical and implied volatility data, we have based our estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a group of similar companies that are publicly traded. The historical volatility data was computed using the daily closing prices for the selected companies’ shares during the equivalent period of the calculated expected term of the stock-based awards. The more volatility there is in the underlying stock price, the more valuable the option becomes because of the greater possibility of significant changes in stock price.
Determination of Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO, as there had been no public market for our common stock to date, the estimated fair value of our common stock was determined by our board of directors as of the date of each option grant, with input from management, considering our most recently available third-party valuations of common stock and our board of directors’ assessment of additional objective and subjective factors that it believed were relevant and which may have changed from the date of the most recent valuation through the date of the grant. Based on our stage of development and other relevant factors, for valuations prior to January 2020, we determined that the option pricing method, or OPM, was the most appropriate method for estimating our enterprise value to determine the fair value of our common stock. Starting in January 2020, we determined that the hybrid method was the most appropriate method for determining the fair value of our common stock. The hybrid method is a probability-weighted expected return method, or PWERM, where the equity value in one or more scenarios is calculated using an OPM.
The assumptions underlying these valuations represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different.
As a public trading market for our common stock was established upon the initial trading of our common stock on February 5, 2021, it is no longer necessary for our board of directors to estimate the fair value of our common stock in connection with our accounting for granted stock options and other such awards we may grant, as the fair value of our common stock will be determined based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of grant.
As of December 31, 2021, the unrecognized stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options was $4.7 million and is expected to be recognized as expense over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.4 years.
Provision for Income Taxes
We use the asset and liability method to account for income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and any valuation allowance recorded against our deferred tax assets. Our provision for income taxes primarily consists of state tax expense.
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we continuously monitor the circumstances impacting the expected realization of our deferred tax assets. We consider all available evidence, including historical operating results in each jurisdiction, expectations and risks associated with estimates of future taxable income, and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. A full valuation allowance is established to reduce our deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. These deferred tax assets primarily consist of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development tax credits. We intend to maintain such valuation allowance until sufficient evidence exists to support its reduction. Our deferred tax liabilities primarily consist of book and tax basis differences in fixed assets. The deferred tax assets, net of the valuation allowance, reduce the deferred tax liabilities in full, resulting in no deferred tax assets or liabilities recorded on the balance sheet. We make estimates and judgments about our future taxable income that are based on assumptions that are consistent with our plans and estimates. Should the actual amounts differ from our estimates, the amount of our valuation allowance could be materially impacted. Changes in these estimates may result in significant increases or decreases to our tax provision in a period in which such estimates are changed, which in turn would affect net income or loss.
We recognize the financial statement effects of a tax position when it is more likely than not, based on the technical merits, that the position will be sustained upon examination. Any interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions have not been material.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Standards
See Note 2 to our audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for more information.
Emerging Growth Company Status
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, reduce certain reporting requirements for an “emerging growth company.” The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period under the JOBS Act until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies who have adopted new or revised accounting pronouncements.
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (1) (a) December 31, 2026, (b) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion or (c) the date on which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Exchange Act, and (2) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt during the prior three-year period.