Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. You should read the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections of this report for a discussion of important factors that could cause our actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Some of the numbers included herein have been rounded for the convenience of presentation.
Overview
We are a global, science-driven biopharmaceutical company dedicated to developing and commercializing innovative medicines for patients with unmet medical needs, with an initial focus on in-licensing assets for Greater China and other Asian markets. We have assembled a pipeline of nine assets across five therapeutic areas, each with its own distinct value proposition and the potential to drive new standards of care across cardiovascular, oncology, ophthalmology, inflammatory disease and respiratory indications.
Recent Business Highlights and Clinical Development Updates
Initial Public Offering
In November 2021, we completed an initial public offering (“IPO”) of our ordinary shares through the sale and issuance of 20,312,500 American Depositary Shares (“ADSs”), at a public offering price of $16.00 per ADS. Following the close of the IPO, on December 1, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their option to purchase additional shares and purchased an additional 593,616 ADSs at the initial public offering price of $16.00 per ADS. We received gross proceeds of $334.5 million in connection with the IPO and subsequent exercise of the underwriters’ option and aggregate net proceeds of $304.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses.
Mavacamten
In November 2021, we initiated and completed enrollment and dosing in a pharmacokinetic (“PK”) study of mavacamten in healthy volunteers.
In November 2021, our partner Bristol-Myers Squibb (“BMS”) announced a Prescription Drug User Fee Act (“PDUFA”) target action date of April 28, 2022 for its New Drug Application to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for mavacamten for the treatment of patients with oHCM.
In November 2021, BMS presented data at the American Heart Association Scientific Sessions 2021 from the Phase 2 MAVERICK study demonstrating long-term efficacy and safety of mavacamten in patients with non-obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
In January 2022, we announced the first patient had been dosed in the Phase 3 EXPLORER-CN clinical trial of mavacamten in Chinese patients with symptomatic oHCM.
In February 2022, we announced that the Center for Drug Evaluation (“CDE”) of the National Medical Products Administration (“NMPA” granted Breakthrough Therapy Designation in China for mavacamten for the treatment of patients with oHCM.
In February 2022, BMS announced positive topline results from Phase 3 VALOR-HCM trial, evaluating mavacamten in patients with obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who are eligible for septal reduction therapy.
Infigratinib
In August 2021, we announced that we began treating patients in a Phase 2a clinical trial of infigratinib in locally advanced or metastatic gastric cancer or gastroesophageal junction adenocarcinoma with fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 (“FGFR2”) gene amplification and other advanced solid tumors with FGFR genomic alterations.
In December 2021, we announced that infigratinib has been approved by the Health Commission and Medical Products Administration of Hainan Province, under the special Named Patient Program (“NPP”), for the treatment of patients with previously treated, unresectable locally advanced or metastatic cholangiocarcinoma with a FGFR2 fusion or other rearrangement. The approval enables early commercial access to infigratinib in the Bo’ao Lecheng International Medical Tourism Pilot Zone based on the drug’s approval in other global jurisdictions.
TP-03
In November 2021, our partner Tarsus Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Tarsus”) presented data from two studies on the prevalence and impact of Demodex blepharitis (“DB”) at the American Academy of Optometry 2021 Annual Meeting. Data from the Titan real-world prevalence study demonstrated that DB accounts for 69% of all blepharitis cases and that current management tools for this disease are largely ineffective. Data from the multi-center observational Atlas impact study demonstrated that DB is associated with a significant symptomatic and psychosocial burden, negatively affecting daily life in 80% of patients.
In February 2022, Tarsus announced that the second pivotal trial of TP-03 in DB, Saturn-2, has completed enrollment and that they expect to announce topline results in April 2022.
NBTXR3
In October 2021, our partner Nanobiotix S.A. (“Nanobiotix”) presented data at the 2021 Annual Meeting of the American Society for Radiation Oncology. The first analysis of overall survival (“OS”) and progression-free survival (“PFS”) from the ongoing Phase 1 trial of NBTXR3 in elderly and frail locally advanced head and neck squamous cell carcinoma patients ineligible for cisplatin and intolerant to cetuximab (Study 102) demonstrated median OS of 18.1 months and median PFS of 10.6 months in the evaluable population (n=41) from the dose expansion part of the study. NBTXR3 administration was feasible and well-tolerated overall. A total of eight Grade 3-4 NBTXR3-related adverse events (“AEs”) were observed in eight patients. Of these AEs related to NBTXR3, five serious adverse events (“SAEs”) were observed including dysphagia, sepsis, soft tissue necrosis, stomatitis, and tumor hemorrhage. Of the SAEs, one death from sepsis assessed by the investigator as possibly related to NBTXR3, radiotherapy, and cancer was observed.
In January 2022, Nanobiotix announced enrollment of the first patient in the NANORAY-312 global Phase 3 registrational study of NBTXR3 in head and neck cancer.
LYR-210
In October 2021, our partner Lyra Therapeutics, Inc. (“Lyra”) presented new data from the Phase 2 LANTERN clinical trial of LYR-210 in surgically naïve chronic rhinosinusitis patients who had failed previous medical management at the 67th Annual Meeting of the American Rhinologic Society (“ARS”). The data presented at ARS demonstrated that 24 weeks after LYR-210 removal, 50% of treated patients continued to experience durable symptom improvement. LYR-210 continued to show strong safety during the 24-week follow up period with no increased incidence of treatment-related AEs.
In January 2022, Lyra announced the initiation of the Phase 3 ENLIGHTEN I clinical trial of LYR-210 in adult, surgically naïve chronic rhinosinusitis “(CRS”) patients. In February 2022, Lyra announced dosing of the first patient in ENLIGHTEN I and that it plans to initiate ENLIGHTEN II, the second Phase 3 study by mid-year 2022.
Omilancor
In November 2021, our partner Landos BioPharma, Inc. (“Landos”) announced that prior to initiating a pivotal Phase 3 study, the company plans to leverage the results of the prior Phase 2 study of omilancor in mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis (“UC”) patients to design and initiate a Phase 2b study in 2022. The Phase 2b study is expected to provide additional data to inform the pivotal Phase 3 study design. Accordingly, we are evaluating our clinical development strategy within our territories.
In October 2021, Landos presented positive translational data from the Phase 2 trial of omilancor in mild-to-moderate UC at United European Gastroenterology Week. Patients remaining on omilancor after the induction phase of the trial maintained low Mayo scores, an assessment of disease severity in UC, and nearly 90% of patients achieved remission thresholds in stool frequency and rectal bleeding after 36 weeks of open-label treatment.
Factors Affecting our Results of Operations
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations
Beginning in December 2019, the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic created business interruptions for companies globally, including us. For example, in the biotechnology sector, companies, including our company, have experienced delays in their ability to enroll patients at clinical trial sites because of the pandemic, potentially leading to delays in the regulatory approval process. Other outbreaks may occur, or there could be further resurgences of the COVID-19 pandemic (such as current resurgences in certain locations in China, including locations in which we are conducting clinical trials), which have caused and could further cause business disruptions in the future.
Efforts to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States (including in New Jersey, where our U.S. headquarters is located) have included quarantines, shelter-in-place orders and various other government restrictions in order to control the spread of this virus.
We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business. We have taken important steps to ensure the workplace safety of our employees when working within our administrative offices, or when traveling to our clinical trial sites. We may take further actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities.
To date, we have been able to continue our key business activities and advance our clinical programs. However, COVID has impacted our clinical trial enrollment and it is possible that our clinical development timelines and business plans could be adversely affected. We maintain regular communication with our vendors and clinical sites to appropriately plan for, and mitigate, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations.
See “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors” included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19 on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Key Components of Results of Operations
Research and development expenses
We believe our ability to successfully develop product candidates will be a significant factor affecting our long-term competitiveness, as well as our future growth and development. Developing high quality product candidates requires a significant investment of resources over a prolonged period of time, and a core part of our strategy is to continue making sustained investment in this area.
We expect our research and development expense to increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the clinical development of our product candidates and initiate additional clinical trials of, and seek regulatory approval for, these and other future product candidates. These expenses include:
•payments made under third party licensing and asset acquisition agreements;
•employee-related expense, including salaries, related benefits, equity-based compensation and travel expenses for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expense incurred in connection with the clinical development of our product candidates, including expenses incurred under agreements with CROs;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•facilities, depreciation and amortization, insurance and other direct and allocated expense incurred as a result of research and development activities.
The following table sets forth the components of our research and development expenses for the years indicated:
Licensing arrangements
Our results of operations have been, and we expect them to continue to be, affected by our licensing, collaboration and development agreements. We are generally required to make upfront payments upon entry into such agreements and milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development, regulatory and commercial milestones for the relevant product candidate under these agreements, as well as tiered royalties based on net sales of the license products. These upfront payments and milestone payments upon the achievement of certain development and regulatory milestones are recorded in research and development expense in our consolidated financial statements and totaled $136.9 million and $114.4 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The following table sets forth a breakdown of licensing fees by program for the years indicated:
General and administrative expenses
Our general and administrative expense consists primarily of salaries and other related costs for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expense also includes professional fees for legal, consulting, auditing, tax services and insurance costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expense will increase in the future to support continued development and commercialization of our product candidates. These increases will likely include increased costs related to hiring additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, attorneys and accountants, among other expenses. Additionally, we have incurred and will continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including costs of additional personnel, accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements, director and office insurance costs, and investor and public relations costs.
Interest (expense) income, net
Interest (expense) income, net consists of interest expense from the payment made upon reaching the financing milestone under the exclusive license agreement with MyoKardia (“the MyoKardia Agreement”), offset by interest income received on our cash balances.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net consists of unrealized gains and losses on foreign currencies held in our China subsidiary, Shanghai LianBio Development Co., Ltd., unrealized foreign exchange activity from the remeasurement of our intercompany payables and bank fees incurred on our cash balances.
Income taxes
Provision for income taxes consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We expect income tax expense to increase over time as the Company continues to grow net income.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal net operating losses (“NOLs”) of approximately $11.2 million, which are available to reduce future taxable income. U.S. federal NOLs can be carried forward indefinitely. Additionally, we carried forward foreign NOLs of approximately $20.1 million, some of which will begin to expire in 2025. Our carryforwards are subject to review and possible adjustment by the appropriate taxing authorities.
As required by Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 740, Income Taxes, our management has evaluated the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets, which are composed principally of NOL carryforwards, intangible assets, share compensation, and accrued expenses. Management has determined that it is more likely than not that we will not realize the benefits of the deferred tax assets. As a result, a valuation allowance of $9.6 million was recorded as of December 31, 2021.
Cayman Islands
We are incorporated in the Cayman Islands. The Cayman Islands currently levies no taxes on profits, income, gains or appreciation earned by individuals or corporations. In addition, our payment of dividends, if any, is not subject to withholding tax in the Cayman Islands.
People’s Republic of China
Our subsidiaries incorporated in Mainland China are governed by the PRC Enterprise Income Tax Law (“EIT Law”), and regulations. Under EIT Law, the standard Enterprise Income Tax (“EIT”) rate is 25.0% on taxable profits as reduced by available tax losses. Tax losses may be carried forward to offset any taxable profits for up to following five years.
Hong Kong
Our subsidiaries incorporated and carrying on a trade or business in Hong Kong are generally subject to profits tax at a rate of 16.5%. Tax losses incurred may be carried forward indefinitely to offset any taxable profits in subsequent years. Hong Kong does not levy tax on capital gains or non-Hong Kong sourced income. Payments of dividend and interest are not subject to withholding tax in Hong Kong. However, certain payments (such as payment for right to use intellectual properties) made to non-resident persons may be subject to withholding tax.
Singapore
Our subsidiary incorporated and carrying on a trade or business in Singapore is generally subject to income tax at the prevailing corporate income tax rate (currently, 17%). Tax losses incurred may be carried forward indefinitely to offset any taxable profits in subsequent years provided conditions are met. Singapore does not levy tax on capital gains. Payments of dividend are not subject to withholding tax in Singapore, however, certain payments (such as interest and royalty or payment for the use or right to use intellectual properties) made to non-resident persons may be subject to withholding tax.
Results of operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth a summary of our consolidated results of operations for the periods indicated.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased by $37.8 million from $120.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $158.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development cost was primarily attributable to (i) $55.0 million in upfront and development milestone payments and $9.4 million of expenses related to warrants issued in connection with our development and license agreement with Tarsus (the “Tarsus Agreement”), (ii) a $20.0 million upfront payment pursuant to our license, development and commercialization agreement with Nanobiotix (the “Nanobiotix Agreement”), (iii) a $18.0 million upfront payment pursuant to our license and collaboration agreement with Landos (the “Landos Agreement”), (iv) a $14.0 million upfront payment pursuant to our co-development and license agreement with ReViral (the “ReViral Agreement”), (v) a $12.0 million upfront payment pursuant to our license and collaboration agreement with Lyra (the “Lyra Agreement”), and (vi) a $8.5 million development milestone payment pursuant to our exclusive license agreement with Navire (the “Navire Agreement"). The remaining expense was attributable to higher personnel-related expenses, including share-based compensation expense, as a result of increased employee headcount, development activities to support our clinical trials and professional fees.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development cost was primarily attributable to (i) $72.7 million in upfront and milestone payments and $33.8 million of expenses related to the warrant issued in connection with the MyoKardia Agreement and (ii) the $8.0 million upfront payment related to the Navire Agreement.
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $22.9 million from $14.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $36.9 million for the year ended December 30, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to a $11.3 million increase in payroll and personnel-related expenses (including share-based compensation expense) for increased employee headcount, a $8.9 million increase, primarily attributable to legal service costs, consulting costs and accounting services, and a $2.8 million increase related to other expenses.
Interest income (expense), net
Interest income (expense) decreased by $5.1 million from $(4.9) million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to interest expense of $2.3 million in 2020 related to imputed interest related to the achievement of the financing milestone under the MyoKardia Agreement that did not exist in 2021 and $2.5 million interest expense related to the conversion in 2020 of the $15.0 million convertible promissory notes due June 29, 2021 issued to Perceptive (the “2020 Convertible Notes”).
Other (expense) income, net
Other (expense) income, net decreased by $(0.6) million from $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $(0.5) million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease was primarily attributable to unrealized loss on foreign currencies held in our China subsidiary, Shanghai LianBio Development Co., Ltd., unrealized foreign exchange loss from the remeasurement of our intercompany payables, and by bank fees incurred on our cash balances.
Income taxes
Our income tax expense was $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in an effective income tax rate of 0.27% for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.0 million, or an effective income tax rate of 0.00%, for the same period in 2020. A reconciliation of the statutory federal income tax rate to the effective income tax rate for each period is included in “Note 12: Income Taxes” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of liquidity
Since our incorporation, our operations have been substantially financed with proceeds from sales of preferred shares as part of the Series Seed financing, the Series A financing, the issuance of the 2020 Convertible Notes and our initial public offering, which was completed in November 2021 (the “IPO”). As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities of $383.2 million.
On November 3, 2021, the Company completed its IPO through an underwritten sale of 20,312,500 ADSs representing 20,312,500 ordinary shares at a price of $16.00 per share. On December 1, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their option to purchase additional shares and purchased an additional 593,616 ADSs at the initial public offering price of $16.00 per ADS. We received gross proceeds of $334.5 million in connection with the IPO and subsequent exercise of the underwriters’ option and aggregate net proceeds of $304.8 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses.
We are a holding company with no operations of our own and, as such, we may rely on dividends and other distributions on equity paid by our Chinese subsidiaries to fund any cash and financing requirements we may have, including the funds necessary to pay dividends and other cash distributions to our shareholders or holders of our ADSs or to service any debt we may incur. Deterioration in the financial condition, earnings or cash flow of our subsidiaries for any reason, as well as any changes in Chinese laws or regulations, could limit or impair their ability to pay such distributions. See “Part I-Item 1A - Risk Factors-Risks Related to Doing Business in China and Our International Operations-We may rely on dividends and other distributions on equity paid by our Chinese subsidiaries to fund any cash and financing requirements we may have, and any limitation on the ability of our Chinese subsidiaries to make payments to us could have a material and adverse effect on our ability to conduct our business.”
Funding requirements
Our primary use of cash is to fund our operating expenditures, consisting of research and development expense (including activities within our clinical and regulatory initiatives and upfront and milestone payments) and general and administrative expense. Our use of cash is impacted by the timing and extent of the required payments for each of these activities.
To date, we have not generated any material revenue. We do not expect to generate revenue from the sale of our products unless and until we (i) complete development of any of our product candidates; (ii) obtain applicable regulatory approvals; and (iii) successfully commercialize or enter into collaborative agreements for our product candidates. We do not know with certainty when, or if, any of these items will ultimately occur. We expect to incur continuing significant losses for the foreseeable future and for our losses to increase as we ramp up our clinical development programs and begin activities related to commercial launch readiness. We may encounter unforeseen expenses, difficulties, complications, delays and other currently unknown factors that could adversely affect our business. Moreover, since the completion of our IPO, we have incurred and will continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a publicly traded company.
We will require additional capital to develop our product candidates and fund our operations into the foreseeable future. We anticipate that we will eventually need to raise substantial additional capital, the requirements for which will depend on many factors, including:
•the number and scope of clinical programs we decide to pursue;
•the cost, timing and outcome of preparing for and undergoing regulatory review of our product candidates;
•the cost and timing associated with commercializing our product candidates, if they receive regulatory approval;
•the amount of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates, should any of our product candidates receive regulatory approval;
•the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we might have at such time;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•our efforts to enhance operational systems and our ability to attract, hire and retain qualified personnel, including personnel to support the development of our product candidates and, ultimately, the sale of our products, following regulatory approval;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our clinical development or operations; and
•the costs associated with being a public company.
A change in the outcome of any of these or other variables with respect to the development and regulatory approval of any of our product candidates could significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. Furthermore, our operating plans may change in the future, and we will continue to require additional capital to meet operational needs and capital requirements associated with such operating plans. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity securities, our shareholders may experience dilution. Any future debt financing into which we enter may impose upon us additional covenants that restrict our operations, including limitations on our ability to incur liens or additional debt, pay dividends, repurchase our ordinary shares, make certain investments or engage in certain merger, consolidation or asset sale transactions. Any debt financing or additional equity that we raise may contain terms that are not favorable to us or our shareholders.
Adequate funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all. Our potential inability to raise capital when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our additional licensing opportunities.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for each of the periods presented:
Net cash used in operating activities
During the year ended December, 2021, operating activities used approximately $164.0 million of cash, primarily due to our net loss of $196.3 million, partially offset by non-cash consideration of $9.4 million related to the warrants granted to Tarsus, $20.0 million of other receivables related to Pfizer in-licensing and co-development activities, $8.7 million related to share-based compensation expense, and other changes related to operating assets and liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used approximately $98.1 million, primarily due to our net loss of $139.6 million, partially offset by non-cash items of $33.8 million related to the MyoKardia Warrant, $2.5 million related to the amortization of the beneficial conversion feature on the 2020 Convertible Notes, $5.2 million related to share-based compensation expense, and due to changes related to operating assets and liabilities.
Net cash used in investing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities used approximately $155.9 million, consisting of approximately $155.0 million for the purchases of marketable securities and approximately $0.9 million for the purchases of property and equipment.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities used approximately $0.9 million, primarily resulting from the purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, financing activities provided approximately $313.3 million in net proceeds due to our issuance of Series A Preferred shares of $2.9 million, net proceeds from the IPO of $304.8 million and the exercise of share options of $5.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, financing activities provided approximately $309.8 million in net proceeds, primarily resulting from the net proceeds from our issuance of Series A Preferred shares and the 2020 Convertible Notes.
Contractual and other Obligations
Contractual Obligations
In the normal course of business, we enter into contracts and commitments that obligate us to make payments in the future. These obligations include operating lease commitments and other liabilities. See “Note 8: Commitments and Contingencies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on material cash requirements from known contractual and other obligations.
Other Obligations
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with various third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies, and testing, manufacturing, and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts provide for termination upon notice. Payments due upon cancellation generally consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including non-cancellable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation. These payments have not been included separately within these contractual and other obligations disclosures.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
In the ordinary course of our business, we do not enter into transactions involving, or otherwise form relationships with, unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships that are established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical accounting policies and significant judgments and estimates
We prepare our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”), which requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements and notes to the financial statements. We continually evaluate these estimates and assumptions based on the most recently available information, our own historical experiences and various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Since the use of estimates is an integral component of the financial reporting process, actual results could differ from our expectations as a result of changes in our estimates. Some of our accounting policies require a higher degree of judgment than others in their application and require us to make significant accounting estimates.
The selection of critical accounting policies, the judgments and other uncertainties affecting application of those policies and the sensitivity of reported results to changes in conditions and assumptions are factors that should be considered when reviewing our financial statements. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in “Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses, including clinical trial costs and accruals, consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including the development of our product candidates, which include:
•payments made under third party licensing and asset acquisition agreements;
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, related benefits, travel and share-based compensation expense for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•expenses incurred in connection with the clinical development of our product candidates, including expenses incurred under agreements with CROs;
•the cost of consultants and our licensors’ CMOs that manufacture product candidates for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials; and
•facilities, depreciation, and other expenses, which include allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and supplies.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid assets. Our prepaid assets are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
We monitor research and development expenses directly associated with our clinical assets at the program level to some degree, however, indirect costs associated with clinical development and the balance of our research and development expenses are not tracked at the program or candidate level.
Equity-based compensation expense
We account for share-based payments under the guidance as set forth in the Share-Based Payment Topic 718 of the FASB Accounting Standards Codification (“AS 2018-07”), which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expense for all share-based payment awards made to employees, officers, directors and consultants, including employee stock options, based on estimated fair values. We adopted ASU 2018-07 upon our incorporation, which expands the scope of Topic 718 to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from non-employees. As a result, non-employee share-based transactions are measured by estimating the fair value of the equity instruments at the grant date, taking into consideration the probability of satisfying performance conditions.We account for forfeitures as they occur.
We recognize share-based compensation expense for stock options on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period. Our share-based compensation costs are based upon the grant date fair value of options estimated using the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model. This model utilizes various inputs, and these assumptions include:
•Expected Term. The expected term represents the period that the share-based awards are expected to be outstanding. We use the simplified method (based on the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term) to determine the expected term.
•Expected Volatility. Since we have historically been privately held and do not have any trading history for our Ordinary Shares, the expected volatility was estimated based on the average historical volatilities for comparable publicly traded pharmaceutical companies over a period equal to the expected term of the stock option grants. The comparable companies were chosen based on their similar size, stage in the life cycle and area of specialty. We will continue to apply this process until a sufficient amount of historical information regarding the volatility of the price of our ADSs becomes available.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero coupon issues in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding with the expected term of option.
•Expected Dividend. We have never paid dividends on our ordinary shares and have no plans to pay dividends on our ordinary shares. Therefore, we used an expected dividend yield of zero.
We recorded share-based compensation expense of $8.7 million and $5.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. While we were a private company, the fair values of the ordinary shares underlying our share-based awards were estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. Our board of directors considered, among other things, valuations of our ordinary shares prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 2013 Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. In determining a fair value for our ordinary shares, the unrelated third-party valuation firm used the Backsolve Method, which utilizes a recent equity financing to estimate the equity value at the valuation date, to estimate the fair value of our ordinary shares. The equity value was then allocated to the equity classes using an option pricing method and then reducing the implied ordinary share value by a discount for lack of marketability. For the independent third-party valuations prepared as of March 31, 2021 and May 1, 2021, the unrelated third-party valuation firm used the Calibration Method of the Market Approach. When the transaction is at fair value at initial recognition, the Calibration Method of the Market Approach is used at subsequent periods with valuation techniques and assumptions that are consistent with the observed transaction, updated to take into account any changes in Company-specific factors as well as current market conditions. At subsequent measurement dates, the valuation would consider our progress and changes in observable market data to estimate the fair value under current market conditions. The equity value is then allocated to the equity classes using an option pricing method and then reducing the implied ordinary share value by a discount for lack of marketability. Subsequent to the IPO, the Company utilizes the closing price of our publicly traded ADSs as the input for the fair value of our ordinary shares.
The assumptions used in determining the fair value of stock-based awards represent our best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of our judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Income Taxes
We recognize deferred income taxes for temporary differences between the basis of assets and liabilities for financial statement and income tax purposes. In evaluating our valuation allowance, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including scheduled reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, tax planning strategies, and recent financial performance. Due to uncertainty with respect to ultimate realizability of deferred tax assets, we have provided a valuation allowance against the U.S., China and Hong Kong deferred tax assets. We intend to maintain a full valuation allowance on the U.S. federal and state deferred tax assets and foreign deferred tax assets until sufficient positive evidence exists to support reversal of the valuation allowance.
As of December 31, 2021, we had U.S. federal NOLs of approximately $11.2 million, which are available to reduce future taxable income. U.S. federal NOLs can be carried forward indefinitely. Additionally, we carried forward foreign NOLs of approximately $20.1 million, some of which will begin to expire in 2025. Our carryforwards are subject to review and possible adjustment by the appropriate taxing authorities.
We record unrecognized tax benefits as liabilities and adjust these liabilities when our judgment changes as a result of the evaluation of new information not previously available. Because of the complexity of some of these uncertainties, the ultimate resolution may result in a payment that is materially different from our current estimate of the unrecognized tax benefit liabilities. These differences will be reflected as increases or decreases to income tax expense in the period in which new information is available. We have not identified nor recorded any liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits as of December 31, 2021.
Under Sections 382 and 383 of the Code, substantial changes in our ownership may limit the amount of NOL and research and development tax credit carryforwards that could be used annually in the future to offset taxable income. The tax benefits related to future utilization of U.S. federal and state NOL carryforwards, research and development tax credit carryforwards and other deferred tax assets may be limited or lost if cumulative changes in ownership exceeds 50% within any three-year period.
Recently issued accounting standards
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in “Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies” in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.