ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
References to the “Company,” “Logistics Innovation Technologies Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Logistics Innovation Technologies Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the annual financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act. We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 18, 2021 as a Delaware corporation for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our Sponsors are AG LIT Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and 1P Management LLC, a Delaware limited liability company. The registration statement for our IPO was declared effective on June 10, 2021. On June 15, 2021, we consummated the IPO of 34,089,611 Units, including the issuance of 4,089,611 Units as a result of the underwriters’ exercise in part of their option to purchase additional Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $340,896,110, and incurring offering costs of $18,860,728, inclusive of $11,931,364 in deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the Private Placement of 5,945,281 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $8,917,922.
Upon the closing of the IPO and the Private Placement in June 2021, $340,896,110 ($10.00 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the IPO and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a Trust Account located in the United States at JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A. with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and was invested only in U.S. “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of an initial business combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account as described below.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating an initial business combination.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, or June 15, 2023, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay its taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining stockholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject, in each case, to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, the Company had cash outside the Trust Account of $967,124 and working capital of $1,196,779. All remaining cash held in the Trust Account is generally unavailable for the Company’s use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in an initial business combination or to redeem common stock.
During the period covered by this Annual Report, the Company consummated its IPO and Private Placement, and the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option. Of the net proceeds from the IPO, partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and associated Private Placements, $340,896,110 of cash was placed in the Trust Account and $2,427,771 of cash was held outside of the Trust Account and is available for the Company’s working capital purposes.
The Company’s initial stockholders, officers, directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company working capital loans. If the Company completes an initial business combination, the Company may repay the working capital loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the working capital loans may be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the working capital loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the working capital loans, other than the interest on such proceeds that may be released for working capital purposes. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such working capital loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The working capital loans would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such working capital loans may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants of the post-business combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. As of December 31, 2021, $84,999 in working capital loans were outstanding.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that the Company will have sufficient working capital to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, the Company will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
Our management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance sheet. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our IPO and identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combination candidates.
For the period from February 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $827,602, which consisted of formation costs and other operating expenses of $624,582 and warrant transaction costs of $561,610, partially offset by an unrealized gain of on fair value changes of warrants of $346,230, bank interest income of $55 and trust interest income of $12,305.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans and upon conversion of the Founder Shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders will be entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the final prospectus relating to the IPO to purchase up to 4,500,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the IPO price less the underwriting discounts. The underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option on June 15, 2021 with the purchase of 4,089,611 units.
The underwriters were paid a cash underwriting discount of $0.20 per Public Share, or $6,817,922 in the aggregate. Additionally, the underwriters reimbursed us $500,000 for offering costs. In addition, $0.35 per Public Share, or $11,931,364 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP and rules and regulations of the SEC requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, as well as the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the date of the financial statements. Although we believe these estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates. On a regular basis, we evaluate our assumptions, judgments and estimates. We also discuss our critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors.
We believe that the assumptions, judgments and estimates involved in the accounting for our fair value of derivatives have the greatest potential impact on our financial statements. These areas are key components of our results of operations and are based on complex rules which require us to make judgments and estimates. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates, which are discussed further as follows. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our financial statements.
Warrants
We account for the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants as a liability based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and ASC Topic 815. The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC Topic 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC Topic 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC Topic 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent annual period end date while the warrants are outstanding. Because we do not control the occurrence of events, such as a tender offer or exchange, that may trigger cash settlement of the warrants where not all of the stockholders also receive cash, the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment thereunder, as such, the warrants must be recorded as derivative liability. Our Private Placement Warrant liability is based on a Monte Carlo simulation model utilizing management judgment and pricing inputs such as the remaining term of the warrants, expected volatility and the risk free rate of return. Significant deviations from these estimates and inputs could result in a material change in fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, that would have a material effect on our financial statements (see Note 2).
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.