ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
For a description of our significant accounting policies and an understanding of the significant factors that influenced our performance during the year ended September 30, 2022, this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” (hereafter referred to as “MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, including the related notes, appearing in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended September 30, 2022 (this “Form 10-K”).
Note about Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K includes statements that constitute “forward-looking statements.” These forward-looking statements are often characterized by the terms “may,” “believes,” “projects,” “intends,” “plans,” “expects,” or “anticipates,” and do not reflect historical facts.
Specific forward-looking statements contained in this portion of the Annual Report include, but are not limited to: (i) statements that are based on current projections and expectations about the markets in which we operate, (ii) statements about current projections and expectations of general economic conditions, (iii) statements about specific industry projections and expectations of economic activity, (iv) statements relating to our future operations, prospects, results, and performance, (v) statements about the Chapter 11 Case, (vi) statements that the cash on hand and additional cash generated from operations together with potential sources of cash through issuance of debt or equity will provide the Company with sufficient liquidity for the next 12 months, and (vii) statements that the outcome of pending legal proceedings will not have a material adverse effect on business, financial position and results of operations, cash flow or liquidity.
Forward-looking statements involve risks, uncertainties and other factors, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. This Form 10-K identifies those factors and risks that could affect our results, our future performance, and our capital requirements under Item 1A “Risk Factors”. There are also other factors that we are currently unable to identify or quantify, but that may exist in the future, that could similarly affect us.
In addition, any or all of the factors identified in this Form 10-K may generally affect our business, results of operations, and financial position. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date the statements were made. We do not undertake and specifically decline any obligation to update any forward-looking statements. Any information contained on our website, www.liveventures.com, or any other websites referenced in this Annual Report, are not part of this Annual Report.
Our Company
Live Ventures Incorporated is a holding company of diversified businesses, which, together with our subsidiaries, we refer to as the “Company”, “Live Ventures”, “we”, “us” or “our”. We acquire and operate companies in various industries that have historically demonstrated a strong history of earnings power. We currently have three segments to our business: Retail, Flooring Manufacturing, Steel Manufacturing, and Corporate & Other.
Under the Live Ventures brand, we seek opportunities to acquire profitable and well-managed companies. We work closely with consultants who help us identify target companies that fit within the criteria we have established for opportunities that will provide synergies with our businesses.
Our principal offices are located at 325 E. Warm Springs Road, Suite 102, Las Vegas, Nevada 89119, our telephone number is (702) 939-0231, and our corporate website (which does not form part of this report Form 10-K) is located at www.liveventures.com. Our common stock trades on the Nasdaq Capital Market under the symbol “LIVE”.
Retail Segment
Our Retail Segment is composed of Vintage Stock and ApplianceSmart.
Vintage Stock
Vintage Stock Holdings LLC, Vintage Stock, V-Stock, Movie Trading Company and EntertainMart (collectively, “Vintage Stock”) is an award-winning specialty entertainment retailer that offers a large selection of entertainment products, including new and pre-owned movies, video games and music products, as well as ancillary products, such as books, comics, toys and collectibles, in a single location. With its integrated buy-sell-trade business model, Vintage Stock buys, sells and trades new and pre-owned movies, music, video games, electronics and collectibles through 68 retail locations strategically positioned across Arkansas, Colorado, Idaho, Illinois, Kansas, Missouri, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Texas, and Utah.
ApplianceSmart
ApplianceSmart is a household appliance retailer with two product categories: one consisting of typical and commonly available, innovative appliances, and the other consisting of affordable value-priced, offerings such as close-outs, factory overruns, discontinued models, and special-buy appliances, including open box merchandise and others.
On December 9, 2019, ApplianceSmart filed a voluntary petition (the “Chapter 11 Case”) in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Southern District of New York (the “Bankruptcy Court”) seeking relief under Chapter 11 of Title 11 of the United States Code (the “Bankruptcy Code”). The bankruptcy affected Live Ventures’ indirect subsidiary ApplianceSmart only and did not affect any other subsidiary of Live Ventures, or Live Ventures itself. On February 28, 2022, the court approved ApplianceSmart’s plan for reorganization (the “Plan”), discharging ApplianceSmart of certain debts according to the Plan resulting in the Company recording a gain of approximately $11.4 million, which includes a write-off or adjustment of approximately $11.5 million on the settlement of debts and other liabilities, offset by payments subject to the bankruptcy that were not included as debtor-in-possession liabilities of approximately $149,000. As of April 1, 2022, we have ceased operations of its one existing location, and are in the process of winding down operations, which will be immaterial to the consolidated financial statements.
Flooring Manufacturing Segment
Our Flooring Manufacturing segment is comprised of Marquis.
Marquis Affiliated Holdings LLC and wholly-owned subsidiaries (“Marquis”). Marquis is a leading carpet manufacturer and distributor of carpet and hard-surface flooring products. Over the last decade, Marquis has been an innovator and leader in the value-oriented polyester carpet sector, which is currently the market’s fastest-growing fiber category. Marquis focuses on the residential, niche commercial, and hospitality end-markets and serves thousands of customers.
Since commencing operations in 1995, Marquis has built a strong reputation for outstanding value, styling, and customer service. Its innovation has yielded products and technologies that differentiate its brands in the flooring marketplace. Marquis’s state-of-the-art operations enable high quality products, unique customization, and exceptionally short lead-times. Furthermore, the Company has recently invested in additional capacity to grow several attractive lines of business, including printed carpet and yarn extrusion.
On July 1, 2022, Live acquired certain assets and intellectual property of Better Backers, a Georgia corporation, which was accomplished through an Asset Purchase Agreement.
Steel Manufacturing Segment
Our Steel Manufacturing segment is comprised of Precision Industries, Inc. (“Precision Marshall”), and its wholly-owned subsidiary The Kinetic Co., Inc. (“Kinetic”).
Precision Marshall is the North American leader in providing and manufacturing, pre-finished de-carb free tool and die steel. For nearly 75 years, Precision Marshall has served steel distributors through quick and accurate service. Precision Marshall has led the industry with exemplary availability and value-added processing that saves distributors time and processing costs.
Founded in 1948, Precision Marshall “The Deluxe Company” has built a reputation of high integrity, speed of service and doing things the “Deluxe Way”. The term Deluxe refers to all aspects of the product and customer service to be head and shoulders above the rest. From order entry to packaging and delivery, Precision Marshall makes it easy to do business and backs all products and service with a guarantee.
Precision Marshall provides four key products to over 500 steel distributors in four product categories: Deluxe Alloy Plate, Deluxe Tool Steel Plate, Precision Ground Flat Stock, and Drill Rod. With over 5,000 distinct size grade combinations in stock every day, Precision Marshall arms tool steel distributors with deep inventory availability and same day shipment to their place of business or often ships direct to their customer saving time and handling.
On June 28, 2022, Precision Marshall acquired Kinetic. Kinetic is a highly recognizable and regarded brand name in the production of industrial knives and hardened wear products for the tissue, metals, and wood industries and is known as a one-stop shop for in-house grinding, machining, and heat-treating. Kinetic was founded by the Masters family in 1948 and is headquartered in Greendale, Wisconsin. Kinetic manufactures more than 90 types of knives and numerous associated parts with modifications and customizations available to each. Kinetic employs approximately 100 non-union employees.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”). Preparation of these statements requires us to make judgments and estimates. Some accounting policies have a significant and material impact on amounts reported in these financial statements. Estimates and assumptions are based on management's experience and other information available prior to the issuance of our financial statements. Our actual realized results may differ materially from management’s initial estimates as reported. Our critical and significant accounting policies include Trade and Other Receivables, Inventories, Goodwill, Revenue Recognition, Fair Value Measurements, Stock Based Compensation, Income Taxes, Segment Reporting and Concentrations of Credit Risk.
Adjusted EBITDA
We evaluate the performance of our operations based on financial measures such as revenue and “Adjusted EBITDA.” Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) before interest expense, interest income, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, stock-based compensation, and other non-cash or nonrecurring charges. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an important indicator of the operational strength and performance of the business, including the business’ ability to fund acquisitions and other capital expenditures, and to service its debt. Additionally, this measure is used by management to evaluate operating results and perform analytical comparisons and identify strategies to improve performance. Adjusted EBITDA is also a measure that is customarily used by financial analysts to evaluate a company’s financial performance, subject to certain adjustments. Adjusted EBITDA does not represent cash flows from operations, as defined by GAAP, and should not be construed as an alternative to net income or loss and is indicative neither of our results of operations, nor of cash flows available to fund all of our cash needs. It is, however, a measurement that the Company believes is useful to investors in analyzing its operating performance. Accordingly, Adjusted EBITDA should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for, net income, cash flow provided by operating activities, and other measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure. As companies often define non-GAAP financial measures differently, Adjusted EBITDA, as calculated by Live Ventures Incorporated, should not be compared to any similarly titled measures reported by other companies
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain statement of income items and as a percentage of revenue, for the periods indicated (in $000’s):
The following table sets forth revenues by segment (in $000’s):
The following table sets forth gross profit and gross profit as a percentage of total revenue by segment (in $000’s):
Revenues
Revenues increased by approximately $13.9 million to approximately $286.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the year ended September 30, 2021 of approximately $273.0 million.
Retail segment revenue decreased by approximately $2.7 million, or 3.0%, to approximately $86.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to $88.8 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. Movies, Music, Games and Other revenue decreased by approximately $1.9 million, which was primarily due to reduced demand resulting from inflationary pressures, supply chain issues, and overall product sales mix. Appliance revenue decreased by approximately $796,000 due to the shutdown of operations as discussed above.
Flooring Manufacturing revenue increased by approximately $627,000, or 0.5%, to approximately $130.9 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to approximately $130.2 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase was due to the passing on of product cost increases to customers, as well as the acquisition of Better Backers in July 2022.
Steel Manufacturing revenue increased by approximately $11.3 million, or 23.0%, to approximately $60.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to approximately $49.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase is primarily due to passing on product cost increases to customers, as well as the acquisition of Kinetic during June 2022 (see Note 5 below).
Corporate and Other revenue increased by approximately $4.7 million, or 101.5%, to approximately $9.3 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to approximately $4.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase is due to the addition of SW Financial as a VIE during June 2021.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased by approximately $15.6 million, or 9.0% for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the year ended September 30, 2021. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenues was 65.9% for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to 63.6% for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase is primarily attributable to the increases in revenues, as well as increased product costs due to inflationary pressures.
General and Administrative Expense
General and Administrative expense increased by approximately $2.3 million or 4.4%, for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the year ended September 30, 2021, primarily due to the acquisition of Kinetic in June 2022, increases in employee compensation and related costs as a result of our Retail segment opening new locations, the consolidation of SW Financial in June 2021, partially offset by reductions in legal and other professional fees.
Selling and Marketing Expense
Selling and marketing expense increased by approximately $1.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the year ended September 30, 2021 primarily due to increased convention and trade show activity, which was largely canceled in fiscal 2021 due to COVID, as well as compensation associated with the Marquis sales force.
Loss on Impairment of Intangibles and Goodwill
For the year ended September 30, 2022, in connection with quantitative impairment testing performed on SW Financial, we recorded a $4.9 million charge for impairment of intangibles and goodwill. This amount includes approximately $3.7 million for full impairment of goodwill, and approximately $1.2 million in partial impairment of customer relationships and trade names.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net decreased by approximately $1.0 million or 19.1%, for the year ended September 30, 2022 as compared to the year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease is primarily due to the payoff of higher interest rate debt and fully amortizing related debt discount during the year ended September 30, 2021, as well as favorable interest rates obtained from Precision's credit facility refinancing (see Note 10 of the consolidated financial statements), and the capitalization of interest charges by our Flooring Manufacturing segment during the year ended September 30, 2022.
Gain on Payroll Protection Program
During the year ended September 30, 2021, we recorded a gain of approximately $6.2 million due to the forgiveness of PPP Loans. There were no similar transactions during the year ended September 30, 2022.
Gain on Bankruptcy Settlement
During the year ended September 30, 2022, we recorded a gain of approximately $11.4 million due to the discharge of certain obligations relating to the ApplianceSmart bankruptcy as discussed above. During the year ended September 30, 2021, the Company recorded a gain of approximately $1.8 million due to the discharge of certain payables from bankruptcy proceedings.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
For the year ended September 30, 2022, the Company recorded an income tax provision of approximately $6.9 million, compared to a tax provision of approximately $8.7 million for the year ended September 30, 2021. The year over year decrease is primarily due to a bankruptcy gain exclusion, in the amount of $2.8 million, applicable to the gain recorded in connection with the ApplianceSmart bankruptcy.
Results of Operations by Segment
The following table sets forth the results of operations by segment (in $000’s):
Retail Segment
Revenue for the year ended September 30, 2022 decreased by approximately $2.7 million, or 3.0%, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to reduced demand partially offset by price increases as a result of inflationary factors and supply chain issues, offset by increased retail pricing and additional locations added at Vintage Stock. Further, as of April 2022, ApplianceSmart shutdown operations. Retail sales at our Vintage Stock locations during the year ended September 30, 2021 benefitted from increased consumer discretional spending resulting from one-time stimulus payments in 2021. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue was 47.1% for the year ended September 30, 2022, as opposed to 45.9% for the year ended September 30, 2021. This increase is due to inflationary pressures and product mix. General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.2 million, and is primarily attributable to inflationary cost pressures and new stores opened in fiscal year 2022. Operating income for the year ended September 30, 2022 was approximately $12.6 million, as compared to approximately $16.3 million during the prior year period primarily due to those factors discussed above.
Flooring Manufacturing Segment
Revenue for the year ended September 30, 2022 increased moderately as compared to the prior year, primarily due to increases in sales prices that were passed on to customers, partially offset by an overall reduction in consumer demand, as well as the acquisition of Better Backers in July 2022. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue was 75.7% for the year ended September 30, 2022, as opposed to 70.9% for the year ended September 30, 2021. The increase is primarily due to increases in raw material costs, as compared to the prior year. General and administrative expenses decreased by approximately $1.1 million primarily due to one-time expenses incurred during the year ended September 30, 2021, and a reduction of variable employee compensation costs recognized during the year ended September 30, 2022. Sales and marketing expenses increased by approximately $1.2 million primarily due to increased convention and trade show activity, as well as increased compensation associated with the Marquis sales force. Operating income for the year ended September 30, 2022 was approximately $14.0 million, as compared to operating income of approximately $20.2 million for the prior year period.
Steel Manufacturing Segment
Revenue for the year ended September 30, 2022 increased by approximately $11.3 million, or 23%, as compared to the prior year, due to increased sales prices resulting from passing on product cost increases to customers, as well as the acquisition of Kinetic during June 2022. Cost of revenue as a percentage of revenue was 72.2% for the year ended September 30, 2022, as opposed to 75.8% for the year ended September 30, 2021. The decrease is due to improved manufacturing efficiencies, increased revenue due to price increases, and the acquisition of Kinetic. General and administrative expenses increased by approximately $1.9 million, or 33.9%, primarily due to an increase in
compensation costs, as well as the acquisition of Kinetic. Operating income was approximately $9.0 million and approximately $5.9 million, for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Corporate and Other Segment
Results for Corporate and Other includes our directory services business and our investment in SW Financial. Revenues for the year ended September 30, 2022 increased by approximately $4.7 million primarily due to the addition of SW Financial as a VIE during June 2021. Cost of revenue for the year ended September 30, 2022 increased proportionately with revenue due to inflationary pressures and the consolidation of SW Financial in June 2021. Operating loss for the year ended September 30, 2022 was approximately $9.7 million, as compared to a loss of approximately $6.6 million in the prior year. Revenues and operating income for our directory services business continue to decline due to decreasing renewals. We expect revenue and operating income from this segment to continue to decrease in the future. We are no longer accepting new customers in our directory services business.
Adjusted EBITDA Reconciliation
The following tables present a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA from net income for the years ended September 30, 2022 and 2021 (in $000’s):
Adjusted EBITDA decreased by approximately $6.1 million, or 13.8%, for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to the prior year period. The decrease is primarily due to decreases in revenue and gross profit, as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Based on our current operating plans, we believe that available cash balances, cash generated from our operating activities and funds available under our asset-based revolver lines of credit will provide sufficient liquidity to fund our operations, pay our scheduled loan payments, allow for the repurchase of shares under our share buyback program, and pay dividends on our shares of Series E Preferred Stock as declared by the Board of Directors, for at least the next 12 months.
We have the following three asset-based revolver lines of credit: (i) Texas Capital Bank Revolver Loan (“TCB Revolver”) utilized by Vintage Stock, (ii) Bank of America Revolver Loan (“BofA Revolver”) utilized by Marquis, and (iii) Fifth Third Revolver Loan (“Fifth Third Revolver”) utilized by Precision Marshall. Additionally, we have an unsecured revolving line of credit with Isaac Capital Group (“ICG Revolver”), a related party, which is utilized by the Company.
As of September 30, 2022, we had total cash and restricted cash of approximately $4.6 million as well as approximately $26.4 million of available borrowing under our revolving credit facilities. The Company's restricted cash of approximately $890,000 is required collateral for a standby letter of credit for a customs bond, which is renewed annually. As we continue to pursue acquisitions and other strategic transactions to expand and grow our business, we regularly monitor capital market conditions and may raise additional funds through borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities. The amount, nature and timing of any borrowings or sales of debt or equity securities will depend on our operating performance and other circumstances; our then-current commitments and obligations; the amount, nature and timing of our capital requirements; any limitations imposed by our current credit arrangements; and overall market conditions.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
The Company’s cash and restricted cash at September 30, 2022 was approximately $4.6 million compared to approximately $4.7 million at September 30, 2021, a decrease of approximately $100,000. Net cash provided by operations was approximately $14.6 million for the year ended September 30, 2022, as compared to net cash provided by operations of approximately $29.2 million for the same period in 2021. The decrease is primarily due to purchases of inventory and the timing of payments of income taxes and trade accounts payable.
Our primary sources of cash inflows are from customer receipts from sales on account, factored accounts receivable proceeds, receipts for securities sales commissions, and net remittances from directory services customers processed in the form of ACH billings. Our most significant cash outflows include payments for raw materials and general operating expenses, including payroll costs and general and administrative expenses that typically occur within close proximity of expense recognition.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our cash flows used in investing activities of approximately $40.0 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 consisted primarily of purchases of property and equipment and our acquisitions of Kinetic and Better Backers. Our cash flows used in investing activities of approximately $17.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 consisted of purchases of property and equipment and our investment in SW Financial.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Our cash flows provided by financing activities of approximately $25.4 million for the year ended September 30, 2022 primarily consisted in net proceeds from revolver loans of approximately $21.6 million, and approximately $17.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of notes payable, partially offset by payments on notes payable and finance leases of approximately $10.6 million, and purchases of treasury stock of approximately $2.7 million. Proceeds from borrowings under revolver loans and the issuance of notes payable was primarily associated with the acquisition of Kinetic.
Our cash flows used in financing activities of approximately $16.1 million for the year ended September 30, 2021 primarily consisted of approximately $16.8 million for payments of notes payable, approximately $1.4 million in net payments under revolver loans, and approximately $421,000 for the purchase of treasury stock, partially offset by the issuance of notes payable of approximately of $2.3 million from proceeds received from the issuance of notes payable, and proceeds of approximately $323,000 from stock options exercised.
Currently, the Company is not issuing common shares for liquidity purposes. We prefer to use asset-based lending arrangements and mezzanine financing together with Company provided capital to finance acquisitions and have done so historically. Occasionally, as our Company history has demonstrated, we will issue stock and derivative instruments linked to stock for services and/or debt settlement.
Working Capital
We had working capital of approximately $78.4 million as of September 30, 2022 as compared to approximately $33.8 million as of September 30, 2021. The increase is primarily due to the net assets received from the acquisitions of Kinetic and Better Backers, increases in accounts receivable and inventories, and decreases in debtor-in-possession
liabilities and accrued liabilities, partially offset by increases in the current portion of long-term debt and the current portion of operating lease obligations.
Future Sources of Cash; New Products and Services
We may require additional debt financing or capital to finance new acquisitions, refinance existing indebtedness or other strategic investments in our business. Other sources of financing may include stock issuances and additional loans; or other forms of financing. Any financing obtained may further dilute or otherwise impair the ownership interest of our existing stockholders.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations consisting of operating lease agreements and debt obligations and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our future liquidity and cash flows (in $000's):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At September 30, 2022, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements, commitments or guarantees that require additional disclosure or measurement.