Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the Private Warrants, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of our initial public offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to banks or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to banks or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from July 28, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to consummate our initial public offering. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and marketable securities held after our initial public offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $93,808 which consists of formation costs amounting to $1,716,659, and loss from change in fair value of overallotment liability amounting to $54,000 offset by the change in fair value of warrant liability amounting to $1,663,532, and trust interest income amounting to $13,319.
For the period ended from July 28,2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $13,802 which consists of formation costs.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, we had $137,163 in cash. Until the consummation of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied through the receipt of $25,000 from our sale of the Founder Shares, and unsecured loans and advances in an aggregate of $385,000 from related parties.
On January 12, 2021, the Company consummated our initial public offering of 12,000,000 units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $120,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, our Sponsor purchased an aggregate of 3,850,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, for an aggregate purchase price of $3,850,000, in a private placement.
On January 15, 2021, the underwriters purchased 1,800,000 Over-Allotment Units fully exercising the Over-Allotment Option. The Over-Allotment Units were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Over-Allotment Unit, generating additional gross proceeds of $18,000,000 to the Company. In addition, the Company’s sponsor purchased an aggregate of 360,000 warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant, for an aggregate purchase price of $360,000.
Transaction costs of our initial public offering amounted to $3,380,637 consisting of a $2,760,000 underwriting discount and $620,637 of other offering costs.
Following the closing of our initial public offering and the sale of over-allotment units, an aggregate of $138,000,000 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds and the sale of the Private Warrants was held in a Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We have engaged EarlyBirdCapital as an advisor in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholder to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with our initial Business Combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial Business Combination in an amount equal to 3.5% of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering. Additionally, we will pay EarlyBirdCapital a cash fee equal to 1.0% of the total consideration payable in the proposed business combination if EarlyBirdCapital introduces us to the target business with which we complete a business combination; provided that the foregoing fee will not be paid prior to the date that is 90 days from the effective date of the registration statement.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We anticipate that the $137,163 held outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021, might not be sufficient to allow us to operate until July 12, 2022, the period it has to consummate an initial business combination, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, we will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional Working Capital Loans from the initial stockholders, our officers and directors, or their respective affiliates, for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
We are required to complete its Initial Business Combination within 18 months from the date of IPO (January 12, 2021).
If the we are unable to complete its initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including any interest not previously released to us (net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the our remaining stockholder and its board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject (in the case of (ii) and (iii) above) to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. It is not certain that The Company would be able to complete a business combination with the period of Initial Business Combination and Company cannot assure that it will have funds sufficient to pay or provide for creditors’ claims..
These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the next 12 months, if a business combination is not consummated. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets of the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should we be unable to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative services. We began incurring these fees on January 12, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of a business combination and the Company’s liquidation. For the December 31, 2021 the Company has incurred an aggregate of $120,000 for administrative services which is included in the amount due to related parties as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with US GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting policies.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We issued an aggregate of 9,850,000 warrants in connection with our initial public offering and private placement. We account for the Private Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40 under which the Private Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. The fair value of the Private Warrants has been estimated using the Monte Carlo simulation model. We evaluated the Public Warrants in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity” and concluded that they met the criteria for equity classification and are required to be recorded as part a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company is reviewing what impact, if any, adoption may have on the financial statements.