Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
LL Flooring is one of North America’s leading specialty retailers of hard-surface flooring, with 424 stores as of December 31, 2021. Our Company seeks to offer the best customer experience online and in stores, with more than 500 varieties of hard-surface floors featuring a range of quality styles and on-trend designs. Our online tools also help empower customers to find the right solution for the space they’ve envisioned. Our extensive selection includes waterproof vinyl plank, solid and engineered hardwood, laminate, bamboo, porcelain tile, and cork, with a wide range of flooring enhancements and accessories to complement. Our stores are staffed with flooring experts who provide advice, Pro partnership services, and installation options for all of our products, most of which is in stock and ready for delivery. Our vision is to be the customer’s first choice in hard-surface flooring by providing the best experience, from start to finish. We offer a wide selection of high-quality, stocked products and the accessible flooring expertise and service of a local store, with the scale, omni-channel convenience and value of a national chain. We plan to leverage this advantage to differentiate ourselves in the highly fragmented flooring market. We launched our new digital platform, LLFlooring.com, in December 2020. In February 2021, we launched our new mobile app featuring our popular Picture It! and Floor Finder tools and making it easy to order installations.
To supplement the financial measures prepared in accordance with GAAP, we use the following non-GAAP financial measures: (i) Adjusted Gross Profit; (ii) Adjusted Gross Margin; (iii) Adjusted SG&A; (iv) Adjusted SG&A as a percentage of net sales; (v) Adjusted Operating Income; (vi) Adjusted Operating Margin; (vii) Adjusted Other Expense; (viii) Adjusted Other Expense as a percentage of net sales; (ix) Adjusted Earnings; and (x) Adjusted Earnings per Diluted Share. The non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not in lieu of, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. These supplemental measures may vary from, and may not be comparable to, similarly titled measures by other companies.
The non-GAAP financial measures are presented because management and analysts use these non-GAAP financial measures to evaluate our operating performance and management, in certain cases, uses them to determine incentive compensation and/or to address questions it receives. Therefore, we believe that the presentation of non-GAAP financial measures provides useful supplementary information to, and facilitates additional analysis by, investors. The presented non-GAAP financial measures exclude items that management does not believe reflect our core operating performance, which include regulatory and legal settlements and associated legal and operating costs, changes in antidumping and countervailing duties, and store closures, as such items are outside of our control or due to their inherent unusual, non-operating, unpredictable, non-recurring, or non-cash nature.
Executive Summary
In 2021, we delivered record sales to Pro customers and record net services sales. We also launched new, innovative products and deployed effective pricing and promotion strategies. Our annual comparable store sales grew 5.2% and we recorded net income of $42 million in 2021 despite the headwinds of world-wide macroeconomic uncertainty, supply chain turbulence, labor shortages, inflation (price, product, and wage) and the continued impact of COVID-19.
Highlights for the year ended December 31, 2021 were as follows:
● Net sales of $1.15 billion increased 5.0% compared to last year, driven by double-digit growth in sales to Pro customers and net services sales (install and freight) that more than offset a decrease in DIY sales. Total comparable store net sales increased 5.2%. The Company opened 14 net stores in 2021, and as of December 31, 2021, operated 424 stores.
● Gross margin of 38.2% decreased 80 basis points as a percentage of sales compared to last year. Both 2021 and 2020 were impacted by the net of anti-dumping and countervailing duty rate changes. Additionally, 2020 included costs related to Canadian and US store closures. When excluding items in the table that follows in Results of Operations, Adjusted Gross Profit (a non-GAAP measure) of $434 million in 2021
increased $7.4 million versus 2020. Adjusted Gross Margin (a non-GAAP measure) of 37.6% decreased 120 basis points compared to last year, primarily reflecting significantly higher transportation, tariff and material costs (collectively up more than 500 basis points) that the Company was able to partially mitigate through pricing, promotion and alternative country/vendor sourcing strategies.
● Selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses of $387 million in 2021 increased $16 million from 2020, but as a percentage of net sales, SG&A of 33.6% decreased 20 basis points compared to 2020. When excluding items in the table that follows in Results of Operations, Adjusted SG&A (a non-GAAP measure) of $380 million in 2021 increased $17 million from 2020. Adjusted SG&A as a percentage of sales (a non-GAAP measure) of 33.0% was flat compared to last year, primarily due to increased investment in customer-facing and distribution-center personnel that was offset by higher net sales.
● Operating income was $53 million in 2021, compared to operating income of $56 million in 2020. When excluding items in the table that follows in Results of Operations, Adjusted Operating Income (a non-GAAP measure) was $54 million and Adjusted Operating Margin (a non-GAAP measure) of 4.7% decreased 110 basis points compared to last year mainly as a result of the decline in adjusted gross margin described above.
● The Company had other income of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to other expense of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Both years were favorably impacted by the reversal of interest expense associated with anti-dumping and countervailing duty rate changes. When excluding items in the table that follows in Results of Operations, Adjusted Other Expense (a non-GAAP measure) of $1.7 million in 2021 decreased $2.2 million compared to 2020 primarily as a result of repayment of all outstanding debt during the second quarter of 2021.
● Income tax expense was $11 million in 2021 compared to income tax benefit of $7.8 million in 2020. 2020 included the partial release of valuation allowance on deferred tax assets of $20 million.
● Net income was $42 million, or $1.41 per diluted share, in 2021 compared to net income of $61 million, or $2.10 per diluted share, in 2020. When excluding items in the table that follows in Results of Operations,
Adjusted Earnings Per Diluted Share (a non-GAAP measure) decreased to $1.39 compared to $2.25 for 2020. The change was primarily due to the absence of the valuation allowance noted above.
Other Items
Liquidity, Working Capital and Credit Agreement
As of December 31, 2021, we had liquidity of $227 million, consisting of excess availability under our Credit Agreement of $142 million, and cash and cash equivalents of $85 million. This represents an increase in liquidity of $13 million from December 31, 2020. We repaid all $101 million of our outstanding debt in the second quarter of 2021 and did not access borrowings under the Credit Agreement during the year.
We believe that cash flows from operations, together with cash on hand, and the availability under our Credit Agreement will be sufficient to meet our obligations, operations, anticipated capital expenditures, and fund our settlements for the next 12 months. In the coming quarters we also plan to increase our inventories as supply chain disruptions abate. We prepare our forecasted cash flow and liquidity estimates based on assumptions that we believe to be reasonable but are also inherently uncertain. Actual future cash flows could differ from these estimates.
Impact of Macroeconomic Environment
We continue to navigate uncertainty in the macroeconomic environment related to global supply chain disruptions, consumer spending, inflation and a challenging labor market. During the second quarter of 2020 we limited our inventory purchases as a direct result COVID-19. Supply chain disruption on replenishment kept inventory below our targeted level during the second half of 2020 and 2021. As a result, we believe we could have captured more sales in
the fourth quarter of 2020 and 2021 if our inventories had been higher. While our supply chain teams continue to work diligently to bring in new inventory and allocate it effectively across our stores, we anticipate the supply chain to remain constrained well into 2022, limiting inventory availability and increasing transportation and material costs. Supply chain constraints include international container access, congestion in major ports, and a shortage of domestic truckers, as well as renewed COVID-19 related shutdowns. We are also monitoring the impact of inflation on consumer purchasing trends as it could affect our prices, demand for our products, our sales and our profit margins.
Section 301 Tariffs
The Company’s financial statements have been impacted by Section 301 tariffs on certain products imported from China in recent years. A subset of these imports for certain click vinyl and other engineered products (the “Subset Products”) received an exemption that was made retroactive to the beginning of the Section 301 Tariffs for a period of time but were reinstated in August 2020. The tariffs flow through the income statement as the product is sold. The Company has deployed strategies to mitigate tariffs and improve gross margin, primarily through adjusting its pricing and promotion strategies and alternative country sourcing. The following chart provides a timeline of tariff levels for the key events related to Section 301 Tariffs.
1 On November 7, 2019, the U.S. Trade Representative granted a retroactive exclusion to September 2018 on Subset Products as defined in the Section 301 Tariffs section above bringing the rate to 0%.
Canadian and US Store Closure Costs
During the third quarter of 2020, the Company conducted a comprehensive review of its real estate portfolio. Following the conclusion of this review, the Company made the decision to close its Canadian operations, including all eight stores in Canada, and six underperforming US locations by the end of 2020. The Company will continue to monitor store performance on an ongoing basis. The Company incurred expense of $3.8 million to close these stores in the second half of 2020. All 14 stores were closed by year end although certain clean-up activities were fully completed early in 2021.
Results of Operations
We believe the selected sales data, the percentage relationship between Net Sales and major categories in the Consolidated Statements of Income and the percentage change in the dollar amounts of each of the items presented below are important in evaluating the performance of our business operations.
1 Average sale is defined as the average invoiced sales order, measured quarterly, excluding returns as well as transactions under $100 (which are generally sample orders or add-on/accessories to existing orders).
2 A store is generally considered comparable on the first day of the thirteenth full calendar month after opening
3 Transaction count is calculated by applying the average sale to total net sales at comparable stores
4 Average retail price per unit (square feet for flooring and other units of measures for moldings and accessories) sold is calculated on a total company basis and excludes non-merchandise revenue.
5 A relocated store remains a comparable store as long as it is relocated within the primary trade area.
A detailed discussion of the 2021 year-over-year changes can be found below and should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements presented in this report. A detailed discussion of the 2020 year-over-year changes can be found in “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in the Form 10-K filed on March 1, 2021.
Net Sales
Net sales increased $55 million, or 5%, to $1,152 million in 2021 from $1,098 million in 2020 and comparable store net sales increased 5.2%. Average Retail Price per Unit Sold increased 8.2% as the Company reacted to the impact of inflation on costs from its vendors and supply chain disruptions along with a change in mix. Average ticket increased 16.7% driven by sales to Pro customers and higher attachment of installation and freight, partially offset by a 11.5% decrease in transaction count driven by lower DIY sales. The lower DIY sales in 2021 were impacted by weaker year-over-year COVID nesting sales and less-than-optimal inventories. Net merchandise sales increased 2% driven by double-digit sales growth to Pro customers and net services sales (install and freight) increased 29% year-over-year.
Both Pro and net services sales benefited from multiple initiatives launched specifically for these customers, including investments in technology to streamline our installation services. The Company opened 14 net stores in 2021 and operated 424 stores as of December 31, 2021.
Gross Profit
Gross profit of $440 million in 2021 increased $12 million from 2020 and gross margin in 2021 decreased to 38.2% from 39% in 2020. Both years were impacted by the net of anti-dumping and countervailing duty rate changes, with favorable adjustments of $6.3 million and $2.2 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Additionally, 2020 included costs related to Canadian and US store closures. When excluding those items in the table that follows, Adjusted Gross Profit (a non-GAAP measure) of $434 million in 2021 increased $8 million versus 2020 and Adjusted Gross Margin (a non-GAAP measure) in 2021 decreased to 37.6% from 38.8% in 2020. The 120-basis point decrease in Adjusted Gross Margin was due primarily to significantly higher transportation, tariff and material costs (collectively up more than 500 basis points) that the Company was able to partially mitigate through pricing, promotion and alternative country/vendor sourcing strategies.
We believe that the following items set forth in the table below can distort the visibility of our ongoing
performance and that the evaluation of our financial performance can be enhanced by use of supplemental presentation of our results that exclude the impact of these items.
1 Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
2 Represents net antidumping and countervailing income associated with applicable prior-year shipments of engineered hardwood from China.
3 Represents the inventory write-offs related to the Canadian and U.S. store closures described more fully in Item 8. Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses of $387 million in 2021 increased $16 million from 2020, and as a percentage of net sales, SG&A decreased to 33.6% in 2021, compared to 33.8% in 2020. SG&A in both periods included certain costs related to legal matters and settlements. Additionally, the 2020 period included costs related to Canadian and U.S. store closures. When excluding items in the table that follows, Adjusted SG&A (a non-GAAP measure) of $380 million in 2021 increased $17 million from 2020. Adjusted SG&A as a percentage of sales of 33.0% was flat compared to last year, primarily due to increased investment in customer facing and distribution personnel that was offset by higher net sales. 2020 benefited the final settlement of the business interruption insurance claim related to the August 2019 network security incident ($2.5 million) and lower travel and entertainment expense. The Company redeemed $4.5 million of MDL and Gold vouchers during 2021 and relieved the accrual for legal matters and settlements for the full amount, relieved inventory at its cost, and the remaining amount -- the gross margin for the items sold of $1.7 million was recorded as a reduction in SG&A expense.
We believe that the following items set forth in the table below can distort the visibility of our ongoing
performance and that the evaluation of our financial performance can be enhanced by use of supplemental presentation of our results that exclude the impact of these items.
4 Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
5 This amount represents the charge to earnings for the Mason and Savidis matters in the first quarter of 2021 and a $0.9 million of insurance recoveries in the second half of 2021 related to certain significant legal actions. The 2020 amounts reflect expense of $2 million related to the Gold matter in the third quarter and a $0.5 million insurance recovery in the second quarter related to certain significant legal action. These matters are described more fully in Item 8. Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements.
6 This amount represents charges to earnings related to our defense of certain significant legal actions during the period. This does not include all legal costs incurred by the Company.
7 Represents the store lease impairments, write down on fixed assets and employee termination benefits related to the Canadian and U.S. store closures described more fully in Item 8. Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements.
Operating Income and Operating Margin
Operating income was $53 million in 2021, compared to operating income of $56 million in 2020. When excluding items in the table that follows, Adjusted Operating Income (a non-GAAP measure) was $54 million and Adjusted Operating Margin (a non-GAAP measure) was 4.7% in 2021, a decrease of 110 basis points compared to last year. The primary driver of the decrease in Adjusted Operating Margin was the decline in adjusted gross margin described above.
We believe that the following items set forth in the table below can distort the visibility of our ongoing
performance and that the evaluation of our financial performance can be enhanced by use of supplemental presentation of our results that exclude the impact of these items.
1,2,3,4,5,6 See the Gross Profit and SG&A sections above for more detailed explanations of these individual items.
Other (Income) Expense
The Company had other income of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to other expense of $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Both years were favorably impacted by the reversal of interest expense associated with anti-dumping and countervailing duty rate changes. Excluding these items as shown on the table that follows, Adjusted Other Expense (a non-GAAP measure) was $1.7 million in 2021, which is a decrease of $2.2 million compared to 2020 driven by the repayment of all outstanding debt during the second quarter of 2021 and lower interest rates on our Credit Agreement due to the amendment in April 2021.
8 Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
9 Represents the interest income impact of certain antidumping adjustments related to applicable prior-year shipments of engineered hardwood from China.
Provision for Income Taxes
The Company records tax expense each period for income taxes incurred for US federal tax, in certain states, and in foreign jurisdictions resulting in an effective tax rate of 21% and (14.5)% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. 2020 benefited from the partial release of $20 million of valuation allowance on deferred tax assets.
At the beginning of 2020, the Company had a full valuation allowance of $27 million recorded against its net deferred assets as the Company was in a consolidated cumulative three-year loss position, and the Company was not relying upon projections of future taxable income in assessing their recoverability. The Company assesses the available evidence on a quarterly basis to determine if, based on the weight of all available evidence, it is more likely than not that some portion, or all, of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The Company was no longer in a consolidated cumulative three-year loss position at December 31, 2020. Based on the Company’s evaluation at a jurisdictional level as of December 31, 2020, the Company released valuation allowances of $20 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 in jurisdictions where the Company believed sufficient future taxable income, including consideration of future performance, market or economic conditions, will be generated to use existing deferred tax assets. This release of the valuation allowance resulted in noncash income tax benefit in the fourth quarter of 2020 of $20 million. At December 31, 2021 and 2020 the Company’s remaining valuation allowance was $2.4 and $5.6 million, respectively. The amount of the deferred tax assets considered realizable could be adjusted in future periods if evidence warrants such a change. During 2021, the Company recognized additional state net operating losses expected to be utilized, which are reflected in the ending deferred tax assets and resulted in a reduction of tax expense of approximately $2.4 million.
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits NOL carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. The Company amended its 2018 tax return with respect to CARES Act items and carried the 2018 NOL back to 2013 resulting in a net tax benefit of $1.8 million in 2020.
The Company files income tax returns with the United States federal government and various state and foreign jurisdictions. In the normal course of business, the Company is subject to examination by taxing authorities. The Internal Revenue Service has completed audits of our income tax returns through 2016.
Diluted Earnings per Share
Net income was $42 million, or $1.41 per diluted share, in 2021 compared to net income of $61 million, or $2.10 per diluted share, in 2020. 2021 Adjusted Earnings Per Diluted Share (a non-GAAP measure) decreased $0.86 per diluted share to $1.39 compared to $2.25 for 2020. Net income in 2020 benefited from the noncash income tax benefit of $20 million from the partial release of the valuation allowance.
We believe that each of the items below can distort the visibility of our ongoing performance and that the evaluation of our financial performance can be enhanced by use of supplemental presentation of our results that exclude the impact of these items.
1,2,3,4,5,6,7 See the Gross Profit and SG&A and Other (Income) Expense sections above for more detailed explanations of these individual items. These items have been tax affected at the Company’s federal incremental rate of 26.3% for 2021 and 26.1% for 2020.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Cash Flows
Our strong balance sheet and liquidity provide us with the financial flexibility to fund our growth initiatives and position LL Flooring for long-term success. We had cash and cash equivalents of $85 million as of December 31, 2021 even after repaying all $101 million of our outstanding debt during the second quarter of 2021.
Our principal sources of liquidity at December 31, 2021, were cash from our ongoing operations, $85 million of cash and cash equivalents on our balance sheet and $142 million of availability under our Revolving Loan. As of December 31, 2021, there was no outstanding balance on our Revolving Loan.
On April 30, 2021, we entered into a Second Amendment to the Credit Agreement to extend the maturity date to April 30, 2026, convert the FILO Term Loan into the Revolving Credit Facility, decrease the margin for LIBOR Rate Loans, and reduce the LIBOR floor, which is described more fully in Item 8. Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Our cash flows from operating activities were $39 million during 2021 which was primarily the result of our net income during the period of $42 million, accruals for legal matters and settlements of $7.8 million, and growth in customer deposits of $5.7 million, partially offset by an increase in inventory of $15 million and decreased accounts payable of $8.5 million.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $157 million in 2020 and was primarily due to $61 million in net income, a $39 million decrease in inventory, cash received from United States Customs for tariff receivables of $23 million, growth in customer deposits of $20 million and an increase in accounts payable of $9.9 million. These items were somewhat offset by payments for legal matters and settlements of $18 million.
Net cash flows used in investing activities in 2021 included $19 million in capital expenditures, primarily for opening 14 net new stores and store rebranding. We also plan to invest in capital expenditure in the range of $28 million to $32 million in 2022 to support our growth strategies, such as new store openings and to complete our store rebranding, as well as to increase operational efficiency.
Net cash used in investing activities was $15 million in 2020 and included investments in our new digital platform, LLFlooring.com, six new stores, and maintenance to our existing stores.
2021 net cash used in financing activities was $104 million, compared to $19 million provided by financing activities in 2020. The activity in the current year was primarily due to the repayment of all our outstanding debt under the Credit Agreement of $101 million in the second quarter of 2021. Net cash provided by the comparable 2020 period was primarily attributable to $19 million in net borrowings on the Credit Agreement.
We expect free cash flow to turn negative in 2022 as a result of rebuilding inventory and investing in growth.
Merchandise Inventories
Merchandise inventory is our most significant asset and is considered either “available for sale” or “inbound in-transit,” based on whether we have physically received and inspected the products at an individual store location, in our distribution centers or in another facility where we control and monitor inspection.
Merchandise inventories and available inventory per store in operation on December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Available inventory per store at December 31, 2021 was lower than available inventory per store at December 31, 2020. The 7% reduction in total inventory from last year was primarily driven by supply chain constraints on replenishment. We plan to return to more historic levels of merchandise inventory in 2022. Our teams are working diligently to receive new inventory in the face of supply chain constraints and we are working toward rebuilding inventory by $50 to $70 million by end of 2022.
Credit Agreement
Information with respect to this item may be found in Note 4, “Credit Agreement”, to the consolidated financial statements in Item 8 of Part II, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or other financing activities with special-purpose entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those that we believe are both significant and that require us to make difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often because we need to estimate the effect of inherently uncertain matters. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experiences and various other factors that we believe to be appropriate under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates, and we might obtain different estimates if we used different assumptions or conditions. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Loss Contingencies
We are involved in various lawsuits, claims, investigations, and proceedings. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine that a loss is reasonably possible and a loss or range of the loss can be estimated, we disclose such amounts. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount of any loss or range of loss. We assess each legal matter and any related provisions at least quarterly and adjust them accordingly to reflect the impact of negotiations, settlements, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information.
Until a final resolution related to loss contingencies for legal and other contingencies is reached, there may be an exposure to loss in excess of the amount we have recorded, and such amounts could be material, either individually or in the aggregate, to our business, consolidated financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Therefore, if one or more of these matters were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management’s expectations, our results of operations and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period, could be materially adversely affected.
Recognition of Net Sales
We recognize net sales for products purchased at the time the customer takes possession of the merchandise. We recognize service revenue, which consists primarily of installation revenue and freight charges for in-home delivery, when the service has been rendered. We report sales exclusive of sales taxes collected from customers and remitted to governmental taxing authorities. Net sales are reduced by an allowance for anticipated sales returns that we estimate based on historical and current sales trends and experience. We believe that our estimate for sales returns is an accurate reflection of future returns. Any reasonably likely changes that may occur in the assumptions underlying our allowance estimates would not be expected to have a material impact on our financial condition or operating performance. Actual sales returns did not vary materially from estimated amounts for 2021, 2020 or 2019.
In addition, customers who do not take immediate delivery of their purchases are generally required to pay a deposit, equal to approximately half of the retail sales value, with the balance payable when the customer takes possession of the merchandise. These customer deposits benefit our cash flow and return on investment capital, because we receive partial payment for our customers’ purchases immediately. We record these deposits as a liability on our balance sheet in Customer Deposits and Store Credits until the customer takes possession of the merchandise.
Leases
The Company determines if an arrangement is a lease at inception. If the arrangement is a lease, the Company accounts for the transaction in accordance with FASB ASC Topic 842, Leases (“ASC 842”). Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and operating lease liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet. The operating lease ROU asset also is adjusted for any lease payments made and excludes lease incentives and initial direct costs incurred. The Company’s lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease at certain dates, typically at the Company’s own discretion. The Company regularly evaluates the renewal options and when they are
reasonably certain of exercise, the Company includes the renewal period in its lease term. Many of the Company’s leases include both lease (e.g., payments including rent, taxes, and insurance costs) and non-lease components (e.g., common-area or other maintenance costs) which are accounted for as a single lease component as the Company has elected the practical expedient to group lease and non-lease components for all leases. Lease expense for minimum lease payments is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement. The Company made an accounting policy election that payments under agreements with an initial term of 12 months or less will not be included on the consolidated balance sheet but will be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations on a straight-line basis over the term of the agreement.
The operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities are recognized as the present value of the future minimum lease payments over the lease term at commencement date. As most of the leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate based on the information available at commencement date in determining the present value of future payments. The incremental borrowing rate is estimated based on U.S. Composite yields obtained from Bloomberg based on a third-party’s estimate of the Company’s credit rating. The determination of an appropriate secured incremental borrowing rate requires judgments in selecting an appropriate yield curve and estimating adjustments for collateralization and inflation. Based on the volume of new store leases that the Company enters into each year, a significant increase or decrease in the incremental borrowing rates used to discount lease payments could have a significant impact on the value of operating lease liabilities and right-of-use assets subsequently reported on its consolidated balance sheet.