Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K contains certain forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements other than statements of historical facts included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including without limitation, statements regarding our future financial position, business strategy, budgets, projected revenues, projected costs and plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Forward-looking statements generally can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as “may,” “will,” “expects,” “intends,” “plans,” “projects,” “estimates,” “anticipates,” “believes” or the negative thereof or any variation thereon or similar terminology or expressions.
We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are not guarantees and are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Important factors which could materially affect our results and our future performance include, without limitation, our ability to purchase defaulted consumer receivables at appropriate prices, competition to acquire such receivables, our dependence upon third party law firms to service our accounts, our ability to obtain funds to purchase receivables, ability to manage growth or declines in the business, changes in government regulations that affect our ability to collect sufficient amounts on our defaulted consumer receivables, the impact of class action suits and other litigation, our ability to keep our software systems updated to operate our business, our ability to employ and retain qualified employees, our ability to establish and maintain internal accounting controls, changes in the credit or capital markets, changes in interest rates, deterioration in economic conditions, and negative press regarding the debt collection industry which may have a negative impact on a debtor’s willingness to pay the debt we acquire, as well as other factors set forth under “Risk Factors” in this report.
•
our ability to retain the listing of our securities on the Nasdaq Capital market,
•
our ability to purchase defaulted consumer receivables at appropriate prices,
•
competition to acquire such receivables,
•
our dependence upon third party law firms to service our accounts,
•
our ability to obtain funds to purchase receivables,
•
our ability to manage growth or declines in the business,
•
changes in government regulations that affect our ability to collect sufficient amounts on our defaulted consumer receivables,
•
the impact of class action lawsuits and other litigation on our business or operations,
•
our ability to keep our software systems updated to operate our business,
•
our ability to employ and retain qualified employees,
•
our ability to establish and maintain internal accounting controls,
•
changes in the credit or capital markets,
•
changes in interest rates,
•
deterioration in economic conditions,
•
negative press regarding the debt collection industry which may have a negative impact on a debtor’s willingness to pay the debt we acquire,
•
the spread of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), its impact on the economy generally and, more specifically, the specialty finance industry, and
•
other factors set forth under “Risk Factors” in this report.
Except as required by law, we assume no duty to update or revise any forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a specialty finance company that provides funding to nonprofit community associations primarily located in the state of Florida. We offer incorporated nonprofit community associations, which we refer to as “Associations,” a variety of financial products customized to each Association’s financial needs. Our original product offering consists of providing funding to Associations by purchasing their rights under delinquent accounts that are selected by the Associations arising from unpaid Association assessments. Historically, we provided funding against such delinquent accounts, which we refer to as “Accounts,” in exchange for a portion of the proceeds collected by the Associations from the account debtors on the Accounts. In addition to our original product offering, we have started purchasing Accounts on varying terms tailored to suit each Association’s financial needs, including under our New Neighbor Guaranty™ program, and are exploring other specialty finance business opportunities that are complementary to or that can leverage our historical business.
We also have implemented plans to operate in the Bitcoin mining ecosystem. Specifically, we plan to develop and grow a cryptocurrency mining business, specializing in Bitcoin. Our key mission is to become a leading Bitcoin mining company in the United States. As of the date of this filing, we have not commenced mining operations. We aim to deploy the computing power that we will create to mine Bitcoin and validate transactions on the Bitcoin network. We believe that recent developments in Bitcoin mining have created an opportunity for us to deploy capital and conduct large-scale mining operations in the United States. We have formed a new wholly owned subsidiary, US Digital Mining and Hosting Co, LLC, a Florida limited liability company (US Digital), to develop and operate our cryptocurrency mining business.
Specialty Finance Company Operations
In our specialty finance company operations, we purchase an Association’s right to receive a portion of the Association’s collected proceeds from owners that are not paying their assessments. After taking assignment of an Association’s right to receive a portion of the Association’s proceeds from the collection of delinquent assessments, we engage law firms to perform collection work on a deferred billing basis wherein the law firms receive payment upon collection from the account debtors or a predetermined contracted amount if payment from account debtors is less than legal fees and costs owed. Under this business model, we typically fund an amount equal to or less than the statutory minimum an Association could recover on a delinquent account for each Account, which we refer to as the “Super Lien Amount.” Upon collection of an Account, the law firm working on the Account, on behalf of the Association, generally distributes to us the funded amount, interest, and administrative late fees, with the law firm retaining legal fees and costs collected, and the Association retaining the balance of the collection. In connection with this line of business, we have developed proprietary software for servicing Accounts, which we believe enables law firms to service Accounts efficiently and profitably.
Under our New Neighbor Guaranty program, an Association will generally assign substantially all of its outstanding indebtedness and accruals on its delinquent units to us in exchange for payment by us of monthly dues on each delinquent unit. This simultaneously eliminates a substantial portion of the Association’s balance sheet bad debts and assists the Association to meet its budget by receiving guaranteed monthly payments on its delinquent units and relieving the Association from paying legal fees and costs to collect its bad debts. We believe that the combined features of the program enhance the value of the underlying real estate in an Association and the value of an Association’s delinquent receivables.
Because we acquire and collect on the delinquent receivables of Associations, the Account debtors are third parties about whom we have little or no information. Therefore, we cannot predict when any given Account will be paid off or how much it will yield. In assessing the risk of purchasing Accounts, we review the property values of the underlying units, the governing documents of the relevant Association, and the total number of delinquent receivables held by the Association.
Specialty Finance Products
Original Product
Our original product relies upon Florida statutory provisions that effectively protect the principal amount invested by us in each Account. In particular, Section 718.116(1), Florida Statutes, makes purchasers and sellers of a unit in an Association jointly and severally liable for all past due assessments, interest, late fees, legal fees, and costs payable to the Association. As discussed above, the Florida Statutes grants to Associations a so-called “super lien”, which is a category of lien that is given a statutorily higher priority than all other types of liens other than property tax liens. The amount of the Association’s priority over a first mortgage holder that takes title to a property through foreclosure (or deed in lieu), referred to as the Super Lien Amount, is limited to twelve months’ past due assessments or, if less, one percent (1.0%) of the original mortgage amount. Under our contracts with Associations for our original product, we pay Associations an amount up to the Super Lien Amount for the right to receive all collected interest and late fees on Accounts purchased from the Associations.
The Statutes specify that the rate of interest an association (or its assignor) may charge on delinquent assessments is equal to the rate set forth in the association’s declaration or bylaws. In Florida if a rate is not specified, the statutory rate is equal to 18% but may not exceed the maximum rate allowed by law. Similarly, the Statutes in Florida also stipulate that administrative late fees cannot be charged on delinquent assessments unless so provided by the association’s declaration or bylaws and may not exceed the greater of $25 or 5% of each delinquent assessment.
In other states in which we have offered our original product, which are currently only in Washington, Colorado and Illinois, we rely on statutes that we believe are similar to the above-described Florida statutes in relevant respects.
New Neighbor Guaranty
We also developed the New Neighbor Guaranty, wherein an Association assigns substantially all of its outstanding indebtedness and accruals on its delinquent units to us in exchange for payments in an amount equal to the regular ongoing monthly or quarterly assessments for delinquent units when those amounts would be due to the Association. We assume both the payment and collection obligations for these assigned Accounts under this product. This simultaneously eliminates an Association’s balance sheet bad debts and assists the Association to meet its budget by receiving guaranteed assessment payments on its delinquent units and relieving the Association from paying legal fees and costs to collect its bad debts. We believe that the combined features of the product enhance the value of the underlying real estate in an Association and the value of an Association’s delinquent receivables.
Before we implement the New Neighbor Guaranty program for an Association typically asks us to conduct a review of its accounts receivable. After we have conducted the review, we inform the Association which Accounts we are willing to purchase and the terms of such purchase. Once we implement the New Neighbor Guaranty program, we begin making scheduled payments to the Association on the Accounts as if the Association had non-delinquent residents occupying the units underlying the Accounts. Our New Neighbor Guaranty contracts typically allow us to retain all collection proceeds on each Account other than special assessments and accelerated assessment balances. Thus, the Association foregoes the potential benefit of a larger future collection in exchange for the certainty of a steady stream of immediate payments on the Account.
Recent Developments
Reverse Stock Split
On May 11, 2020, our shareholders voted in favor of the approval of an amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation, in the event it is deemed advisable by our Board of Directors, to effect an additional reverse stock split of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock at a ratio within the range of one-for-two (1:2) and one-for-ten (1:10), as determined by the Board of Directors.
On May 6, 2021, pursuant to the foregoing shareholder vote, the Company effected a common share consolidation (“Reverse Stock Split”) by means of a one-for-five (1:5) reverse split of its outstanding common stock, par value $0.001 per share which resulted in a decrease in outstanding common stock to 5,414,296 shares. The Reverse Stock Split was effected by the filing of an amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation on May 5, 2021 which provided that the Reverse Stock Split become effective at 12:01 a.m. Eastern time on May 7, 2021. The amendment provided that any fraction of a share of common stock that would be created as a result of the Reverse Stock Split is to be cashed out at price equal to the product of the closing price of the Company’s common stock on May 6, 2021 and the amount of the fractional share. The Reverse Stock Split became effective on May 7, 2021 and the Company’s common stock began trading on The Nasdaq Capital Market on a
split-adjusted basis on May 7, 2021. The Company has retroactively adjusted all share amounts and per share data herein to give effect to the Reverse Stock Split.
Sponsorship of LMF Acquisition Opportunities, Inc.
On January 28, 2021, LMF Acquisition Opportunities, Inc. (“LMF Acquisition”), a special purpose acquisition company organized by the Company, announced the closing of an initial public offering of units (“Units”). In the initial public offering, LMF Acquisition sold an aggregate of 10,350,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per unit, resulting in total gross proceeds of $103,500,000. Each Unit consisted of one share of Class A common stock and one redeemable warrant, with each warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock of LMF Acquisition at a price of $11.50 per share. LMFAO Sponsor, LLC (“Sponsor”), a subsidiary in which the Company owns approximately 70% of the equity and for which the Company is the sole manager, served as the sponsor for LMF Acquisition’s initial public offering.
Sponsor was organized by, and its initial capital contribution was contributed by, the Company and the Company’s executive officers. The Company’s executive officers and LMF Acquisition’s directors collectively own an approximately 30% nonvoting equity interest in Sponsor, and LMF Acquisition is managed by the Company’s management team. In connection with the initial public offering of LMF Acquisition, the Company loaned $5.7 million to Sponsor in an intercompany loan, which Sponsor used to purchase an aggregate of approximately 5,738,000 warrants of LMF Acquisition. Prior to a business combination by LMF Acquisition, Sponsor holds 100% of the shares of Class B common stock outstanding of LMF Acquisition. The Class B shares equal approximately 20% of the outstanding common stock of LMF Acquisition. Upon the successful completion of a business combination by LMF Acquisition, the proforma ownership of the new company will vary depending on the business combination terms. If LMF Acquisition does not successfully complete a business combination within 18 months from its initial public offering or July 29, 2022 (subject to a potential extension from the 18 month period to up to 21 months) or if the business combination is not successful, the Company can lose its entire investment in Sponsor.
As a result of LMF Acquisition’s IPO, we ceased having a controlling financial interest in LMF Acquisition as of January 28, 2021. Additionally, as our retained investment in LMF Acquisition qualifies for equity-method accounting, we are required to remeasure our retained interest in LMF Acquisition at fair value and include any resulting adjustments as part of a gain or loss recognized on deconsolidation. The fair value calculation related to our retained interest in LMF Acquisition is dependent upon company-specific adjustments applied to the observable trading price of LMF Acquisition’s Class A common stock and publicly traded warrants. Changes in fair value will be recorded in the income statement during the period of the change.
Transactions with Borqs
On December 14, 2020, the Company entered into a Master Loan Receivables Purchase and Assignment Agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) under which the Company agreed to purchase up to $18 million of loan receivables of Borqs Technologies, Inc. (NASDAQ: BRQS), a British Virgin Islands company (“Borqs”), from Borqs’ senior lenders, Partners for Growth IV, L.P. and Partners for Growth V. L.P. As a part of the transaction, the Company entered into a Settlement Agreement, dated December 14, 2020 (the “Settlement Agreement”), with Borqs pursuant to which Borqs was obligated to issue shares of Borqs common stock to the Company (the “Settlement Shares”), in one or more tranches, in settlement of the loan receivables acquired by the Company under the Purchase Agreement. This transaction was completed on February 11, 2021 and the Company realized $5.7 million from the transaction.
In a separate transaction that was funded after December 31, 2020 and as previously disclosed on December 16, 2020, the Company and Esousa Holdings, LLC, a private investor (the “Investor”) entered into a Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) pursuant to which the Investor agreed to provide consulting services and make one or more non-recourse loans to the Company in a principal amount of up to the purchase price of the Borqs loan receivables purchased by the Company. The Loan Agreement does not provide a fixed rate of interest, and the Company and Investor agreed to split the net proceeds from the Company’s sale of the Settlement Shares, with the Company receiving one-third of the net proceeds after a return of Investor’s principal and the Investor receiving return of principal plus two-thirds of the net proceeds thereafter.
In an additional transaction on February 24, 2021, the Company entered into a specialty finance transaction with Borqs, under which the Company agreed to purchase Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Notes of Borqs (the “Borqs Notes”) up to an aggregate principal amount of $5 million. The Borqs Notes are due in two years, have an annual interest rate of 8%, are convertible into ordinary shares of Borqs at a 10% discount from the market price, and have 90% warrant coverage (with the warrants exercisable at 110% of the conversion price. One-third of the Borqs Notes ($1,666,667) were funded by the Company at the execution of definitive agreements for the transaction, and two-thirds of the Borqs Notes ($3,333,333) to be purchased by the Company were required to be purchased and funded upon the satisfaction of certain conditions, including
effectiveness of a registration statement to be filed by Borqs by April 15, 2021. The registration was deemed effective on May 3, 2021 and the Company completed this funding on May 6, 2021.
Entry into Contracts Relating to Planned Cryptocurrency Mining Business
On September 15, 2021, we announced that we plan to operate in the Bitcoin mining ecosystem. As of the date of this filing, we have not commenced operations. We aim to deploy the computing power that we will create to mine Bitcoin and validate transactions on the Bitcoin network. We believe that recent developments in Bitcoin mining have created an opportunity for us to deploy capital and conduct large-scale mining operations in the United States. We have formed a new wholly owned subsidiary, US Digital Mining and Hosting Co, LLC, a Florida limited liability company (US Digital), to develop and operate our cryptocurrency mining business.
In furtherance of these plans, on September 8, 2021, we entered into a sale and purchase agreement (the “Bitmain Purchase Agreement”) with Bitmain Technologies Limited (“Seller”) pursuant to which we agreed to purchase, and Seller agreed to supply to us, an aggregate of 1,002 Bitcoin S19J Pro Antminer cryptocurrency mining machines for an aggregate purchase price of $6.3 million (the “Mining Machines”). On October 6, 2021, we entered into a second Bitmain Purchase Agreement pursuant to which we agreed to purchase, and Seller agreed to supply to us, an aggregate of 4,044 Bitcoin additional S19J Pro Antminer cryptocurrency Mining Machines for an aggregate purchase price of $25.3 million. The Bitmain Purchase Agreements provide for delivery of the Mining Machines in batches over an estimated delivery timeframe starting in April 2022 and continuing through September 2022. The Bitmain Purchase Agreements require us to pay $7.9 million or 25% of the total purchase price as a non-refundable deposit for the Mining Machines within 7 days of the date of the signing of the respective Bitmain Purchase Agreements, and additional 35% of the batch price at least 6 months prior to shipment of such batch, and the remaining 40% of each batch price one month prior to the shipment of the batch.
On October 6, 2021, US Digital entered into a sale and purchase agreement (the “Uptime Purchase Agreement”) with Uptime Armory LLC (“Uptime”) pursuant to which US Digital agreed to purchase, and Uptime agreed to supply to US Digital, an aggregate of 18 modified 40-foot cargo containers (“POD5ive containers”) that will be designed to hold and operate 280 S19 Pro Antminers manufactured by Seller. The purchase price of the POD5ive containers totals $3.15 million of which $2.4 million or 75% is due as a non-refundable down payment within 7 business days of the effective date and the remaining 25% is due within five business days after Uptime delivers a “notice of completion” of the equipment. The Uptime Purchase Agreement contains other customary terms, provisions, and conditions. On the same effective date, US Digital also entered into a hosting agreement with Uptime Hosting LLC to host the Company’s 18 POD5ive containers at a secure location and provide power, maintenance and other services specified in the contract for 6 cents per kilowatt with a term of one year. This hosting agreement requires a deposit of $0.8 million within 7 business days of the effective date, an additional deposit for each container three months prior to delivery at the hosting site of $44 thousand and a final deposit for each container one month prior to arrival at the hosting site of $44 thousand.
In November 2021, also in connection with our planned cryptocurrency mining business, we entered into strategic alliance agreements (the “Strategic Alliance Agreements”) with OTC Miners Corp. (“OTC Miners”) and Spartan Crest Capital Corp. (“Spartan”). The Strategic Alliance Agreements generally provide that OTC Miners and Spartan will work together with us and collaborate with us regarding our cryptocurrency mining business strategy and planned business operations. The agreements contemplate that each of OTC Miners and Spartan will provide ongoing consulting and advisory services to us on a non-exclusive basis over a one-year period with respect to the bitcoin mining business and industry and that the parties will meet periodically to collaborate and share information regarding the industry, the equipment used in the industry, key industry relationships, and financing options. In consideration of the strategic alliances and related services and benefits, we issued 100,000 shares of restricted common stock to each of OTC Miners and Spartan and paid OTC Miners $1,250,000 to cover anticipate expenses of OTC Miners in connection with its activities under the strategic alliance. We also agreed to pay OTC Miners a fee of 3% of the aggregate consideration of any strategic transaction completed by our company that we and OTC Miners jointly agree to pursue. The Strategic Alliance Agreements have a term of one year each.
Public Offering
On October 18, 2021, the Company entered into an Underwriting Agreement with Maxim Group LLC on behalf of itself and as representative of the underwriters named therein (the “Underwriting Agreement”), pursuant to which the Company issued and sold, in an underwritten public offering (the “Public Offering”), 6,315,780 units, with each unit consisting of one share of common stock, $0.001 par value per share (“Common Stock”), and one warrant to purchase one share of Common Stock (the “Common Warrants”). The units were sold to the public at the price of $4.75 per unit.
On October 19, 2021, the Public Offering closed, resulting in gross proceeds to the Company of approximately $30,000,000, before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions and estimated offering expenses. The Company also granted to
the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to an additional 947,367 shares of Common Stock (“Option Shares”) and/or warrants (“Option Warrants”) to purchase up to 947,367 shares of Common Stock (the “Over-Allotment Option”). The underwriter partially exercised the Over-Allotment Option, and the Company thereby issued and sold the additional 947,367 Option Warrants, in a simultaneous closing with the Public Offering on October 19, 2021. On October 20, 2021, the underwriter exercised the remainder of the Over-Allotment Option, and the Company thereby issued and sold the additional 947,367 Option Shares (the “October 20 Over-Allotment Closing”).
The Common Warrants issued in the offering are immediately exercisable and entitle the holder to purchase one share of Common Stock at an exercise price equal to $5.00 and expire on the fifth anniversary of the issuance date. The Common Warrants may be exercised on a cashless basis if there is no effective registration statement available for the resale of the shares of common stock underlying such warrants.
The Company agreed to an underwriting discount of 8% of the public offering price of the Units sold in this offering. In addition, the Company issued to Maxim Group LLC (or its designee) warrants to purchase an aggregate of 3% of the number of shares of Common Stock sold in the Public Offering, which warrants entitle the holder to purchase up to an aggregate of 217,894 shares of Common Stock after the October 20 Over-Allotment Closing (the “Representative’s Warrants”). The Representative’s Warrants have an exercise price equal to $5.94, which is 110% of the offering price in the Public Offering. The Representative’s Warrants may be exercised on a cashless basis and will be exercisable six months following the closing date until April 16, 2025.
COVID-19 Update
Although COVID-19 is currently not material to our results of operations, there is uncertainty relating to the potential future impact on our business. While our employees currently have the ability and are encouraged to work remotely, such measures have and may continue to have an impact on employee attendance or productivity, which, along with the possibility of employees’ illness, may adversely affect our operations. In addition to encouraging employees to work remotely, the Company has increased sanitation of its offices, provided hand gel and masks to its employees and has closed the offices during identified periods of high contagion.
The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our operations, or our ability to obtain financing should we require it, will depend on future developments which are uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 and the actions taken by governments and private businesses to contain COVID-19 to treat its impact, among others. If the disruptions posed by COVID-19 continue for an extended period of time, financial markets may not be available to the Company for raising capital in order to fund future growth. Should the Company not be able to obtain financing when required, in the amounts necessary or under terms which are economically feasible, we may be required to reduce planned future growth and/or the scope of our operations.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 30, 2020, the Company obtained a $185,785 Paycheck Protection Program loan (“PPP Loan”). These business loans were established by the 2020 US Federal government Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) to help certain businesses, self-employed workers, sole proprietors, certain nonprofit organizations, and tribal businesses continue paying their workers.
The Paycheck Protection Program allows entities to apply for low interest private loans to pay for their payroll and certain other costs. The loan proceeds were used to cover payroll costs, rent, interest, and utilities. The loan was to be partially or fully forgiven if the Company keeps its employee counts and employee wages stable. The program was implemented by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The interest rate is 1.0% and has a maturity date of 2 years. We applied for loan and interest forgiveness in the fourth quarter of 2020.
On May 6, 2021, we received notice from the Paycheck Protection Program that $157,250 of our loan had been forgiven. As such, we paid the remaining balance of $28,534 by September 30, 2021.
Corporate History and Reorganization
The Company was originally organized in January 2008 as a Florida limited liability company under the name LM Funding, LLC. Prior to our initial public offering in 2015, all of our business was conducted through LM Funding, LLC and its subsidiaries. Immediately prior to our initial public offering in October 2015, the members of the LM Funding, LLC contributed all of their membership interests to LM Funding America, Inc., a Delaware corporation incorporated on April 20, 2015 (“LMFA”), in exchange for shares of the common stock of LMFA. Immediately after such contribution and exchange,
the former members of LM Funding, LLC became the holders of 100% of the issued and outstanding common stock of LMFA, thereby making LM Funding, LLC a wholly-owned subsidiary of LMFA.
The Company organized two new subsidiaries in 2020: LMFA Financing LLC, a Florida limited liability company, on November 21, 2020, and LMFAO Sponsor LLC, a Florida limited liability company, on October 29, 2020. LMFAO Sponsor LLC organized a subsidiary, LMF Acquisition Opportunities Inc., on October 29, 2020. LM Funding America Inc. organized a subsidiary, US Digital Mining and Hosting Co., LLC., on September 10, 2021.
Results of Operations
The Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared with the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
During the year ended December 31, 2021, total revenues decreased by $0.4 million, or 28.9%, to $0.9 million from $1.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is due in part to a decrease in interest, administrative and late fees collected during the year along with a reduction in rental revenues resulting from a reduced number of rental properties.
The decrease in interest, administrative and late fees was the result of a decrease in the average revenue collected per unit. The average revenue per unit was down to $1,676 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $3,011 for the year ended December 31, 2020. There was a 28% increase in payoffs as the Company recorded approximately 452 payoff occurrences for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with 351 payoff occurrences for the year ended December 31, 2020. “Payoffs” consist of recovery of the entire legally collectible portion, or a settlement thereof, of our principal investment, accrued interest, and late fees owed to us from the proceeds of the Accounts collected by the Associations in accordance with our contracts with Associations.
Rental revenue (which includes sales of units) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $0.1 million as compared to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. There were 11 rental units in the portfolio as December 31, 2021 compared with 9 rental units as of December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses increased by $4.0 million, or 76%, to $9.3 million from $5.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The net increase in operating expenses can be attributed to various factors including a $0.2 million expense for stock provided to digital strategy consultants, $2.3 million of expense related to the issuance of stock options to management and board members, increased payroll of $0.6 million related to increased bonuses and base compensation, $0.5 million for increased professional fees and a $0.2 million reduction in the recoupment of bad debt allowance from a related party offset in part by a decrease in real estate management fees of $79 thousand.
Legal fees (excluding fees paid pursuant to our service agreement with BLG), for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were approximately $1.3 million and $0.8 million, respectively. In the ordinary course of our business, we are involved in numerous legal proceedings. We regularly initiate collection lawsuits, using our network of third-party law firms, against debtors. In addition, debtors occasionally initiate litigation against us. Legal fees for BLG for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1.0 million compared to $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 12. Related Party Transactions for further discussion regarding the service agreements with BLG.
Other Income
The Company recognized a $13.8 million gain on securities for the year ended December 31, 2021 including:
•
a $5.7 million gain on a transaction with Borqs in which the Company acquired debt of Borqs and converted the debt into Borqs common stock and subsequently sold such shares at a gain.
•
A $8.5 million gain as part of its purchase of the Borqs $5 million convertible note in which it received warrants that were subsequently exercised in a cashless exercise and received 5,956,544 common shares in Borqs. The Company subsequently sold those warrants and recognized $8.5 million in proceeds, all of which was recognized as gain for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•
The Company recognized a $0.3 million realized loss on the sale of 1,064,935 shares of Borqs common stock for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company previously classified $5 million convertible note has been classified as a trading security and as such is fair valued each quarter. The Company recognized an unrealized loss of $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the revaluation and partial conversion of the Borq convertible debt securities.
The Company recognized a $1.4 million unrealized loss on marketable securities for year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company’s investment in LMAO changed due to the LMAO IPO on January 28, 2021. This resulted in LMAO’s deconsolidation from the Company and any changes in fair value will be recorded in the income statement during the period of the change. The Company recognized an unrealized gain on securities of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from the revaluation of LMAO’s Class B common stock and Private Placement Warrants.
The Company recognized a $0.5 million realized gain on the sale of its digital assets for year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company recognized a gain on the forgiveness of note payable of $157 thousand for year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest (Income) Expense
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net interest income was approximately $211 thousand as compared to $7 thousand of interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is related to the investment in Note Receivable.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
The Company recorded net income tax expense of approximately $326 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. Due to the Company generating income of approximately $5.3 million before income taxes, the Company released $1.1 million of its income tax valuation allowance while also recognizing approximately $1.1 million income tax expense. No income tax benefit or expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to continuing losses.
Under ASC 740-10-30-5, Income Taxes, deferred tax assets should be reduced by a valuation allowance if, based on the weight of available evidence, it is more-likely-than-not (i.e., a likelihood of more than 50%) that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. The Company considers all positive and negative evidence available in determining the potential realization of deferred tax assets including, primarily, the recent history of taxable earnings or losses. Based on operating losses reported by the Company during 2020, 2019 and 2018, the Company concluded there was not sufficient positive evidence to overcome this recent operating history. As a result, the Company believes that a valuation allowance continues to be necessary based on the more-likely-than-not threshold noted above. The Company recorded a valuation allowance of approximately $3.2 million and $4.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Net Income (loss) from Continuing Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated net income from continuing operations of approximately $5.0 million as compared to a net loss of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 for the reasons mentioned above.
Income from Discontinued Operations
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the income from discontinued operations was $0 as compared to net income of $16 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Income Attributable to Non-Controlling Interest
The Company owns 70.5% of Sponsor. As such, approximately $244 thousand of the $0.9 million net unrealized gain recognized by the Sponsor’s ownership of LMAO is attributed to the Non-Controlling Interest.
Net Loss
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated net income of approximately $4.8 million as compared to a net loss of $4.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 for the reasons mentioned above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $32.6 million compared with $11.6 million at December 31, 2020. The increase in cash is due primarily to $10.2 million of proceeds from the exercise of warrants and $31.5 million of proceeds from our October 2021 public offering.
Recent Capital Raising Transactions
Public Offering - 2021
In October 2021, we raised approximately $31.5 million in net proceeds in a registered public offering by issuing 7.3 million shares of common stock and 7.5 million warrants to purchase shares of common stock. Holders of the warrants subsequently exercised such warrants for 140,500 shares of common stock for approximately $702 thousand.
Holders of our warrants issued in our public offering from 2020 exercised warrants for 2,330,536 shares for total consideration of approximately $9.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Public Offering - 2020
On August 18, 2020, we raised approximately $8.2 million in net proceeds in a registered public offering by issuing 2.0 million shares of common stock and 2.2 million warrants to purchase shares of common stock. Holders of the warrants subsequently exercised such warrants for 30,000 shares of common stock for $135 thousand.
Holders of our warrants exercised warrants for 255,540 shares for total consideration of approximately $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
On March 23, 2020, the Company entered into a Share Exchange Agreement (the “Share Exchange Agreement”), with Hanfor (Cayman) Limited, a Cayman Islands exempted company (“Hanfor”), and BZ Industrial Limited, a British Virgin Islands business company and the sole stockholder of Hanfor (“Hanfor Owner”). In connection with the execution of the Share Exchange Agreement, the Company and Hanfor Owner entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement, dated March 23, 2020, pursuant to which Hanfor Owner purchased from Company an aggregate of 104,168 shares of the Company’s common stock at a price of $12.00 per share. Hanfor Owner paid $250,000 cash on March 23, 2020 and the Company received the remaining $1.0 million in April 2020 at which time the Company issued the 104,168 shares.
Cash from Operations
Net cash provided by operations was approximately $3.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with net cash used in operations of $3.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily driven by a $5.7 million realized gain on securities from the Borq Note transactions and a $8.5 million realized gain on securities from selling the Borq warrants offset in part by a $5 million investment in the Borq convertible note receivable and a $3.7 million investment in marketable securities.
Cash from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $24 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $1.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities was due to the investment of $5.7 million in LMF Acquisition Opportunities Inc (a special purpose acquisition corporation), a $1.4 million investment in digital assets, a $2 million investment in Symbiont note receivable and a $16.8 million deposit for mining equipment offset in part by the receipt of $1.9 million from the sale of digital assets. For the year ended December 31, 2020 we received $1.5 million from the recoupment of a note receivable.
Cash from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $41.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $12.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. During 2021 the Company received $31.5 million from a public offering of common stock and warrants, and $10.2 million from the exercise of warrants. During 2021, the Company repaid $0.2 million in principal repayments. During 2020 the Company received $1.3 million from a stock subscription agreement, $8.2 million from a public offering of common stock and warrants, and $3.1 million from the exercise of warrants. During 2020, the Company repaid $0.2 million in principal repayments and borrowed $0.2 million.
Outstanding Debt
Debt of the Company consisted of the following:
Minimum required principal payments on the Company’s debt as of December 31, 2021 are as follows :
Years Ending December 31,
$114,688
$114,688
On April 30, 2020, the Company obtained a $185,785 Paycheck Protection Program loan. These business loans were established by the 2020 US Federal government Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) to help certain businesses, self-employed workers, sole proprietors, certain nonprofit organizations, and tribal businesses continue paying their workers.
The Paycheck Protection Program allows entities to apply for low interest private loans to pay for their payroll and certain other costs. The loan proceeds were used to cover payroll costs, rent, interest, and utilities. The loan was to be partially or fully forgiven if the Company kept its employee counts and employee wages stable. The program was implemented by the U.S. Small Business Administration. The interest rate was 1.0% and had a maturity date of 2 years.
On May 6, 2021, we received notice from the Paycheck Protection Program that $157,250 of our loan had been forgiven. As such, we paid the remaining balance of $28,534 by September 30, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles, generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires our management to make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure or inclusion of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the period. We evaluate our significant estimates on an ongoing basis, including, but not limited to, estimates related to allowance for doubtful accounts, and income tax provisions. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We do not consider any of our policies or estimates to be critical. Refer to Note 1 - Significant Accounting Policies to our financial statements for a complete discussion of the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.