ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This MDA includes information relating to Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL, as well as AEF and Corporate Services. Where appropriate, information relating to a specific entity has been segregated and labeled as such. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Financial Statements and Notes included in this report. Unless otherwise noted, all “per share” references in MDA refer to earnings per diluted share. In addition, this MDA includes certain financial information for 2021 compared to 2020. Refer to MDA in the combined 2020 Form 10-K for details on certain financial information for 2020 compared to 2019.
OVERVIEW
Strategy and Mission
Alliant Energy’s mission is to deliver affordable energy solutions and exceptional service that its customers and communities count on - safely, efficiently, reliably and responsibly. The mission is supported by a strategy focused on meeting the evolving expectations of customers while providing an attractive return for investors, as well as serving its customers and building strong communities. This strategy includes the following key elements:
Providing affordable energy solutions to customers - Alliant Energy’s strategy focuses on affordable energy solutions that support retention and growth of its existing customers and attract new customers to its service territories.
Key Highlights -
•Alliant Energy’s Clean Energy Blueprints, also known as its cleaner energy strategy, is expected to result in cost savings for its utility customers through the planned transition away from coal-fired EGUs and incorporation of additional renewable energy, renewable tax credits for investments in renewable energy projects, and utilization of renewable project tax equity financing under the current tax regulations.
•WPL maintaining flat base rates in 2021 by utilizing Federal Tax Reform benefits and expected lower fuel costs to offset higher revenue requirements from rate base additions.
•IPL’s renewable energy rider became effective February 26, 2020, which allows for annual adjustments to electric rates charged to IPL’s retail electric customers for actual renewable energy costs incurred to fund IPL’s 1,000 MW of wind EGUs placed in service in 2019 and 2020, and related tax benefits, including production tax credits.
•Providing $35 million of billing credits to IPL’s retail electric customers beginning in the third quarter of 2020 through June 2021, largely driven by Federal Tax Reform benefits for customers.
•Significant fuel cost reductions achieved in 2021 as a result of expansion of renewable generation and shortening the term of IPL’s DAEC PPA by 5 years.
•Issuance of new long-term debt in 2021 at historically low interest rates for IPL ($300 million of 3.1% senior debentures due 2051) and WPL ($300 million of 1.95% green bonds due 2031).
•Redemption of IPL’s 5.1% cumulative preferred stock in 2021.
•Levelized cost recovery mechanism for the remaining net book value of Edgewater Unit 5, which helps reduce customer costs in 2022 and 2023.
Making customer-focused investments - Alliant Energy’s strategic priorities include making significant customer-focused investments toward cleaner energy and sustainable customer solutions. Alliant Energy’s strategy drives a capital allocation process focused on: 1) transitioning its generation portfolio to meet the growing interest of customers for cleaner sources of energy, 2) upgrading its electric and gas distribution systems to strengthen safety and resiliency, as well as enable distributed energy solutions in its service territories, and 3) enhancing its customers’ experience with evolving technology and greater flexibility.
Key Highlights (refer to “Customer Investments” for details) -
•Planned development and acquisition of additional renewable energy, including approximately 1,100 MW of solar generation at WPL with in-service dates in 2022 and 2023, approximately 400 MW of solar generation at IPL with in-service dates in 2023 and 2024 and approximately 75 MW of battery storage in 2024 at IPL. In addition, IPL and WPL continue to evaluate additional opportunities to add more renewable generation, including repowering of existing wind farms and additional solar generation and distributed energy resources, including community solar and energy storage systems.
•IPL’s December 2021 completion of the fuel switch of the Burlington Generating Station (212 MW) from coal to natural gas.
Growing customer demand - Alliant Energy’s strategy supports expanding electric and gas usage in its service territories by promoting electrification initiatives and economic development in the communities it serves.
Key Highlights -
•WPL entered into a new wholesale power supply agreement, which was effective January 1, 2021 and brought approximately 55 MW of load to WPL’s electric system in 2021.
•Alliant Energy has various development-ready sites throughout Iowa and Wisconsin, including the 1,300-acre Big Cedar Industrial Center Mega-site in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, and the 730-acre Prairie View Industrial Center Super Park in Ames, Iowa, which are rail-served ready-to-build manufacturing and industrial sites in close proximity to the regional airport and interstate freeways and access IPL’s electric services. The Big Cedar Industrial Center Mega-site also accesses Travero’s rail-served warehouse in Iowa. In addition, the Beaver Dam Commerce Park is a 520-acre ready-to-build manufacturing and industrial site in Beaver Dam, Wisconsin, with access to commercial and freight airports, interstate freeways and WPL’s electric services.
COVID-19
The outbreak of COVID-19 has become a global pandemic and Alliant Energy’s service territories are not immune to the challenges presented by COVID-19. Despite these challenges, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL continue to focus on providing the critical, reliable service their customers depend on, while emphasizing the health and welfare of their employees, customers and communities. Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL have not experienced significant impacts on their overall business operations, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows; however, the degree to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact such items in the future is currently unknown and will depend on future developments of the pandemic as well as possible additional actions by government and regulatory authorities. Alliant Energy has mitigated the impact of any sales declines from COVID-19 by accelerating planned cost transformation activities. Actual and potential impacts from COVID-19 include, but are not limited to, the following:
Operational and Supply Chain Impacts - Alliant Energy has modified certain business practices to help ensure the health and safety of its employees, contractors, customers and vendors consistent with orders and best practices issued by government and regulatory authorities. For example, Alliant Energy implemented its business continuity and pandemic plans for critical items and services, including travel restrictions, physical distancing, working-from-home protocols, and rescheduling of planned EGU outages. Alliant Energy also temporarily suspended service disconnects, waived late payment fees for its customers, and modified reconnect service procedures to ensure continuity of service for customers unable to pay their bills and consistency with regulatory orders.
While Alliant Energy has not experienced any significant issues to-date, it continues to monitor potential disruptions or constraints in materials and supplies from key suppliers. Alliant Energy’s construction projects are currently progressing as planned with added safety protocols, and while it continues to monitor its supply chain, Alliant Energy has experienced supply constraints and commodity inflation in the solar market. Alliant Energy’s wind farms under construction during the pandemic were placed in service in 2020 as previously planned to meet the timing requirements to qualify for the maximum renewable tax credits. In addition, Alliant Energy does not currently expect any material changes to its construction and acquisition expenditures plans disclosed in “Liquidity and Capital Resources” resulting from COVID-19.
Alliant Energy has not experienced, and currently does not expect, an interruption in its ability to provide electric and natural gas services to its customers. Alliant Energy currently expects to incur incremental direct expenses related to certain of these operational and supply chain impacts but does not expect them to have a material impact on its results of operations.
Customer Impacts - COVID-19 has resulted in various travel restrictions and closures of commercial spaces and industrial facilities in Alliant Energy’s service territories, especially early on in the pandemic. While the total expected impact of COVID-19 on future sales is currently unknown, Alliant Energy experienced higher electric residential sales and lower electric commercial and industrial sales in 2020, and lower electric residential sales and higher electric commercial and industrial sales in 2021. In addition, Alliant Energy has not experienced a material increase in customer bankruptcies in 2020 or 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources Impacts - Alliant Energy maintains a single credit facility, which allows borrowing capacity to shift among Alliant Energy (at the parent company level), IPL and WPL, as needed. In addition, IPL maintains a sales of accounts receivable program as an alternative financing source; however, if customer arrears were to exceed certain levels, IPL’s access to the program may be restricted. Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL currently expect to maintain compliance with the financial covenants of the credit facility agreement, and Alliant Energy currently expects to maintain compliance with the financial covenants in AEF’s term loan credit agreement. In addition, Alliant Energy currently expects to have adequate liquidity to fulfill its contractual obligations, access to capital markets and continue with its planned quarterly dividend payments.
Credit Risk Impacts - Alliant Energy has not experienced any material negative impacts related to customer arrears and bad debts as a result of the pandemic; however, if government funds are no longer available for customers to help pay their utility bills, it may negatively impact Alliant Energy’s customers’ willingness and ability to pay, which could negatively impact Alliant Energy’s cash flows from operations. Currently, Alliant Energy does not anticipate any material credit risk related to its commodity transactions.
Legislative Impacts - Refer to “Legislative Matters” for discussion of legislation that was enacted in 2020 related to impacts from COVID-19.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Results of operations include financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP as well as utility electric margins and utility gas margins, which are not measures of financial performance under GAAP. Utility electric margins are defined as electric revenues less electric production fuel, purchased power and electric transmission service expenses. Utility gas margins are defined as gas revenues less cost of gas sold. Utility electric margins and utility gas margins are non-GAAP financial measures because they exclude other utility and non-utility revenues, other operation and maintenance expenses, depreciation and amortization expenses, and taxes other than income tax expense.
Management believes that utility electric and gas margins provide a meaningful basis for evaluating and managing utility operations since electric production fuel, purchased power and electric transmission service expenses and cost of gas sold are generally passed through to customers, and therefore, result in changes to electric and gas revenues that are comparable to changes in such expenses. The presentation of utility electric and gas margins herein is intended to provide supplemental information for investors regarding operating performance. These utility electric and gas margins may not be comparable to how other entities define utility electric and gas margin. Furthermore, these measures are not intended to replace operating income as determined in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of operating performance.
Additionally, the table below includes EPS for Utilities and Corporate Services, ATC Holdings, and Non-utility and Parent, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Alliant Energy believes these non-GAAP financial measures are useful to investors because they facilitate an understanding of segment performance and trends, and provide additional information about Alliant Energy’s operations on a basis consistent with the measures that management uses to manage its operations and evaluate its performance.
Financial Results Overview - Alliant Energy’s net income and EPS attributable to Alliant Energy common shareowners were as follows (dollars in millions, except per share amounts):
Alliant Energy’s Utilities and Corporate Services income increased $46 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher earnings resulting from IPL’s and WPL’s increasing rate base, as well as higher sales due in part to the derecho windstorm in Iowa and COVID-19 sales impacts in 2020. These items were partially offset by higher depreciation expense and lower AFUDC.
Operating income and a reconciliation of utility electric and gas margins to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, operating income, was as follows (in millions):
Operating Income Variances - Variances between periods in operating income for 2021 compared to 2020 were as follows (in millions):
Electric and Gas Revenues and Sales Summary - Electric and gas revenues (in millions), and MWh and Dth sales (in thousands), were as follows:
Sales Trends and Temperatures - Alliant Energy’s retail electric sales volumes increased 4% in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to changes in temperatures, COVID-19 impacts in Alliant Energy’s service territories and impacts from the derecho windstorm in IPL’s service territory in August 2020, partially offset by the impact on sales of the additional day due to leap year in 2020. Alliant Energy’s retail gas sales volumes decreased 1% in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to changes in temperatures and the impact on sales of the additional day due to leap year in 2020, partially offset by COVID-19 impacts in Alliant Energy’s service territories. In 2021, changes in COVID-19 impacts resulted in decreases for retail electric residential sales volumes and increases for retail electric commercial and industrial sales.
Estimated increases (decreases) to electric and gas margins from the impacts of temperatures were as follows (in millions):
Electric Sales for Resale - Electric sales for resale volume changes were largely due to changes in sales in the wholesale energy markets operated by MISO. These changes are impacted by several factors, including the availability and dispatch of Alliant Energy’s EGUs and electricity demand within these wholesale energy markets. Changes in sales for resale revenues were largely offset by changes in fuel-related costs, and therefore, did not have a significant impact on electric margins.
Gas Transportation/Other - Gas transportation/other sales volume changes were largely due to changes in the gas volumes supplied to Alliant Energy’s natural gas-fired EGUs caused by the availability and dispatch of such EGUs. Changes in these transportation/other revenues did not have a significant impact on gas margins.
Utility Electric Margin Variances - The following items contributed to increased (decreased) utility electric margins for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
(a)IPL’s final retail electric base rate increase was effective February 26, 2020. Effective with final rates, the recovery of, and return on, IPL’s new wind generation placed in service in 2019 and 2020 is provided through the renewable energy rider. The final rate increase includes a reduction for anticipated production tax credits for IPL’s new wind generation. This reduction is expected to be offset by a reduction in income tax expense resulting from production tax credits recognized from this new wind generation. In September 2020, IPL made a buyout payment of $110 million in exchange for shortening the terms of its DAEC PPA by 5 years. The higher revenue requirements from the buyout payment, including a return on such costs, is being recovered from IPL’s retail customers from 2021 through the end of 2025. Refer to Note 2 for further discussion.
(b)In December 2020, the PSCW issued an order authorizing WPL to maintain its current retail electric base rates through the end of 2021. WPL utilized anticipated fuel-related cost savings and excess deferred income tax benefits in 2021 to offset the revenue requirement impacts of increasing electric rate base, including the Kossuth wind farm, which was placed in service in October 2020. The lower fuel expense benefits are recognized in electric margin and the additional amount of excess deferred income tax benefits is recognized as a reduction in income tax expense.
Utility Gas Margin Variances - The following items contributed to increased (decreased) utility gas margins for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
Other Operation and Maintenance Expenses Variances - The following items contributed to (increased) decreased other operation and maintenance expenses for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
Other Income and Deductions Variances - The following items contributed to (increased) decreased other income and deductions for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
Income Taxes - Refer to Note 12 for details of effective income tax rates.
Preferred Dividend Requirements of IPL - Refer to Note 8 for details of the redemption of IPL’s 5.1% cumulative preferred stock in December 2021, including a $5 million non-cash charge recorded in 2021 related to this transaction.
Other Future Considerations - In addition to items discussed in this report, the following key items could impact Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s future financial condition or results of operations:
•Financing Plans - WPL and AEF currently expect to issue up to $600 million and $800 million of long-term debt, respectively, in 2022. WPL, AEF and Corporate Services have $250 million, $300 million and $75 million of long-term debt maturing in 2022, respectively. Alliant Energy currently expects to issue approximately $25 million of common stock in 2022 through its Shareowner Direct Plan.
•Common Stock Dividends - Alliant Energy announced a 6% increase in its targeted 2022 annual common stock dividend to $1.71 per share, which is equivalent to a quarterly rate of $0.4275 per share, beginning with the February 2022 dividend payment. The timing and amount of future dividends is subject to an approved dividend declaration from Alliant Energy’s Board of Directors, and is dependent upon earnings expectations, capital requirements, and general financial business conditions, among other factors.
•Higher Earnings on Increasing Rate Base - Alliant Energy and WPL currently expect an increase in earnings in 2022 compared to 2021 due to impacts from increasing revenue requirements related to investments in the utility business, including WPL’s solar investments. WPL’s increased revenue requirements are expected to be offset by higher income tax expense as a result of lower tax benefits.
•Depreciation and Amortization Expenses - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL currently expect an increase in depreciation and amortization expenses in 2022 compared to 2021 due to property additions, including WPL’s expansion of solar generation.
•Interest Expense - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL currently expect an increase in interest expense in 2022 compared to 2021 due to financings completed in 2021 and planned in 2022 as discussed above.
•Allowance for Funds Used During Construction - Alliant Energy and WPL currently expect AFUDC to increase in 2022 compared to 2021 primarily due to increased CWIP balances related to WPL’s solar generation.
•Preferred Dividend Requirements of IPL - Alliant Energy and IPL currently expect a decrease in preferred dividend requirements in 2022 compared to 2021 due to the redemption of IPL’s 5.1% cumulative preferred stock in December 2021.
CUSTOMER INVESTMENTS
Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s strategic priorities include making significant customer-focused investments toward cleaner energy and sustainable customer solutions. These priorities include:
Environmental Stewardship
Alliant Energy’s environmental stewardship is focused on meeting its customers’ energy needs in an economical, efficient, reliable and sustainable manner. Alliant Energy proactively considers future environmental compliance requirements and proposed regulations in its planning, decision-making, construction and ongoing operations activities. Alliant Energy is focused on executing a long-term strategy to deliver reliable and affordable energy with lower emissions independent of changing policies and political landscape. To achieve these long-term goals, Alliant Energy will transition away from coal-fired EGUs by
incorporating renewable energy, distributed energy resources, energy efficiency, demand response, highly-efficient natural gas-fired EGUs and other emerging technologies such as energy storage. Alliant Energy’s voluntary environmental-related goals and achievements include the following:
•Exceeded its 2020 targets by reducing air emissions for sulfur dioxide by over 90%, nitrogen oxide by over 80% and mercury by over 90% from 2005 levels.
•By 2030, reduce CO2 emissions by 50% from its owned fossil-fueled EGUs and reduce electric utility water supply by 75% from 2005 levels, and transition 100% of its owned light-duty fleet vehicles to be electric, as well as partner to plant more than 1 million trees by the end of 2030.
•By 2040, eliminate all coal-fired EGUs from its generating fleet.
•By 2050, achieve an aspirational goal of net-zero CO2 emissions from the electricity it generates.
Future updates to sustainable energy plans and attaining these goals will depend on future economic developments, evolving energy technologies and emerging trends in Alliant Energy’s service territories.
Renewable Generation
Alliant Energy has developed Clean Energy Blueprints, or its cleaner energy strategy, as a guide to meet customer demand for affordable, reliable and cleaner energy in Iowa and Wisconsin. This strategy includes the planned development and acquisition of additional renewable energy, including approximately 1,100 MW of solar generation at WPL with in-service dates in 2022 and 2023, approximately 400 MW of solar generation at IPL with in-service dates in 2023 and 2024 and approximately 75 MW of battery storage in 2024 at IPL. In addition, WPL’s plans include up to 300 MW of additional capacity. Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL continue to evaluate additional opportunities to add more renewable generation, repowering of existing wind farms, and distributed energy resources, including community solar and energy storage systems. Estimated capital expenditures for these planned projects for 2022 through 2025 are included in the “Renewable projects” line in the construction and acquisition table in “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” These estimates include current expectations for higher costs for various projects, as supply constraints and commodity inflation continue to be prevalent in the solar market. IPL and WPL currently assume that a portion of the construction costs for the new solar generation will be financed by a tax equity partner, which is discussed in “IPL and WPL Solar Project Tax Equity Financing” in “Liquidity and Capital Resources.” In addition, Alliant Energy completed the construction and acquisition of approximately 1,200 MW of wind generation in aggregate (approximately 1,000 MW at IPL and approximately 200 MW at WPL) from 2018 through 2020.
WPL’s Solar Generation and Distributed Energy Resources - In June 2021, WPL received an order from the PSCW for its first CA authorizing WPL to acquire, own, and operate 675 MW of new solar generation in the following Wisconsin counties: Grant (200 MW), Sheboygan (150 MW), Wood (150 MW), Jefferson (75 MW), Richland (50 MW) and Rock (50 MW). In July 2021, WPL notified the PSCW that it currently expects estimated construction costs and related rate base additions associated with its 675 MW of new solar generation will exceed amounts approved by the PSCW in June 2021 by approximately 7-10%. In September 2021 and January 2022, WPL filed revised estimated construction costs and related rate base additions for its second CA with the PSCW for approval to acquire, construct, own, and operate up to 414 MW of new solar generation in the following Wisconsin counties: Dodge (150 MW), Waushara (99 MW), Rock (65 MW), Grant (50 MW) and Green (50 MW). These projects in the first and second CAs are expected to be placed in service in 2022 and 2023. The 1,089 MW of new solar generation would replace energy and capacity being eliminated with the planned retirement of the coal-fired Edgewater Generating Station (414 MW) by early 2023, and Columbia Unit 1 by the end of 2023 and Columbia Unit 2 by the end of 2024 (595 MW in aggregate), which are the last coal-fired EGUs at WPL. The retirement of these coal-fired EGUs supports Alliant Energy’s strategy, which is focused on meeting its customers’ energy needs in an economical, efficient, reliable and sustainable manner. As a result of WPL’s neighboring utilities’ anticipated purchase of a partial ownership interest in West Riverside and any requirements resulting from MISO’s resource adequacy proposal that was issued in 2021, WPL anticipates additional capacity needs by 2024, which is expected to result in additional renewable energy resources and energy storage systems. WPL currently expects to request approval from the PSCW in 2022 for up to 300 MW of additional capacity.
IPL’s Solar Generation and Distributed Energy Resources - In November 2021, IPL filed for advance rate-making principles with the IUB for up to 400 MW of solar generation with in-service dates in 2023 and 2024 and approximately 75 MW of battery storage in 2024. The advance rate-making principles filing included requests for a fixed cost cap of $1,575/kilowatt, including AFUDC and transmission upgrade costs among other costs, and a return on common equity of 11.40%, and proposes that a portion of the construction be financed by tax equity partners. In addition, the filing included a request that any costs incurred in excess of the cost cap be incorporated into rates if determined to be reasonable and prudent. The 400 MW of new solar generation and 75 MW of battery storage would help replace a portion of the energy and capacity expected to be eliminated with the planned retirement of the coal-fired Lansing Generating Station (275 MW) by the end of 2022 and the expected reduction of energy and capacity resulting from the December 2021 fuel switch of the Burlington Generating Station (212 MW) from coal to natural gas. In addition, IPL’s plans include additional renewables and distributed energy resources, including community solar and energy storage systems, to add energy and capacity.
Complementary Generation Investments
WPL’s West Riverside Natural Gas-fired Generating Station - In 2020, WPL completed the construction of West Riverside, a 723 MW natural gas-fired combined-cycle EGU in Beloit, Wisconsin. WPL entered into agreements with neighboring utilities and electric cooperatives that provide each of them options to purchase a partial ownership interest in West Riverside. The
purchase price for such options is based on the ownership interest acquired and the net book value of West Riverside on the date of the purchase. The exercise of the WPSC and MGE options is subject to PSCW approval, which is currently expected by early 2023, and the timing and ownership amounts of the options are as follows:
(a)Upon WPSC’s exercise of its options, WPL may exercise reciprocal options, subject to approval by the PSCW, to purchase up to 200 MW of any natural-gas combined-cycle EGU that either WPSC or its affiliated utility, Wisconsin Electric Power Company, places in service prior to May 2030.
Plant Retirements and Fuel Switching - The current strategy includes the retirement, or fuel switch from coal to natural gas, of various EGUs in the next several years. In December 2021, completed the fuel switch of the Burlington Generating Station (212 MW) from coal to natural gas. IPL currently expects to retire the coal-fired Lansing Generating Station (275 MW) by the end of 2022. WPL currently expects to retire the coal-fired Edgewater Generating Station (414 MW) by early 2023, Columbia Unit 1 by the end of 2023 and Columbia Unit 2 by the end of 2024. Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL are working with MISO, state regulatory commissions and other regulatory agencies, as required, to determine the timing of these actions, which are subject to change depending on operational, regulatory, market and other factors. Refer to Note 3 for additional details on these EGUs.
Other Customer-focused Investments
Electric and Gas Distribution Systems - Customer-focused investments include replacing, modernizing and upgrading infrastructure in the electric and gas distribution systems. Electric system investments will focus on areas such as improving reliability and resiliency with more underground electric distribution and enabling distributed energy solutions with higher capacity lines. Gas system investments will focus on pipeline replacement to ensure safety and pipeline expansion to support reliability and economic development. Estimated capital expenditures for expected and current electric and gas distribution infrastructure projects for 2022 through 2025 are included in the “Electric and gas distribution systems” lines in the construction and acquisition expenditures table in “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Fiber Optic Telecommunication Network - Alliant Energy is currently installing fiber optic routes between its facilities to enhance its communications network to improve resiliency and reliability of, and enable and strengthen, the integrated grid network to help serve its customers.
Gas Pipeline Expansion - IPL and WPL currently expect to make investments to extend various gas distribution systems to provide natural gas to unserved or underserved areas in their service territories.
Gas Pipeline Safety - In 2019, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration published a final rule that updates safety requirements for gas transmission pipelines, and various updated procedures were implemented in 2020. Plans to address certain requirements for specific pipelines were developed and implemented, and remediation efforts must be completed by July 2035. In anticipation of these rule changes, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL have been proactively replacing certain of IPL’s transmission pipelines and making modifications to certain of WPL’s transmission pipelines. Alliant Energy, IPL, and WPL also continue to evaluate the impact of this final rule and resulting remediation plans on their financial condition and results of operations.
Technology - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL currently plan to make investments in technology to enhance productivity and efficiency through automation, customer self-service and telework. Estimated capital expenditures for expected and current technology projects for 2022 through 2025 are included in the “Other” line in the construction and acquisition expenditures table in “Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Non-utility business - Alliant Energy continues to explore growth of its Travero businesses and other limited scope opportunities outside of, but complimentary to, Alliant Energy’s core utility business. This non-utility strategy continues to evolve through exploration of modest strategic opportunities that are accretive to earnings and cash flows.
RATE MATTERS
Rate Reviews
Retail Base Rate Filings - Base rate changes reflect both returns on additions to infrastructure and recovery of changes in costs incurred or expected to be incurred. Given that a portion of the rate changes will offset changes in costs, revenues from rate changes should not be expected to result in an equal change in net income for either IPL or WPL.
WPL’s Retail Electric and Gas Rate Reviews (2022/2023 Forward-looking Test Period) - In December 2021, the PSCW issued an order authorizing annual base rate increases of $114 million and $15 million for WPL’s retail electric and gas customers, respectively, covering the 2022/2023 forward-looking Test Period, which was based on a stipulated agreement between WPL and certain intervenor groups. The key drivers for the annual base rate increases include higher retail fuel-related costs in 2022, lower excess deferred income tax benefits in 2022 and 2023 and revenue requirement impacts of increasing electric and gas rate base, including investments in solar generation. In addition, the PSCW authorized WPL to receive a recovery of and a return on the remaining net book value of Edgewater Unit 5 through 2023. Retail electric rate changes were effective on January 1, 2022 and extend through the end of 2023. Retail gas rate changes were effective on January 1, 2022 and extend through the end of 2022. WPL expects to file a limited reopener by August 2022 to adjust retail gas rates for the 2023 forward-looking Test Period, which will be limited to changes in weighted average cost of capital, updated depreciation rates and modifications to certain regulatory asset and regulatory liability amortizations. WPL’s settlement extends, with certain modifications, an earnings sharing mechanism through 2023. Under the earnings sharing mechanism, WPL will defer a portion of its earnings if its annual regulatory return on common equity exceeds 10.25% during the 2022/2023 Test Period. WPL must defer 50% of its excess earnings between 10.25% and 10.75%, and 100% of any excess earnings above 10.75%. Through 2023, any such deferral is required to be offset against the remaining net book value of Edgewater Unit 5, which is currently expected to be retired by early 2023.
IPL’s Retail Electric and Gas Rate Reviews (2020 Forward-looking Test Period) - In 2019, IPL filed retail electric and gas rate review requests with the IUB covering the 2020 forward-looking Test Period. In January 2020, IPL received an order from the IUB approving IPL’s proposed settlement for its retail electric rate review. Final retail electric rates were effective February 26, 2020. In December 2019, IPL received an order from the IUB approving IPL’s proposed settlement for its retail gas rate review. Final retail gas rates were effective January 10, 2020. In 2021, the IUB issued orders for IPL’s 2020 forward-looking Test Period electric and gas subsequent proceedings, which compared actual revenues and costs to those initially forecasted by IPL, and authorized IPL to main its current retail electric and gas rates. Refer to Note 2 for details.
Rate Review Details - Details related to IPL’s and WPL’s key jurisdictions were as follows:
(a)Authorized returns on common equity may not be indicative of actual returns earned or projections of future returns.
(b)Average rate base amounts reflect IPL’s allocated retail share of rate base and do not include CWIP, and were calculated using a forecasted 13-month average for the test period.
(c)Average rate base amounts recovered through IPL’s renewable energy rider mechanism include construction costs incurred to fund IPL’s 1,000 MW of wind generation facilities placed in service in 2019 and 2020 (11.00% return on common equity), production tax credit carryforwards for the 1,000 MW of wind generation facilities (5.00% return on common equity) and certain transmission facilities classified as intangible assets (9.50% return on common equity), and were calculated using a 13-month average.
(d)Average rate base amounts reflect WPL’s allocated retail share of rate base and do not include CWIP or a cash working capital allowance, and were calculated using a forecasted 13-month average for the test period. The PSCW provides a return on selected CWIP and a cash working capital allowance by adjusting the percentage return on rate base.
LEGISLATIVE MATTERS
In March 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) was enacted. The most significant provision of the CARES Act for Alliant Energy relates to an acceleration of refunds of existing alternative minimum tax credits to increase liquidity. In 2020, Alliant Energy received $11 million of credits that otherwise would have been received in 2021 and 2022. In addition, Alliant Energy deferred certain 2020 payroll taxes to 2021 and 2022. The CARES Act also provides additional funding to the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, which assists certain of Alliant Energy’s customers with managing their energy costs, as well as financial support for certain of Alliant Energy’s residential, small business and non-profit customers.
In December 2020, the Coronavirus Response and Relief Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2021 (CRRSA) was enacted. The most significant provision of the CRRSA Act for Alliant Energy relates to the extension of certain renewable tax credits, and as a result, Alliant Energy will evaluate additional opportunities for repowering of its existing wind farms and additional solar projects beyond 2023. The CRRSA Act also provides additional funding to the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, as well as financial support for certain of Alliant Energy’s residential, small business and non-profit customers.
In March 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Act) was enacted. The most significant provision of the Act for Alliant Energy is reduced minimum pension plan funding requirements, which Alliant Energy adopted in August 2021. The Act also provides additional funding to the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program, which assists certain of Alliant Energy’s customers with managing their energy costs, as well as provides financial support for certain of Alliant Energy’s residential, small business and non-profit customers.
In April 2021, legislation was enacted in Iowa prohibiting counties and cities from regulating the sale of natural gas and propane, which supports IPL’s ability to provide gas utility service to a diversified base of retail customers and industries.
In November 2021, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA Act) was enacted. The most significant provisions of the IIJA Act for Alliant Energy relate to a variety of infrastructure-related priorities, including transportation, environmental, energy and broadband infrastructure. In addition, the IIJA Act is intended to accelerate research, development, demonstration and deployment of carbon-free technologies, including hydrogen and carbon capture and storage.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL expect to maintain adequate liquidity to operate their businesses and implement their strategy as a result of operating cash flows generated by their utility business, and available capacity under a single revolving credit facility and IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program, supplemented by periodic issuances of long-term debt and Alliant Energy equity securities. As summarized below, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL believe they have the ability to generate and obtain adequate amounts of cash to meet their requirements and plans for cash in the next 12 months and beyond.
COVID-19 Considerations - Refer to “Overview” in MDA for discussion of COVID-19 and the impacts on Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s liquidity and capital resources.
Liquidity Position - At December 31, 2021, Alliant Energy had $39 million of cash and cash equivalents, $485 million ($171 million at the parent company, $250 million at IPL and $64 million at WPL) of available capacity under the single revolving credit facility and $109 million of available capacity at IPL under its sales of accounts receivable program.
Capital Structure - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL plan to maintain debt-to-total capitalization ratios that are consistent with investment-grade credit ratings. IPL and WPL expect to maintain capital structures consistent with their authorized levels. Capital structures as of December 31, 2021 were as follows (Common Equity (CE); Long-term Debt (including current maturities) (LD); Short-term Debt (SD)):
Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL intend to manage their capital structures and liquidity positions in such a way that facilitates their ability to raise funds reliably and on reasonable terms and conditions, while maintaining capital structures consistent with those approved by regulators. In addition to capital structures, other important factors used to determine the characteristics of future financings include financial coverage ratios, capital spending plans and solar construction that is expected to be partially financed by tax equity partners, regulatory orders and rate-making considerations, levels of debt imputed by rating agencies, market conditions, the impact of tax initiatives and legislation, and any potential proceeds from asset sales. The PSCW factors certain imputed debt adjustments, including certain lease obligations, in establishing a regulatory capital structure as part of WPL’s retail rate reviews. The IUB does not make any explicit adjustments for imputed debt in establishing capital ratios used in determining customer rates, although such adjustments are considered by IPL in recommending an appropriate capital structure. Debt imputations by rating agencies include, among others, pension and OPEB obligations and the sales of accounts receivable program.
Credit and Capital Markets - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL maintain a single revolving credit facility to provide backstop liquidity to their commercial paper programs, and ensure a committed source of liquidity in the event the commercial paper market becomes disrupted. In addition, IPL maintains a sales of accounts receivable program as an alternative financing source; however, if customer arrears were to exceed certain levels, IPL’s access to the program may be restricted.
Primary Sources and Uses of Cash - Alliant Energy’s most significant source of cash is from electric and gas sales to IPL’s and WPL’s customers. Cash from these sales reimburses IPL and WPL for prudently-incurred expenses to provide service to their utility customers and generally provides IPL and WPL a return of and a return on the assets used to provide such services. Capital needed to retire debt and fund capital expenditures related to large strategic projects is expected to be met primarily through external financings.
Cash Flows - Selected information from the cash flows statements was as follows (in millions):
Operating Activities - The following items contributed to increased (decreased) operating activity cash flows for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
Income Tax Payments and Refunds - Income tax (payments) refunds, including refunds of alternative minimum tax credits, were as follows (in millions):
Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL currently do not expect to make any significant federal income tax payments through 2023 based on their current federal net operating loss and credit carryforward positions. While no significant federal income tax payments through 2023 are expected to occur, some tax payments and refunds may occur for state taxes and between consolidated group members (including IPL and WPL) under the tax sharing agreement between Alliant Energy and its subsidiaries. Refer to Note 12 for discussion of the carryforward positions.
Pension Plan Contributions - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL currently expect to make $2 million, $0 and $0 of pension plan contributions in 2022, respectively, based on the funded status and assumed return on assets for each plan as of the December 31, 2021 measurement date. Refer to Note 13(a) for discussion of pension plan contributions in 2021 and the current funded levels of pension plans.
Investing Activities - The following items contributed to increased (decreased) investing activity cash flows for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
(a)Largely due to lower expenditures for IPL’s and WPL’s expansion of wind generation, IPL’s and WPL’s electric and gas distribution systems and WPL’s West Riverside Energy Center, partially offset by higher expenditures for WPL’s solar generation.
Construction and Acquisition Expenditures - Construction and acquisition expenditures and financing plans are reviewed, approved and updated as part of the strategic planning process. Changes may result from a number of reasons, including regulatory requirements, changing legislation, not obtaining favorable and acceptable regulatory approval on certain projects, improvements in technology and improvements to ensure reliability of the electric and gas distribution systems. Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL have not yet entered into contractual commitments relating to the majority of their anticipated future construction and acquisition expenditures. As a result, they have some discretion with regard to the level and timing of these expenditures. The table below summarizes anticipated construction and acquisition expenditures (in millions), which are focused on the transition to cleaner energy and strengthening the resiliency of Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s electric grid. Cost estimates represent Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s portion of construction expenditures and exclude AFUDC and capitalized interest, if applicable. Such estimates do not reflect the assumption that a portion of the construction is expected to be financed by tax equity partners, which is described in more detail below in “IPL and WPL Solar Project Tax Equity Financing.” Refer to “Customer Investments” for further discussion of certain key projects impacting construction and acquisition plans related to the utility business.
Alliant Energy’s and IPL’s construction and acquisition expenditures for renewable projects in 2022 through 2024 include approximately $300 million in aggregate, a portion of which is expected to be reflected as “Other” cash flows used for investing activities in Alliant Energy’s and IPL’s cash flows.
West Riverside Options - WPL entered into agreements with neighboring utilities that provide them options to purchase a partial ownership interest in West Riverside. Upon exercise of such options, WPL will receive proceeds from the sale. Refer to “Customer Investments” for additional information, including timing for the actual and potential exercise of options.
Financing Activities - The following items contributed to increased (decreased) financing activity cash flows for 2021 compared to 2020 (in millions):
IPL and WPL Solar Project Tax Equity Financing - IPL and WPL each propose to own and operate their planned solar projects, discussed in “Customer Investments,” which are currently expected to qualify for 26% to 30% investment tax credits, through a tax equity partnership, with approximately 25% to 45% of the construction costs financed with capital from the tax equity partner. This would allow IPL’s and WPL’s customers to share the costs of the solar projects with an investment partner for 10 years or less, while ensuring their customers receive energy, capacity, and renewable energy credit benefits from the projects. IPL and WPL would expect to purchase the tax equity partner’s interest in the solar projects within 10 years of operation, and then convert to a traditional ownership structure for the remainder of the useful life of the projects. Assuming a portion of the construction costs are financed by the tax equity partner, IPL would receive approximately $25 million in 2023, $200 million in 2024 and $60 million in 2025 from the tax equity partner, and WPL would receive approximately $165 million in 2022, $420 million in 2023, $230 million in 2024 and $190 million in 2025 from the tax equity partner. Changes to proposed solar project tax equity financing may result from a number of reasons, including changing legislation. IPL and WPL would expect to include their portion of capital expenditures, less the amounts financed by the tax equity partner, in their respective rate base.
FERC and Public Utility Holding Company Act Financing Authorizations - Under the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 2005, FERC has authority over the issuance of utility securities, except to the extent that a public utility’s primary state regulatory commission has retained jurisdiction over such matters. FERC currently has authority over the issuance of securities by IPL. FERC does not have authority over the issuance of securities by Alliant Energy, WPL, AEF or Corporate Services. In 2021, IPL received authorization from FERC to issue securities in 2022 and 2023 as follows (in millions):
State Regulatory Financing Authorizations - In 2017, WPL received authorization from the PSCW to have up to $400 million of short-term borrowings and/or letters of credit outstanding at any time through the earlier of the expiration date of WPL’s credit facility agreement (including extensions) or December 2024. As of December 31, 2021, WPL also had authority to issue up to $700 million of long-term debt securities in aggregate through December 2023 pursuant to a September 2020 PSCW order.
Shelf Registrations - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL have current shelf registration statements on file with the SEC for availability to issue unspecified amounts of securities through December 2023. Alliant Energy’s shelf registration statement may be used to issue common stock, debt and other securities. IPL’s and WPL’s shelf registration statements may be used to issue preferred stock and debt securities.
Common Stock Dividends - Payment of common stock dividends is subject to dividend declaration by Alliant Energy’s Board of Directors and is dependent upon, among other factors, regulatory limitations, earnings, cash flows, capital requirements and general financial condition of subsidiaries. Alliant Energy’s general long-term goal is to maintain a dividend payout ratio that is competitive with the industry average. Based on that, Alliant Energy’s goal is to maintain a dividend payout ratio of approximately 60% to 70% of consolidated earnings from continuing operations. Refer to “Results of Operations” for discussion of expected common stock dividends in 2022.
Common Stock Issuances - Refer to Note 7 for discussion of common stock issuances by Alliant Energy in 2020 and 2021, and “Results of Operations” for discussion of expected issuances of common stock in 2022.
Short-term Debt - In December 2021, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL entered into a single revolving credit facility agreement, which expires in December 2026 and is discussed in Note 9(a). There are currently 13 lenders that participate in the credit facility, with respective commitments ranging from $20 million to $130 million. Subject to certain conditions, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL may exercise two extension options, each extending the maturity date by one year. The credit facility has a provision to expand the facility size up to an additional $300 million, for a potential total commitment of $1.3 billion, subject to lender approval for Alliant Energy and subject to lender and regulatory approvals for IPL and WPL.
The credit agreement contains customary events of default, including a cross-default provision that would be triggered if Alliant Energy or certain of its significant subsidiaries (including IPL and WPL) defaults on debt (other than non-recourse debt) totaling $100 million or more. IPL and WPL are subject to a similar cross-default provision with respect to their own respective consolidated debt. A default by Alliant Energy or its non-utility subsidiaries would not trigger a cross-default at IPL or WPL, nor would a default by either of IPL or WPL constitute a cross-default event for the other. If an event of default under the credit agreement occurs and is continuing, then the lenders may declare any outstanding obligations of the defaulting borrower under the credit agreement immediately due and payable.
The single credit facility agreement contains a financial covenant, which requires Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL to maintain certain debt-to-capital ratios in order to borrow under the credit facility. AEF’s term loan credit agreement contains a financial covenant, which requires Alliant Energy to maintain a certain debt-to-capital ratio in order to borrow under the term loan credit agreement. The required debt-to-capital ratios compared to the actual debt-to-capital ratios at December 31, 2021 were as follows:
The debt component of the capital ratios includes, when applicable, long- and short-term debt (excluding non-recourse debt and hybrid securities to the extent the total carrying value of such hybrid securities does not exceed 15% of consolidated capital of the applicable borrower), finance lease obligations, certain letters of credit, guarantees of the foregoing and new synthetic leases. Unfunded vested benefits under qualified pension plans and sales of accounts receivable are not included in the debt-to-capital ratios. The equity component of the capital ratios excludes accumulated other comprehensive income (loss).
Long-term Debt - Refer to Note 9(b) for discussion of issuances and retirements of long-term debt in 2021 and “Results of Operations” for discussion of expected issuances of long-term debt in 2022. In 2020, IPL issued $400 million of 2.3% senior debentures due 2030, and a portion of the proceeds from the issuance was used by IPL to retire its $200 million 3.65% senior debentures that matured in 2020. In 2020, WPL issued $350 million of 3.65% debentures due 2050, and a portion of the proceeds from the issuance was used by WPL to reduce borrowings under the single revolving credit facility. In 2020, AEF entered into a $300 million variable-rate term loan credit agreement and used the borrowings under this agreement to retire its $300 million variable-rate term loan credit agreement that expired in 2020. In 2020, AEF issued $200 million of 1.4% senior notes due 2026, and a portion of the proceeds from the issuance was used to reduce Alliant Energy’s outstanding commercial paper.
Impact of Credit Ratings on Liquidity and Collateral Obligations -
Ratings Triggers - The long-term debt of Alliant Energy and its subsidiaries is not subject to any repayment requirements as a result of explicit credit rating downgrades or so-called “ratings triggers.” However, Alliant Energy and its subsidiaries are parties to various agreements that contain provisions dependent on credit ratings. In the event of a significant downgrade, Alliant Energy or its subsidiaries may need to provide credit support, such as letters of credit or cash collateral equal to the amount of any exposure, or may need to unwind contracts or pay underlying obligations. In the event of a significant downgrade, management believes Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL have sufficient liquidity to cover counterparty credit support or collateral requirements under these various agreements. In addition, a downgrade in the credit ratings of Alliant Energy, IPL or WPL could also result in them paying higher interest rates in future financings, reduce flexibility with future financing plans, reduce their pool of potential lenders, increase their borrowing costs under existing credit facilities or limit their access to the commercial paper market. Credit ratings and outlooks as of the date of this report are as follows:
Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services and Moody’s Investors Service issued credit ratings of BBB+ and Baa2, respectively, for the senior notes issued by AEF in 2018 and 2020 (with Alliant Energy as guarantor). Credit ratings are not recommendations to buy or sell securities and are subject to change, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Each of Alliant Energy, IPL or WPL assumes no obligation to update their respective credit ratings. Refer to Note 15 for additional information on ratings triggers for commodity contracts accounted for as derivatives.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements -
Special Purpose Entities - IPL maintains a Receivables Agreement whereby it may sell its customer accounts receivables, unbilled revenues and certain other accounts receivables to a third party through wholly-owned and consolidated special purpose entities. The purchase commitment from the third party to which IPL sells its receivables expires in March 2023. In 2021 and 2020, IPL evaluated the third party that purchases IPL’s receivable assets under the Receivables Agreement and believes that the third party is a VIE; however, IPL concluded consolidation of the third party was not required.
In addition, IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program agreement contains a cross-default provision that is triggered if IPL or Alliant Energy incurs an event of default on debt totaling $100 million or more. If an event of default under IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program agreement occurs, then the counterparty could terminate such agreement. Refer to Note 5(b) for additional information regarding IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program.
Guarantees and Indemnifications - At December 31, 2021, various guarantees and indemnifications are outstanding related to Alliant Energy’s cash equity ownership interest in a non-utility wind farm and prior divestiture activities. Refer to Note 17(d) for additional information.
Certain Financial Commitments -
Contractual Obligations - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL have various long-term contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021, which include long-term debt maturities in Note 9(b), operating and finance leases in Note 10, capital purchase obligations in Note 17(a), and other purchase obligations in Note 17(b). At December 31, 2021, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL had no uncertain tax positions recorded as liabilities. Refer to Note 13(a) for anticipated pension and OPEB funding amounts. Refer to “Construction and Acquisition Expenditures” above for additional information on construction and acquisition programs. In addition, at December 31, 2021, there were various other liabilities included on the balance sheets that, due to the nature of the liabilities, the timing of payments cannot be estimated.
OTHER MATTERS
Market Risk Sensitive Instruments and Positions - Primary market risk exposures are associated with commodity prices, investment prices and interest rates. Risk management policies are used to monitor and assist in mitigating these market risks and derivative instruments are used to manage some of the exposures related to commodity prices. Refer to Notes 1(h) and 15 for further discussion of derivative instruments, and Note 1(g) for details of utility cost recovery mechanisms that significantly reduce commodity risk.
Commodity Price - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL are exposed to the impact of market fluctuations in the price and transportation costs of commodities they procure and market. Established policies and procedures mitigate risks associated with these market fluctuations, including the use of various commodity derivatives and contracts of various durations for the forward sale and purchase of these commodities. Exposure to commodity price risks in the utility businesses is also significantly mitigated by current rate-making structures in place for recovery of fuel-related costs as well as the cost of natural gas purchased for resale. IPL’s electric and gas tariffs and WPL’s wholesale electric and gas tariffs provide for subsequent monthly adjustments to their tariff rates for material changes in prudently incurred commodity costs. IPL’s and WPL’s rate mechanisms, combined with commodity derivatives, significantly reduce commodity risk associated with their electric and gas margins. WPL’s retail electric margins have modest exposure to the impact of changes in commodity prices due largely to the current retail recovery mechanism in place in Wisconsin for fuel-related costs.
Investment Price - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL are exposed to investment price risk as a result of their investments in securities, largely related to securities held by their pension and OPEB plans. Refer to Note 13(a) for details of the securities held by their pension and OPEB plans. Refer to “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” for the impact on retirement plan costs of changes in the rate of returns earned by plan assets.
Interest Rate - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL are exposed to risk resulting from changes in interest rates associated with variable-rate borrowings. In addition, Alliant Energy and IPL are exposed to risk resulting from changes in interest rates on cash amounts outstanding under IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program. Assuming the impact of a hypothetical 100 basis point increase in interest rates on variable-rate borrowings and cash amounts outstanding under IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program at December 31, 2021, Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s annual pre-tax expense would increase by approximately $8 million, $0 and $2 million, respectively. Refer to Notes 5(b) and 9 for additional information on cash amounts outstanding under IPL’s sales of accounts receivable program, and short- and long-term variable-rate borrowings, respectively. Refer to “Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates” for the impacts of changes in discount rates on retirement plan obligations and costs.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates - Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP, which requires management to apply accounting policies, judgments and assumptions, and make estimates that affect results of operations and the amounts of assets and liabilities reported in the financial statements. The following accounting policies and estimates are critical to the business and the understanding of financial results as they require critical assumptions and judgments by management. The results of these assumptions and judgments form the basis for making estimates regarding the results of operations and the amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual financial results may differ materially from estimates. Management has discussed these critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors. Refer to Note 1 for additional discussion of accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of the financial statements.
Regulatory Assets and Regulatory Liabilities - IPL and WPL are regulated by various federal and state regulatory agencies. As a result, they are subject to GAAP for regulated operations, which recognizes that the actions of a regulator can provide reasonable assurance of the existence of an asset or liability. Regulatory assets or regulatory liabilities arise as a result of a difference between GAAP and actions imposed by the regulatory agencies in the rate-making process. Regulatory assets generally represent incurred costs that have been deferred as such costs are probable of recovery in future customer rates. Regulatory liabilities generally represent obligations to make refunds to customers or amounts collected in rates for which the related costs have not yet been incurred. Regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities are recognized in accordance with the rulings of applicable federal and state regulators, and future regulatory rulings may impact the carrying value and accounting treatment of regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities.
Assumptions and judgments are made each reporting period regarding whether regulatory assets are probable of future recovery and regulatory liabilities are probable future obligations by considering factors such as regulatory environment
changes, rate orders issued by the applicable regulatory agencies, historical decisions by such regulatory agencies regarding similar regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities, and subsequent events of such regulatory agencies. The decisions made by regulatory authorities have an impact on the recovery of costs, the rate of return on invested capital and the timing and amount of assets to be recovered by rates. A change in these decisions may result in a material impact on results of operations and the amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements. Note 2 provides details of the nature and amounts of regulatory assets and regulatory liabilities assessed at December 31, 2021.
Income Taxes - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL are subject to income taxes in various jurisdictions. Assumptions and judgments are made each reporting period to estimate income tax assets, liabilities, benefits and expenses. Judgments and assumptions are supported by historical data and reasonable projections. Significant changes in these judgments and assumptions could have a material impact on financial condition and results of operations. Alliant Energy’s and IPL’s critical assumptions and judgments for 2021 include estimates of qualifying deductions for repairs expenditures and allocation of mixed service costs due to the impact of Iowa rate-making principles on such property-related differences. Critical assumptions and judgments also include projections of future taxable income used to determine the ability to utilize net operating losses and credit carryforwards prior to their expiration. Refer to Note 12 for further discussion of tax matters.
Effect of Rate-making on Property-related Differences - Alliant Energy’s and IPL’s effective income tax rates are normally impacted by certain property-related differences at IPL for which deferred tax is not recorded in the income statement pursuant to Iowa rate-making principles. Changes in methods or assumptions regarding the amount of IPL’s qualifying repairs expenditures, allocation of mixed service costs, and costs related to retirement or removal of depreciable property could result in a material impact on Alliant Energy’s and IPL’s financial condition and results of operations.
Carryforward Utilization - Significant federal tax credit carryforwards and federal and state net operating loss carryforwards exist for Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL as of December 31, 2021. Based on projections of current and future taxable income, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL plan to utilize substantially all of these carryforwards prior to their expiration. Taxable income must be reduced by federal net operating losses carryforwards prior to utilizing federal tax credit carryforwards. Alliant Energy does not expect to utilize all of its federal net operating loss carryforwards until 2023, and therefore, currently does not expect to utilize 2002 vintage federal credit carryforwards prior to their expiration in 2022, resulting in valuation allowances that remain as of December 31, 2021. Federal credit carryforwards generated from 2003 through 2008, which amount to $12 million for Alliant Energy, are expected to be utilized within five years of expiration. All other federal credit carryforwards and federal net operating loss carryforwards are expected to be utilized more than five years before expiration. Changes in tax regulations or assumptions regarding current and future taxable income could require changes to valuation allowances in the future resulting in a material impact on financial condition and results of operations.
Long-Lived Assets - Periodic assessments regarding the recoverability of certain long-lived assets are completed when factors indicate the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable or such assets are planned to be sold. These assessments require significant assumptions and judgments by management. The long-lived assets assessed for impairment generally include certain assets within regulated operations that may not be fully recovered from IPL’s and WPL’s customers as a result of regulatory decisions in the future, and assets within non-utility operations that are proposed to be sold or are currently generating operating losses.
Regulated Operations - Alliant Energy’s, IPL’s and WPL’s long-lived assets within their regulated operations that were assessed for impairment and plant abandonment in 2021 included IPL’s and WPL’s generating units subject to early retirement.
Generating Units Subject to Early Retirement - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL evaluate future plans for their electric generation fleet and have announced the early retirement of certain older and less-efficient EGUs. When it becomes probable that an EGU will be retired before the end of its useful life, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL must assess whether the EGU meets the criteria to be considered probable of abandonment. EGUs that are considered probable of abandonment generally have material remaining net book values and are expected to cease operations in the near term significantly before the end of their original estimated useful lives. If an EGU meets such criteria to be considered probable of abandonment, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL must assess the probability of full recovery of the remaining carrying value of such EGU. If it is probable that regulators will not allow full recovery of and a full return on the remaining net book value of the abandoned EGU, an impairment charge is recognized equal to the difference between the remaining carrying value and the present value of the future revenues expected from the abandoned EGU.
Alliant Energy and IPL concluded that Lansing, and Alliant Energy and WPL concluded that Edgewater Unit 5 and Columbia Units 1 and 2, met the criteria to be considered probable of abandonment as of December 31, 2021. IPL and WPL are currently allowed a full recovery of and a full return on its respective EGUs from both its retail and wholesale customers, and as a result, Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL concluded that no impairment was required as of December 31, 2021. Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL evaluated their other EGUs that are subject to early retirement and determined that no other EGUs met the criteria to be considered probable of abandonment as of December 31, 2021. Note 3 provides additional details of these assets anticipated to be retired early.
Unbilled Revenues - Unbilled revenues are primarily associated with utility operations. Energy sales to individual customers are based on the reading of customers’ meters, which occurs on a systematic basis throughout the month. Amounts of energy delivered to customers since the date of the last meter reading are estimated at the end of each reporting period and the corresponding estimated unbilled revenue is recorded. The unbilled revenue is based on estimates of daily system demand volumes, customer usage by class, temperature impacts, line losses and the most recent customer rates. Such process involves the use of various judgments and assumptions and significant changes in these judgments and assumptions could have a material impact on results of operations. As of December 31, 2021, unbilled revenues related to Alliant Energy’s utility operations were $195 million ($104 million at IPL and $91 million at WPL).
Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefits - Alliant Energy, IPL and WPL sponsor various defined benefit pension and OPEB plans that provide benefits to a significant portion of their employees and retirees. Assumptions and judgments are made periodically to estimate the obligations and costs related to their retirement plans. There are many judgments and assumptions involved in determining an entity’s pension and other postretirement liabilities and costs each period including employee demographics (including life expectancies and compensation levels), discount rates, assumed rates of return and funding. Changes made to plan provisions may also impact current and future benefits costs. Judgments and assumptions are supported by historical data and reasonable projections and are reviewed at least annually. The following table shows the impacts of changing certain key actuarial assumptions discussed above (in millions):
Contingencies - Assumptions and judgments are made each reporting period regarding the future outcome of contingent events. Loss contingency amounts are recorded for any contingent events for which the likelihood of loss is probable and able to be reasonably estimated based upon current available information. The amounts recorded may differ from actuals when the uncertainty is resolved. The estimates made in accounting for contingencies, and the gains and losses that are recorded upon the ultimate resolution of these uncertainties, could have a significant effect on results of operations and the amount of assets and liabilities in the financial statements.
Effective January 1, 2020 upon the adoption of the new accounting standard for credit losses, certain contingencies, such as Alliant Energy Resources, LLC’s guarantees of the partnership obligations of an affiliate of Whiting Petroleum, require estimation each reporting period of the expected credit losses on those contingencies. These estimates require significant judgment and result in recognition of a credit loss liability sooner than the previous accounting standards, which required recognition when the contingency became probable and could be reasonably estimated based on then currently available information. With respect to Alliant Energy’s guarantees of the partnership obligations of an affiliate of Whiting Petroleum, the most significant judgments in determining the credit loss liability were the estimate of the exposure under the guarantees and the methodology used for calculating the credit loss liability. As of December 31, 2021, Alliant Energy currently estimates the exposure to be a portion of the known partnership abandonment obligations. The methodology used to determine the credit loss liability considers both quantitative and qualitative information, which utilizes potential outcomes in a range of possible estimated amounts. Factors considered include market and external data points, the creditworthiness of the other partners, Whiting Petroleum’s emergence from bankruptcy in the third quarter of 2020, and forecasted cash flow expenditures associated with the abandonment obligations based on information made available to Alliant Energy. Note 1(l) provides discussion of the adoption of the new accounting standard for credit losses.
Note 17 provides further discussion of contingencies assessed at December 31, 2021 that may have a material impact on financial condition and results of operations, including various pending legal proceedings, guarantees and indemnifications.