Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Actual results and the timing of certain events may differ significantly from those projected in such forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a New York-based real estate finance company taxed as a REIT that specializes in originating, servicing and managing a portfolio of first mortgage loans. We offer short-term, secured, non-banking loans (sometimes referred to as “hard money” loans), which we may renew or extend on, before or after their initial term expires, to real estate investors to fund their acquisition, renovation, rehabilitation or development of residential or commercial properties located in the New York metropolitan area, including New Jersey and Connecticut, and in Florida. As a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our REIT taxable income to our shareholders on an annual basis.
In order to maintain our qualification for taxation as a REIT, we are required to distribute at least 90% of our REIT taxable income to our shareholders each year. To the extent we distribute less than 100% of our taxable income to our shareholders (but more than 90%) we will maintain our qualification for taxation as a REIT, but the undistributed portion will be subject to regular corporate income taxes. As a REIT, we may also be subject to federal excise taxes and minimum state taxes. We also intend to operate our business in a manner that will permit us to maintain our exemption from registration under the Investment Company Act. In addition, in order for us to qualify for taxation as a REIT, not more than 50% in value of our outstanding common shares may be owned, directly or indirectly, by five or fewer individuals (as defined in the Code to include certain entities) at any time during the last half of each taxable year, and at least 100 persons must beneficially own our stock during at least 335 days of a taxable year of 12 months, or during a proportionate portion of a shorter taxable year. To help ensure that we meet the tests, our restated certificate of incorporation restricts the acquisition and ownership of our capital stock. The ownership limitation is fixed at 4.0% of our outstanding shares of capital stock, by value or number of shares, whichever is more restrictive.
The properties securing the loans are generally classified as residential or commercial real estate and, typically, are not income producing. Each loan is secured by a first mortgage lien on real estate. In addition, each loan is personally guaranteed by the principal(s) of the borrower, which guarantee may be collaterally secured by a pledge of the guarantor’s interest in the borrower. The face amount of the loans we originated in the past seven years ranged from $30,000 to a maximum of $2.85 million. Our lending policy limits the maximum amount of any loan to the lower of (i) 9.9% of the aggregate amount of our loan portfolio (not including the loan under consideration) and (ii) $3 million. Our loans typically have a maximum initial term of 12 months bearing interest at a fixed rate of 8% to 14% per year. In addition, we usually receive origination fees or “points” ranging from 0% to 2% of the original principal amount of the loan as well as other fees relating to underwriting and funding the loan. Interest is always payable monthly, in arrears. In the case of acquisition financing, the principal amount of the loan usually does not exceed 75% of the value of the property (as determined by an independent appraiser) and in the case of construction financing, it is typically up to 80% of construction costs.
Since commencing this business in 2007, we have made over 1,040 loans and never foreclosed on a property and none of our loans have ever gone into default although sometimes we have renewed or extended our loans to enable the borrower to avoid premature sale or refinancing of the property. When we renew or extend a loan we receive additional “points” and other fees.
Our primary business objective is to grow our loan portfolio while protecting and preserving capital in a manner that provides for attractive risk-adjusted returns to our shareholders over the long term through dividends. We intend to achieve this objective by continuing to selectively originate loans and carefully manage our portfolio of first mortgage real estate loans in a manner designed to generate attractive risk-adjusted returns across a variety of market conditions and economic cycles. We believe that the demand for relatively small loans secured by residential and commercial real estate held for investment around the New York metropolitan market, including New Jersey and Connecticut, and in the Florida market remains relatively strong, but weakened due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our ability to close deals fast has created an opportunity for non-bank “hard money” real estate lenders like us to selectively originate high-quality first mortgage loans and this condition should persist for a number of years. However, we have observed more intense competition in our industry from both small and large lenders, which has resulted in more liquidity in the real estate markets in the geographic areas in which we operate. We also believe that certain of our business competitors will not survive the COVID-19 pandemic if it continues for an extended period.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have continued to originate loans as well as continued to service our existing loans, though we had observed lower demand for new loans. In addition, we may experience difficulties collecting the monthly interest on time, property values may decline and certain of our originated loans may need to be extended, though to date we have not experienced many borrowers requiring such accommodations. Furthermore, due to market conditions and intense competition in the market, we have begun to charge our customers lower interest rates and origination fees charged on loans, which has resulted in our reduced revenues in 2021. We had also seen a lower demand of new loans resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, we have not been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and will continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business.
We expect the significance of the COVID-19 pandemic, including the extent of its effect on our financial and operational results, to be dictated by, among other things, its duration, the success of efforts to contain it and the impact of actions taken in response. For instance, government action to provide substantial financial support to businesses has provided helpful mitigation for us and certain of our borrowers; its ultimate impact, however, is not yet clear. While we are not able at this time to estimate the future impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our financial and operational results, it could be material.
We have built our business on a foundation of intimate knowledge of the New York metropolitan area real estate market combined with a disciplined credit and due diligence culture that is designed to protect and preserve capital. We believe that our flexibility in terms of meeting the needs of borrowers without compromising our standards on credit risk, our expertise, our intimate knowledge of the New York metropolitan area real estate market and our focus on newly originated first mortgage loans, has defined our success until now and should enable us to continue to achieve our objectives.
A principal source of new transactions has been repeat business from prior customers and their referral of new business. We also receive leads for new business from banks, brokers and a limited amount of advertising. Finally, our Chief Executive Officer also spends a significant portion of his time on new business development. We rely on our own employees, independent legal counsel, and other independent professionals to verify titles and ownership, to file liens and to consummate the transactions. Outside appraisers are used to assist us in evaluating the worth of collateral, when deemed necessary by management. We also use construction inspectors.
At December 31, 2021, we were committed to $7,214,286 in construction loans that can be drawn by our borrowers when certain conditions are met.
To date, we have not experienced any defaults and none of the loans previously made have been non-collectable, although no assurances can be given that existing or future loans may not go into default or prove to be non-collectible in the future.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management will base the use of estimates on (a) a preset number of assumptions that consider past experience, (b) future projections, and (c) general financial market conditions. Actual amounts could differ from those estimates.
Interest income from commercial loans is recognized, as earned, over the loan period.
Origination fee revenue on commercial loans is amortized over the term of the respective note.
Effective January 1, 2020, we adopted Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326). The ASU introduces a new credit loss methodology, Current Expected Credit Losses (“CECL”), which requires earlier recognition of credit losses, while also providing additional transparency about credit risk. Management estimates our CECL reserve primarily using the Weighted Average Remaining Maturity (“WARM”) method, which requires reference to historic loss data taking into consideration expected economic conditions over the relevant timeframe. Application of the WARM method to estimate a CECL reserve requires judgment, including (i) the appropriate historical loan loss reference data, (ii) the expected timing and amount of future loan fundings and repayments, and (iii) the current credit quality of our loan portfolio and expectations of performance and market conditions over the relevant time period. In addition, management reviews each loan on a quarterly basis and evaluates the borrower’s ability to pay the monthly interest, the borrower’s likelihood of executing the original exit strategy, as well as the loan-to-value ratio. Failure to properly measure an allowance for credit losses could result in the overstatement of earnings and the carrying value of the loans receivable. Actual losses, if any, could differ significantly from estimated amounts.
We continually monitor events and changes in circumstances that could indicate that the carrying amounts of long lived assets, including intangible assets, may not be recoverable. When such events or changes in circumstances occur, we assess the recoverability of long-lived assets by determining whether the carrying value of such assets will be recovered through undiscounted expected future cash flows. If the total of the undiscounted cash flows is less than the carrying amount of these assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets.
There are also areas in which in management’s judgment in selecting any available alternative would not produce a materially different result. See our audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto which begin on page of this Report, which contain accounting policies and other disclosures required by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Results of operations
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Total revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $6,808,000, compared to approximately $7,006,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $198,000, or 2.8%. The decrease in revenue was primarily attributable to lower interest rates and origination fees charged on loans due to market conditions and intense competition from other lenders. In 2021, approximately $5,609,000 of our revenue represents interest income on secured, real estate loans that we offer to small businesses compared to approximately $5,989,000 in 2020, and approximately $1,199,000 represents origination fees on such loans, compared to approximately $1,018,000 in 2020. The loans are principally secured by collateral consisting of real estate and accompanied by personal guarantees from the principals of the borrowers.
Interest and amortization of deferred financing costs
Interest and amortization of deferred financing costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $1,046,000, compared to approximately $1,356,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $310,000 or 22.9%. The decrease was primarily attributable to the reduced outstanding balance of the Webster Credit Line resulting from a public offering of our common shares in July 2021 and decreased interest expense due to lower LIBOR rates. (See Notes 5 and 10 to the financial statements included elsewhere in this Report).
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were approximately $1,349,000, compared to approximately $1,434,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $85,000 or 5.9%. The decrease is primarily attributable to an annual bonus paid to the Company’s CEO in 2020 which was not repeated in 2021 and a voluntary waiver from the Company’s CEO forgoing his base salary for the months of October, November and December 2021, partially offset by increases in advertising, travel and meal expenses.
Net income
Net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $4,423,000, compared to approximately $4,229,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $194,000, or 4.6%. This increase is primarily attributable to decreases in interest and payroll expenses, offset by the decrease in revenue.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $143,000, compared to cash of approximately $132,000 at December 31, 2020 (not including restricted cash, which mainly represents collections received, pending check clearance, from the Company’s commercial loans and is primarily dedicated to the reduction of the Webster Credit Line).
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was approximately $4,599,000, compared to approximately $4,222,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities primarily resulted from increases in net income, deferred origination fees, and interest receivable on loans.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $7,617,000, compared to approximately $4,607,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of the issuance of our short term commercial loans of approximately $49,268,000, offset by collection of our commercial loans of approximately $41,650,000. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of the issuance of our short term commercial loans of approximately $43,719,000, offset by collection of our commercial loans of approximately $39,136,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $2,701,000, compared to approximately $726,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects the net proceeds from the public offering, as described below, of approximately $12,354,000, offset by the repayment of the Webster Credit Line of an aggregate of approximately $4,663,000 and the dividend payments of approximately $4,990,000. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 reflects the net proceeds from the Webster Credit Line of an aggregate of approximately $5,076,000, offset by dividend payments of approximately $4,143,000, the purchase of treasury shares of approximately $179,000 and deferred financing costs of approximately $27,000.
Our Amended and Restated Credit and Security Agreement with Webster, Flushing Bank and Mizrahi provides for the Webster Credit Line. Currently, the Webster Credit Line provides us with a credit line of $32.5 million in the aggregate until February 28, 2023, secured by assignments of mortgages and other collateral. The Webster Credit Line contains various covenants and restrictions including, among other covenants and restrictions, limiting the amount that the Company can borrow relative to the value of the underlying collateral, maintaining various financial ratios and limitations on the terms of loans the Company makes to its customers, limiting the Company’s ability to pay dividends under certain circumstances, and limiting the Company’s ability to repurchase its common shares, sell assets, engage in mergers or consolidations, grant liens, and enter into transactions with affiliates. In addition, the Webster Credit Line contains a cross default provision which will deem any default under any indebtedness owed by us or our subsidiary, MBC Funding II, as a default under the credit line.
The interest rates relating to the Webster Credit Line equal (i) LIBOR plus a premium, which rate aggregated approximately 4.10%, including a 0.5% agency fee, as of December 31, 2021, or (ii) a Base Rate (as defined in the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) plus 2.25% plus a 0.5% agency fee, as chosen by the Company for each drawdown. Under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company may repurchase, redeem or otherwise retire its equity securities in an amount not to exceed ten percent of our annual net income from the prior fiscal year. Further, the Company may issue up to $20 million in bonds through its subsidiary, of which not more than $10 million of such bonds may be secured by mortgage notes receivable, and provided that the terms and conditions of such bonds are approved by Webster, subject to its reasonable discretion. In addition, Mr. Ran has provided a personal guaranty to the Webster Credit Line, which shall not exceed the sum of $500,000 plus any costs relating to the enforcement of the personal guaranty.
On July 2, 2021, we entered into a consent and amendment letter agreement, with respect to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with the Lenders and Assaf Ran, as guarantor, to amend the definition of “Change of Control” to provide that Mr. Ran would be required to own at least 20%, instead of 27%, of the equity interests of the Company, on a fully diluted basis.
On March 7, 2022, we entered into a waiver agreement, or the Waiver, with respect to the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, with the Lenders and Assaf Ran, as guarantor, providing the Company with a waiver of its covenant with respect to maintaining its fixed charge coverage ratio for the period ended December 31, 2021. In addition, the Waiver also provided an amount of $700,000 of distributions and/or dividends paid during the quarter ended December 31, 2021 shall be excluded from the calculation of fixed charge coverage ratio for the fiscal quarters ending March 31, 2022, June 30, 2022 and September 30, 2022.
Except as set forth in the preceding paragraph, we were in compliance with all covenants of the Webster Credit Line, as amended, as of December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021, the outstanding amount under the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement was $15,645,970. The interest rate on the amount outstanding fluctuates daily. The rate, including a 0.5% agency fee, for December 31, 2021 was approximately 4.10%.
MBC Funding II has $6,000,000 of outstanding principal amount of Notes. The Notes mature on April 22, 2026, unless redeemed earlier, and accrue interest at a rate of 6% per annum commencing on May 16, 2016 and will be payable monthly, in arrears, in cash, on the 15th day of each calendar month, commencing June 2016.
Under the terms of the Indenture, the aggregate outstanding principal balance of the mortgage loans held by MBC Funding II, together with its cash on hand, must always equal at least 120% of the aggregate outstanding principal amount of the Notes at all times. To the extent the aggregate principal amount of the mortgage loans owned by MBC Funding II plus its cash on hand is less than 120% of the aggregate outstanding principal balance of the Notes, MBC Funding II is required to repay, on a monthly basis, the principal amount of the Notes equal to the amount necessary such that, after giving effect to such repayment, the aggregate principal amount of all mortgage loans owned by it plus, its cash on hand at such time is equal to or greater than 120% of the outstanding principal amount of the Notes. For this purpose, each mortgage loan is deemed to have a value equal to its outstanding principal balance, unless the borrower is in default of its obligations.
The Notes are secured by a first priority lien on all of MBC Funding II’s assets, including, primarily, mortgage notes, mortgages and other transaction documents entered into in connection with first mortgage loans originated and funded by us, which MBC Funding II acquired from MBC pursuant to an asset purchase agreement. MBC Funding II may redeem the Notes, in whole or in part, at any time after April 22, 2019 upon at least 30 days prior written notice to the noteholders. The redemption price will be equal to the outstanding principal amount of the Notes redeemed plus the accrued but unpaid interest thereon up to, but not including, the date of redemption, without penalty or premium. No Notes were redeemed by MBC Funding II as of December 31, 2021.
Each Noteholder had the right to cause MBC Funding II to redeem his, her or its Notes on April 22, 2021 by notifying MBC Funding II in writing, no earlier than November 22, 2020 and no later than January 22, 2021. No Noteholder exercised such right during the required time frame and as such the Notes are no longer redeemable by the Noteholders.
MBC Funding II is obligated to offer to redeem the Notes if there occurs a “change of control” with respect to us or MBC Funding II or if we or MBC Funding II sell any assets unless, in the case of an asset sale, the proceeds are reinvested in the business of the seller. The redemption price in connection with a “change of control” will be 101% of the principal amount of the Notes redeemed plus accrued but unpaid interest thereon up to, but not including, the date of redemption. The redemption price in connection with an asset sale will be the outstanding principal amount of the Notes redeemed plus accrued but unpaid interest thereon up to, but not including, the date of redemption.
We guarantee MBC Funding II’s obligations under the Notes, which are secured by our pledge of 100% of the outstanding common shares of MBC Funding II that we own.
On February 26, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized a share buy back program for the repurchase of up to 100,000 shares of the Company’s common stock. The Company purchased an aggregate of 38,899 common shares under this repurchase program, at an aggregate cost of approximately $179,000, before the program expired on February 25, 2021.
On July 9, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 1,875,000 common shares at a public offering price of $7.20 per share. The gross proceeds from the offering were $13.5 million and the net proceeds were approximately $12.4 million, after deducting our underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses.
We anticipate that our current cash balances, the proceeds of the offering, and the Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, as described above, together with our cash flows from operations will be sufficient to fund our operations for the next 12 months. In addition, from time to time, we receive short term unsecured loans from our executive officers and others in order to provide us with the flexibility necessary to maintain a steady deployment of capital. However, we expect our working capital requirements to increase over the next 12 months as we continue to strive for growth.
As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we experienced a slowdown in the deployment of capital and lower demand for new loans. However, to date, we have not been materially impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and have not experienced any material disruptions in our business operations. We will continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business. If the COVID-19 pandemic worsens in the New York area in which we operate, the pandemic could materially affect our financial and operational results.