Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements, including the Notes to those statements, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and the Section entitled "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in more detail in the section entitled "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements," this discussion contains forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause those differences include those discussed in "Risk Factors" and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Local Bounti was founded in August 2018 and is headquartered in Hamilton, Montana. Local Bounti is a producer of sustainably grown living lettuce, herbs, and loose leaf lettuce. Local Bounti’s vision is to deliver the freshest, locally grown produce over the fewest food miles possible. Local Bounti is a CEA company that utilizes patent pending Stack & Flow TechnologyTM, which is a hybrid of vertical farming and hydroponic greenhouse farming, to grow healthy food sustainably and affordably. Through its CEA process, it is our goal to produce our products in an environmentally sustainable manner that will increase harvest efficiency, limit water usage and reduce the carbon footprint of the production and distribution process. The environmental greenhouse conditions help to ensure nutritional value and taste, and the Local Bounti products are non-GMO and are certified pesticide residue free. Our products use 90% less water and 90% less land than conventional agriculture to produce. Our first CEA facility in Hamilton, Montana commenced construction in 2019 and reached full commercial operation by the second half of 2020. We completed an increase to the capacity of the Montana Facility by approximately 140% to 12 hydroponic ponds in the third quarter of 2021, which is now operational, and was fully commissioned in the fourth quarter of 2021.
We derive the majority of our revenue from the sale of produce. We grow and package fresh greens and herbs that are sold into existing markets and channels such as food retailers and food service distributors from our Montana Facility. Sales are recognized at a point in time when control of the goods is transferred to the customer. Additional revenue is generated from the sale of intellectual property that we have developed. Intellectual property sold in 2021 consisted of intellectual property for salad kits, including the licensed know-how for recipes, packaging support, and branding kit development. For information on our operating segments, see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In the future, we expect to build and operate new facilities across the United States, which will increase our production capacity and expand our reach to new markets, new geographies, and new customers. We also expect to expand our product offering to new varieties of fresh greens, herbs, and other produce. We periodically offer sales incentives to our customers, including temporary price reductions. We anticipate that these promotional activities could impact sales and that changes in such activities could impact period-over-period results. Sales may also vary from period to period depending on the purchase orders we receive, the volume and mix of products sold and the channels through which our products are sold.
Recent Developments
Business Combination with Leo Holdings III Corp ("Leo")
Local Bounti was originally incorporated in the State of Delaware on January 8, 2021 as a special purpose acquisition company under the name Leo, formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. Leo completed its IPO in January 2021. On November 19, 2021, Leo merged with and into Local Bounti, a Delaware corporation ("Legacy Local Bounti"), with Legacy Local Bounti surviving the merger of Leo (the "Business Combination").
In connection with the consummation of the Business Combination (the "Closing"), the registrant changed its name from Leo to Local Bounti Corporation. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Leo was treated as the "acquired" company for financial reporting purposes. Accordingly, the Business Combination was treated as the equivalent of Legacy Local Bounti issuing stock for the net assets of Leo, accompanied by a recapitalization, whereby no goodwill or other intangible assets was recorded. Operations prior to the Business Combination are those of Legacy Local Bounti.
Pete's Acquisition
On March 14, 2022, we entered into a definitive agreement to acquire California-based complementary indoor farming company Pete's, for total consideration of $122.5 million, subject to customary adjustments. The Pete's Acquisition consideration will be comprised of $92.5 million in cash, expected to be provided pursuant to Local Bounti’s existing lending facility with Cargill Financial, and the remaining $30.0 million of consideration payable in shares of Local Bounti common stock.
Pete’s is a California-based indoor farming company with three greenhouse growing facilities, including two operating facilities in California and one under construction in Georgia which is scheduled to begin operations in the second quarter of 2022. Pete’s has distribution to approximately 10,000 retail locations across 35 U.S. states and Canadian provinces, primarily through direct relationships with blue-chip retail customers, including Albertsons, Kroger, Target, Walmart, as well as Whole Foods and AmazonFresh. Pete’s primary products include living butter
lettuce - where it is a leading provider with an approximate 80 percent share of the CEA market within the Western U.S. - as well as packaged salad and cress. Pete’s has been in operation for over 50 years while focusing the last 25 years in leafy greens, has long-standing relationships with the majority of its customers, and has a demonstrated track record of generating positive EBITDA.
Local Bounti plans to install its patent pending Stack & Flow Technology™ at Pete’s facilities, combining the best aspects of vertical farming and greenhouse growing technologies to deliver higher yields of diverse leafy greens at superior unit economics. The Pete's Acquisition also allows Local Bounti to gain access to Pete’s existing retail customer base of more than 10,000 retail locations nationwide.
Local Bounti expects to close the Pete’s Acquisition in the second quarter of 2022.
Environmental, Social and Governance
Conventional agriculture has been feeding the world for hundreds of years, yet given the negative impacts of climate change, it is now struggling to keep pace. Add to that the COVID-19 pandemic, and an already stressed food supply system is experiencing even more pressure. Sustainability has emerged as a global imperative, and when it comes to agriculture, it is clear we must find ways to do better. We believe growing healthy vegetables is good business, and our growing technology delivers clean produce with safer growing methods, which we believe benefits all stakeholders and differentiates us from traditional agriculture. We expect that consumer demand for clean, nutritious, locally grown, and high-quality products will increase over time.
Our compact, efficient, and local farms provide fresh produce with minimum transportation distances. Combined with our advanced technologies, the location of our facilities in less developed communities and areas with available supporting resources such as adequate water and renewable energy, we believe Local Bounti has the potential to be among the most sustainable produce suppliers in the nation.
More information on our key ESG programs, goals and commitments, and key metrics can be found in our 2021 sustainability report, which is available on our website at localbounti.com/sustainability.
While we believe all of our ESG goals align with our long-term growth strategy and financial and operational priorities, they are aspirational and may change, and there is no guarantee or promise that they will be met.
Factors Affecting Our Financial Condition and Results of Operations
We expect to expend substantial resources as we:
•complete the Pete's Acquisition and integrate Pete's operations into our business;
•build-out the Pasco facility and invest in additional CEA facilities in the future;
•identify and invest in future growth opportunities, including new product lines;
•invest in sales and marketing efforts to increase brand awareness, engage customers and drive sales of our products;
•invest in product innovation and development; and
•incur additional general administration expenses, including increased finance, legal and accounting expenses associated with being a public company, and growing operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is based upon our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. Our significant accounting policies and estimates are more fully described in Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Certain of our accounting estimates are particularly important to our financial position and results of operations and require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our management uses its judgment to determine the appropriate assumptions to be used in the determination of certain estimates. We evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that it believes are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our critical accounting policies that involve significant estimates and judgments of management include the following:
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize in our Consolidated Statements of Operations the grant-date fair value of restricted stock awards (RSAs) and restricted stock units (RSUs) issued to both employees and non-employees. Our RSAs and RSUs are subject to service-based vesting conditions. Stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a tranche-by-tranche basis using the accelerated attribution method over the requisite service period of the award, which generally corresponds to the underlying vesting term. Forfeitures of awards are accounted for in the period in which they occur.
Prior to the Business Combination, there was no public market for our common stock. Therefore, the fair value of our common stock and related stock-based awards was determined by our Board based in part on valuations prepared by a third-party valuation firm. Since the closing of the Business Combination, the Board determines the fair value of each share of common stock underlying stock-based awards based on the closing price of our common stock as reported by NYSE on the date of the grant.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our historical operating results for the periods indicated:
The following sections discuss and analyze the changes in the significant line items in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the comparative periods in the table above.
Sales
Sale of Produce
We derive the majority of our revenue from the sale of produce. Sales of produce increased by $469 thousand to $551 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to commercial production of fresh greens and herbs at the Montana Facility not starting until the second half of 2020. The expansion of commercial production led to our produce being sold in more than 500 retail locations at the end of 2021.
Sale of Intellectual Property
Intellectual property sold in 2021 consisted of intellectual property for salad kits, including the licensed know-how for recipes, packaging support, and branding kit development. Sale of intellectual property increased by $87 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to sale of intellectual property of salad kits. No intellectual property was sold for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of Goods Sold
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of costs related to growing produce at the Montana Facility, including labor, seeds and other input supplies, packaging materials, depreciation, and utilities. In the future, we expect to build and operate new facilities across the United States. These facilities will incur similar costs directly related to growing and selling of our products. We expect that, over time, cost of goods sold will decrease as a percentage of sales, as a result of scaling our business.
Cost of goods sold increased by $341 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased sales during 2021 as commercial production did not begin at the Montana Facility until the second half of 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of compensation to employees engaged in research and development activities, including salaries and related benefits, in addition to related overhead (including depreciation, utilities and other related allocated expenses), as well as supplies and services related to the development of our growing process. Our research and development efforts are focused on development of our processes utilizing our CEA facility, increase production yields, and develop new SKUs. We expect, over time, that research and development will decrease as a percentage of sales, as a result of the establishment of our growing process.
Research and development costs increased by $2,346 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased investment in research and development as we continue to expand our product offerings and refine our growing process. We incurred costs for research and development including production, harvesting, post-harvest packaging, as well as production surplus costs related to the development of our production process.
Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general, and administrative expenses consist of expenses for stock-based compensation, salaries, professional services, human resources and recruiting, and marketing and advertising, among others. We expect selling, general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we increase the number of employees to support the growth of our business, and as a result of operating as a public company, including additional costs and expenses associated with compliance with SEC rules, legal, audit, insurance, investor relations, and other administrative and professional services.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses increased by $34,664 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to one-time costs of $8,353 thousand related to the Business Combination, $14,600 thousand increase in stock-based compensation expense driven by the vesting of stock awards in connection with the closing of the Business Combination and additional stock awards granted during the year ended December 31, 2021, a $6,268 thousand increase in salaries and wages and employee development related expenses due to increased headcount from the growth of the Company, and a $2,924 thousand increase in professional services and legal fees including accounting and other consulting fees related to the closing of the Business Combination and preparing to operate as a public company.
Management Fee Income
Management fee income relates to the management fee we receive for managing the Montana Facility and performing maintenance under a related party property maintenance and management services agreement with Grow Bitterroot, LLC ("Grow Bitterroot"), which commenced in June 2020. Management fee income increased by $44 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For information on this agreement, see Note 8, Financing Obligation, of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Convertible Notes Fair Value Adjustment
During 2021, we entered into a series of identical convertible long-term notes with various parties with a face value of $26,050 thousand and bears interest at 8% with a maturity date of February 8, 2023 (the "Convertible Notes"). All Convertible Notes were converted into a number of shares of common stock, at a conversion price equal to value of each share of common stock in the qualified special purpose acquisition company ("SPAC") transaction multiplied by 85% upon the closing of Business Combination on November 19, 2021.
We measure Convertible Notes at fair value based on significant inputs not observable in the market, resulting in these Convertible Notes being classified as Level 3 measurements within the fair value hierarchy. Changes in the fair value of Convertible Notes relate to updated assumptions and estimates are recognized as a Convertible Notes fair value adjustment within the results of operations. Convertible Notes fair value adjustment increased by $5,067 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The fair value adjustment relates to our Convertible Notes which were entered into with various parties during the first half of 2021.
Debt Extinguishment Expense
Debt extinguishment expense relates to the write off of unamortized debt issuance costs, penalties and related fees associated with a loan from Cargill Financial which was repaid in September 2021. Debt extinguishment expense increased by $1,485 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense consists primarily of interest recognized per the terms of our various financing obligations related to the Montana Facility, interest expense related to the loans with Cargill Financial, and the Convertible Notes. Interest expense, net increased by $4,611 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to $2,661 thousand of interest, unused commitment fee, and loan origination fee amortization expense related to notes and warrants with Cargill Financial, $1,364 thousand of interest expense related to our Convertible Notes, and $601 thousand increase in interest expense from the financing element of our sale leaseback with Grow Bitterroot, which commenced in June 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash totaled $101,077 thousand and $45 thousand as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Currently, our primary sources of liquidity are cash flows generated from the successful completion of the Business Combination, cash flows generated from issuances of the Convertible Notes, loans with Cargill Financial, and revenue from the sale of our produce. We incurred losses and generated negative cash flows from operations since our inception in 2018. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $68,242 thousand.
The CEA business is capital-intensive. Expenditures are expected to include working capital, costs associated with planting and harvesting, such as the purchase of seeds and growing supplies, the expansion of our Montana Facility, the construction of our Pasco facility, and the cost of attracting and retaining a skilled local labor force. In addition, other costs may arise due to our scaling and growing process, and the continued development of additional properties for CEA facilities. Other unanticipated costs may arise due to the unique nature of the high-tech CEA facilities, and the purchase and development of additional properties for future facilities. We also expect to expend significant resources as we invest in CEA technology, develop value-added products and pursue other strategic investments in the CEA industry.
We believe that our current cash position and borrowing capacity under our credit facilities are sufficient to fund our cash requirements for the next 12 months. In the event that our plans change or our cash requirements are greater than we anticipate, we may need to access the capital markets to finance future cash requirements. However, there can be no assurance that such financing will be available to us should we need it or, if available, that the terms will be satisfactory to us and not dilutive to existing shareholders. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed could have significant negative consequences for our business, financial condition and results of consolidated operations. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including those set forth in Item 1A, Risk Factors.
Cargill Loans
In March 2021, the Company entered into a loan with Cargill Financial to finance the general working capital for the Company. This loan had a principal balance of up to $10,000 thousand and bore interest at 8% per annum with a maturity date of March 22, 2022. In September 2021, this loan was repaid in full. In connection with the original loan, the lender also received 705,883 warrants. The warrants are still outstanding.
On September 3, 2021, we entered into the Subordinated Facility with Cargill Financial, for up to $50,000 thousand. The interest rate on the Subordinated Facility is 10.5% per annum, with accrued interest paid quarterly in arrears on the last business day of each calendar quarter, commencing on the last business day of the calendar quarter ending December 31, 2021, and on the maturity date. A total of $16,293 thousand was outstanding on the Subordinated Facility as of December 31, 2021. The Subordinated Facility is included in "Long-term debt" on the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
On September 3, 2021, we also entered into the Senior Facility with Cargill Financial whereby Cargill Financial agreed to make advances to the Company of up to $150,000 thousand (together with the Subordinated Facility, the "Original Facilities"). The interest rate on the Senior Facility will be equal to the LIBOR plus an Applicable Margin (which varies between 5.5% to 6.5% depending on the Senior Facility net leverage ratio). The Senior Facility became available upon the SPAC closing. As of December 31, 2021, no amounts had been drawn on the Senior Facility.
On March 14, 2022, we also entered into a First Amendment to Credit Agreements and Subordination Agreement to amend the Credit Agreements and the Original Facilities. The Amendment provides that, subject to and upon the closing of the Pete’s Acquisition, (a) the Pete’s Acquisition will be funded pursuant to the Amended Facilities, (b) the aggregate commitment amount of the Original Facilities will be reduced to $170.0 million which is anticipated to be the amount necessary to fund the Pete’s Acquisition, the Property Acquisition, the updating of the facilities to be acquired in the Pete’s Acquisition with the Company’s Stack & Flow Technology™ and certain expansion at one facility, (c) the minimum liquidity covenant will be reduced from $30 million to $20 million (inclusive of existing restricted cash on the Consolidated Balance Sheets) and (d) the interest rate of each of the Senior Facility and the Subordinated Facility will increase by 2%, among other matters. As part of the Amendment, the
Company agreed to (i) pay a $2.0 million amendment fee and (ii) issue 1,932,931 shares of Common Stock to Cargill Financial upon the closing of the Pete’s Acquisition.
Convertible Notes
During 2021, we entered into the Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes were accounted for at fair value with changes in fair value being recognized under Convertible Notes fair value adjustment within the Consolidated Statement of Operations. The Convertible Notes had a conversion feature that triggered upon the earliest of a qualified equity financing or a qualified SPAC transaction, as defined by the agreement. Upon the completion of the Business Combination, all the Convertible Notes with a fair value of $32,481 thousand, including accrued interest of $1,364 thousand, were converted to shares of common stock of Local Bounti. The Company recognized a gain of $240 thousand for the conversion of all the Convertible Notes with the related interest and fair value adjustment.
Cash Flow Analysis
A summary of our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities is presented in the following table:
Net Cash Used In Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $20,108 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to a net loss of $56,093 thousand, partially offset by non-cash activities of $17,895 thousand in stock-based compensation expense, $5,067 thousand in fair value adjustments to the Convertible Notes, $1,364 thousand of interest expense on the Convertible Notes, $939 thousand in debt extinguishment expense, $782 thousand in amortization of debt issuance costs, $684 thousand in depreciation expense, and $9,491 thousand net increase of cash from changes in assets and liabilities primarily driven by increase in accrued construction expenses related to the Pasco CEA facility.
Net cash used in operating activities was $3,838 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to a net loss of $8,409 thousand, partially offset by $3,295 thousand in stock-based compensation expense, and a $989 thousand net source of cash from changes in assets and liabilities, and $287 thousand in depreciation expense.
Net Cash Used In Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $29,666 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was made up of purchases of equipment and other items related to the expansion of the Montana Facility and construction equipment for the Pasco CEA facility.
Net cash used in investing activities was $3,422 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was entirely driven by the purchases of property and equipment for the Montana Facility.
Net Cash Provided By Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $150,806 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, representing $137,532 thousand in proceeds from the completion of the Business Combination, $26,293 thousand cash received from the issuance of the Cargill Loans, $26,000 thousand cash received from the issuance of Convertible Notes, and $3,854 thousand net proceeds from financing obligations. The increase is offset by $27,320 thousand cash distribution to Legacy Local Bounti shareholders in connection with the closing of the Business Combination, $10,654 thousand cash repayment of debt, and the payment of $5,399 thousand in debt issuance costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5,168 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to proceeds of $7,675 thousand from financing obligations related to the sale leaseback transaction with Grow Bitterroot for the Montana Facility and proceeds of $453 thousand from the issuance of debt, partially offset by the repayment of $2,880 thousand in debt as part of the sale leaseback transaction with Grow Bitterroot and an $80 thousand redemption of common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an "emerging growth company," as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the JOBS Act, and for so long as we continue to be an emerging growth company, we may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved. In addition, pursuant to Section 107 of the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we have elected to take advantage of the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies until the earlier of the date we (1) are no longer an emerging growth company or (2) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For more information about recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2, section Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements of the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated into this Item 7 by reference thereto.