Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes thereto contained herein. This discussion contains forward-looking statements and involves numerous risks and uncertainties, including, but not limited to, those described under the heading “Risk Factors”. Actual results may differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statements. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to “we”, “us”, “our” and the “Company” are intended to mean the business and operations of CarLotz, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries.
Overview
See Part I, Item 1 for a detailed description and discussion of the company’s business.
Business Update
During the year ended December 31, 2021 we met our goal to expand by 14 new hubs, increasing our overall footprint and access to key geographic markets. We have introduced the consignment-to-retail used vehicle marketplace to retail sellers, added new corporate vehicle sourcing partners in these new geographic markets, and have sold vehicles via consignment-to-retail. Additionally, we expanded technology available to customers to be able to provide instant purchase offers to potential retail sellers once they input information about their vehicle.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the continuing semi-conductor chip shortage, COVID-related supply chain issues constraining supply of new vehicles and a corresponding rapid increase in wholesale vehicle pricing has reduced the incremental value we may deliver to our corporate vehicle sourcing partners via Retail Remarketing™, at times making consignment less attractive to partners than quickly selling vehicles through the wholesale channel. Supply of used vehicles from our corporate vehicle sourcing partners has been severely constrained by the lack of new vehicle supply due to the semi-conductor chip shortage. Due to the continued uncertainty influencing the used vehicle market, we are unable to predict when there will be a return to a more normalized used vehicle market.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a higher mix of dealer-owned inventory acquired from wholesale auctions than expected due to a number of factors, such as market conditions, cars available to us, the reduction of vehicles consigned with us from the corporate vehicle sourcing partner that paused consignments with us during a portion of the year, and the purchases from auction of vehicles for our new hubs. Some of that inventory was not profitable to us and was held for sale longer than desired. As a result, our retail gross profit was negatively impacted in the second half of 2021 by lower front-end profits on owned vehicles as well as processing center inefficiencies, and we expect gross profit to be under pressure until the used vehicle market normalizes and we are able to improve the productivity and efficiency at our hubs. At December 31, 2021, non-competitively sourced vehicles (i.e. vehicles sourced other than from auctions) represented approximately 55% of our vehicle inventory, as compared to 96% at December 31, 2020. As part of our goal to increase non-competitively sourced vehicles, our strategy is to increase our consignments from our sourcing partners and consumer acquired vehicles and reduce our reliance on sourcing via wholesale auction.
Additionally, as previously disclosed, in mid-May 2021, our largest corporate vehicle sourcing partner at the time, which accounted for more than 60% of the cars we sold during the fourth quarter of 2020 and the first quarter of 2021, informed us that it would be pausing its consignment of vehicles to us due to the strength of the wholesale market for vehicles. The corporate vehicle sourcing partner resumed its consignment of vehicles with us in the third quarter. For the three months and the year ended December 31, 2021, the corporate vehicle sourcing partner accounted for 14% and 31%, respectively, of our sold vehicles. Although the corporate vehicle sourcing partner resumed its consignment of vehicles with us in the third quarter and continued to consign vehicles with us in the fourth quarter, we cannot currently predict the ultimate volume and profitability of any sourced vehicles from this partner.
Our hubs opened in 2021 have not been ramping to expected results and consequently have not provided the expected contribution to unit sales, revenue and gross profit, due to several factors including inventory constraints.
Factors Affecting our Performance
Impact of COVID-19
Our ability to acquire and sell used vehicles can be negatively impacted by a number of factors that are outside of our control. Due to the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and shortages of semi-conductor chips and other automotive supplies starting in 2020, certain automobile manufacturers have slowed production of new vehicles. The reduction in supply of new vehicles has limited the supply of used vehicles available through our corporate sourcing partners and is likely to continue to do so until the market normalizes. To address the reduction from this supply source, we have sourced a higher percentage of our vehicles through wholesale auction channels than we have historically (approximately 31% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 8% during the year ended December 31, 2020). Because we are purchasing these vehicles in a competitive environment and paying auction fees, there is greater risk to the Company that the margin between the cost of the vehicle and the selling price will be compressed, and, in turn, reduced gross profit and retail GPU, which we expect to continue until the used vehicle market normalizes and we are able to improve the productivity and efficiency at our hubs. This risk could be compounded by our inability to turn inventory quickly and the pace at which used vehicles depreciate.
We cannot provide assurance of the ultimate significance and duration of COVID-19 and the variants’ disruption to our operations for several reasons, including, but not limited to, uncertainty regarding the duration of the pandemic and related disruptions, the impact of governmental orders and regulations that have been, and may in the future be, imposed, and the impact of COVID-19 and the variants on our customers and corporate vehicle sourcing partners.
Like many companies, COVID-19 has increased our focus on the health and safety of our guests, employees and their families. To maintain a safe work environment, we have implemented procedures aligned with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to limit the spread of the virus and provide a safe environment for our guests and teammates. Some of the measures taken include encouraging our teammates to take advantage of flexible work arrangements, acquiring additional corporate office space and mandating social distancing.
Ability to Source Vehicles from Consumers
We believe that we can benefit from the significant volume of vehicles which consumers are selling to dealers and to car buying companies. We intend to increase our efforts on sourcing vehicles from the consumer market. Our ability to successfully source vehicles from consumers is dependent on our marketing, brand, process and pricing. In addition to our consignment model, we partnered with a third-party company to be able to provide instant purchase offers to potential sellers.
Further Penetration of Existing Accounts and Key Vehicle Channels
We believe that we can benefit from volume with existing corporate vehicle sourcing partners. Many of our existing sourcing partners still sell less than 5% of their volumes through the retail channel. As Retail Remarketing™ continues to develop as a more established alternative and as CarLotz expands to serve buyers and sellers in its markets, we believe we can grow our existing commercial seller accounts, after the supply of new vehicles returns to normal.
Seasonality
Used vehicle sales generally experience seasonality with sales typically peaking late in the first calendar quarter of each year and diminishing through the rest of the year, with the lowest relative level of vehicle sales expected to occur in the fourth calendar quarter. Used vehicle prices also exhibit seasonality, with used vehicle prices declining at a faster rate in the last two quarters of each year and a slower rate in the first two quarters of each year, all other factors being equal. Because of the market dynamics related to the continuing semi-conductor chip shortage and COVID-related supply chain issues constraining supply, we have not seen the typical seasonality related to used vehicle prices. Average used vehicle prices increased rapidly during the second quarter and began to level off at the beginning of the third quarter before continuing to appreciate throughout the third and fourth quarters.
Operational Efficiency
As we scaled our business, we incurred various costs to identify new hub locations, obtain licensing, build out our hubs and hire and train our employees. The costs we incurred scaling our business are non-recurring, and we further plan to focus on operational efficiency by reducing discretionary spending, optimizing our staffing level, and focusing on the efficiency of our processing centers. During 2021, as we expanded our geographic footprint by increasing the numbers of our hubs, we increased
our reconditioning capacity in anticipation of increased demand, which did not occur at the levels we expected. We are currently focused on consolidating our reconditioning capacity to reduce our costs.
In addition to achieving cost savings and operational efficiencies, we aim to lower our days to recondition. Going forward, our strategy is to focus on efficiency and reduce our use of the third party reconditioning services which are more costly and are not as timely as our internal reconditioning resources. All of these initiatives are designed to lower reconditioning costs per unit and thereby improve per unit economics.
Technological Capabilities
We are constantly reviewing our technology platform, and our goal is to enhance our online platform for seamless end-to-end transactions and to continually enhance both the car buying and selling experience. Our B2B portal and integration framework are designed to support the assignment, reconditioning, sale and remittance of vehicles from corporate vehicle sourcing partners. We plan to invest in our core suite of technology to enhance the buyer and seller experience, improve our B2B vehicle sourcing and enhance our business intelligence capabilities.
Key Operating Metrics
We regularly review a number of metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our progress and make strategic decisions. Our operating metrics (which may be changed or adjusted over time as our business scales up or industry dynamics change) measure the key drivers of our growth, including opening new hubs, increasing our brand awareness as measured by unique site visitors and continuing to offer a full spectrum of used vehicles to service all types of customers.
(1) Vehicles are sourced non-competitively through our consignment to retail sales model, through purchases directly from consumers and through arrangements with corporate vehicle sourcing partners.
Retail Vehicles Sold
We define retail vehicles sold as the number of vehicles sold to customers in a given period, net of returns. We currently have a three-day, 500 mile exchange policy. The number of retail vehicles sold is the primary contributor to our revenues and gross profit, since retail vehicles generate complementary revenue streams, including all finance and insurance products. We view retail vehicles sold as a key measure of our growth, as growth in this metric is an indicator of our ability to successfully scale our operations while maintaining product integrity and customer satisfaction.
Number of Hubs
We define a hub as a physical location at which we may sell and purchase, recondition and store vehicles within a market.
Average Monthly Unique Visitors
We define a monthly unique visitor as an individual who has visited our website within a calendar month, based on data provided by Google Analytics. We calculate average monthly unique visitors as the sum of monthly unique visitors in a given period, divided by the number of months in that period. We view average monthly unique visitors as a key indicator of the strength of our brand, the effectiveness of our advertising and merchandising campaigns and consumer awareness.
Vehicles Available for Sale
We define vehicles available-for-sale as the number of vehicles listed for sale on our website on the last day of a given reporting period. Along with our hub expansion, we view vehicles available-for-sale as a key measure of our growth potential.
Growth in vehicles available-for-sale increases the selection of vehicles available to consumers in all of our markets simultaneously, which we believe will allow us to increase the number of vehicles we sell. Moreover, growth in inventory units available is an indicator of our ability to scale our vehicle sourcing, inspection and reconditioning operations.
Retail Gross Profit per Unit
We define retail gross profit per unit as the aggregate retail and F&I gross profit in a given period divided by retail vehicles sold during that period. Total retail gross profit per unit is driven by sales of used vehicles and the profit margin and fees on sale of those vehicles, each of which may generate additional revenue from providing retail vehicle buyers with options for financing, insurance and extended warranties. We believe gross profit per unit is a key measure of our growth and long-term profitability.
Percentage of unit sales non-competitively sourced
We define percentage of unit sales sourced non-competitively as the percentage derived by dividing the number of vehicles sold during the period that were sourced non-competitively (i.e., number of vehicles sourced other than from auctions) divided by the total number of vehicles sold during the period. The percentage of unit sales sourced non-competitively dropped in the second half of 2021 due to the low supply of vehicles available from our corporate vehicle sourcing accounts as a result of the chip shortage.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
Retail Vehicle Sales
CarLotz sells used vehicles to retail customers through its hubs in various cities throughout the continental U.S. Revenue from retail vehicle sales is recognized when the title to the vehicle passes to the customer, at which point the customer controls the vehicle. We recognize revenue based on the total purchase price stated in the contract, including any processing fees. Our exchange policy allows customers to initiate the exchange of a vehicle until the earlier of the first three days or 500 miles after delivery.
Wholesale Vehicle Sales
Vehicles that do not meet the Company’s standards for retail vehicle sales, retail vehicles that did not sell through the retail channel within a reasonable period of time and vehicles that the Company determines offer greater financial benefit through the wholesale channel are sold through various wholesale methods. Revenue from wholesale vehicle sales is recognized when the vehicle is sold, either at auction or directly to a wholesaler, and title to the vehicle passes to the buyer.
Finance and Insurance, net
We provide customers with options for financing, insurance and extended warranties. Certain warranties sold beginning January 1, 2019 are serviced by a company owned by a major stockholder. All other such services are provided by third-party vendors with whom we have agreements giving us the right to offer such services directly. When a customer selects a service from these third-party vendors, we earn a commission based on the actual price paid or financed. We recognize finance and insurance revenue at the point in time when the customer enters into the contract.
Lease Income, net
Lease income, net represents revenue earned on the spread between the interest rate on leases we enter into with our B2B lease customers and the related leases we enter into with third party lessors, as well as revenue earned on our owned vehicles leased to B2B lease customers.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales includes the cost to acquire used vehicles and the related reconditioning costs to prepare the vehicles for resale. Vehicle reconditioning costs include parts, labor, inbound transportation costs and other costs such as mechanical inspection, vehicle preparation supplies and repair costs. Cost of sales also includes any necessary adjustments to reflect vehicle inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses primarily include compensation and benefits, marketing, facilities cost, technology expenses, logistics and other administrative expenses. Advertising costs are expensed as incurred.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation on property and equipment is calculated using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which is: the lesser of the asset’s useful life or the underlying lease terms for leasehold improvements, one to five years for equipment, furniture and fixtures, and five years for corporate vehicles. Expenditures for maintenance, repairs and minor renewals are charged to expense as incurred. Major remodels and improvements are capitalized. Depreciation on vehicles leased to B2B customers is calculated using the straight-line over the estimated useful life. Amortization of capitalized website and internal-use software costs is computed using the straight-line method over 3 years.
Non-Operating Expenses
Non-operating expenses represent the change in fair value of the Merger warrants and the earnout shares. Additional non-operating income and expense include interest income on marketable securities, floor plan interest incurred on borrowings to finance the acquisition of used vehicle inventory under the Company’s former $12 million revolving floor plan facility with Automotive Finance Corporation and floorplan interest incurred on borrowings to finance the acquisition of used vehicle inventory under the Company’s current $40 million revolving floorplan facility with Ally.
Results of Operations
The following table presents our consolidated statements of operations for the periods indicated:
Presentation of Results of Operations
We present operating results down to gross profit for our three distinct revenue channels along with our net lease income:
Retail Vehicle Sales: Retail vehicle sales represent sales of vehicles to our retail customers through our hubs in various cities.
Wholesale Vehicle Sales: Wholesale vehicle sales represent sales of vehicles through wholesale channels, primarily through wholesale auctions.
Finance and Insurance: Finance and insurance represents commissions earned on financing, insurance and extended warranty products that we offer to our retail vehicle buyers.
Lease Income, net: Lease income, net represents revenue earned on the spread between the interest rate on leases we enter into with our B2B lease customers and the related leases we enter into with third party lessors, as well as revenue earned on our owned vehicles leased to B2B lease customers.
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
The following table presents certain information from our consolidated statements of operations by channel:
______________
(1)Gross profit per unit is calculated as gross profit for retail vehicles and finance and insurance, each of which is divided by the total number of retail vehicles sold in the period.
Retail Vehicle Sales
2021 Versus 2020. Retail vehicle sales revenue increased by $113.2 million, or 108.6%, to $217.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $104.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in open hubs which largely drove an increase in retail vehicle unit sales to 9,748 retail vehicles in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 6,215 retail vehicles in the year ended December 31, 2020 and an increase in average sale price per unit of $5,578, to $21,735 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The average sale price has increased consistent with macroeconomic trends in the used car industry and as a result of selling a higher percentage of higher priced vehicles.
2020 Versus 2019. Retail vehicle sales revenue increased by $13.9 million, or 15.3%, to $104.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $90.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in average sale price of $2,729 and partially offset by a decrease in retail vehicle unit sales to 6,215, compared to 6,435 retail vehicle sales in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in average sale price was primarily due to an increase in the percentage of units sourced via consignment, and the decrease in retail vehicle unit sales was due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related government lockdown and travel restrictions imposed.
Wholesale Vehicle Revenue
2021 Versus 2020. Wholesale vehicle revenue increased by $21.8 million, or 218.1%, to $31.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $10.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increased average selling price of the wholesale vehicles sold, combined with an increase in wholesale vehicle unit sales.
2020 Versus 2019. Wholesale vehicle revenue increased by $1.5 million, or 18.1%, to $10.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $8.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in average sale price of $2,134 and partially offset by a decrease in wholesale vehicle units sales to 1,059 in 2020, compared to 1,159 wholesale vehicles sold in 2019.
Finance and Insurance (F&I)
2021 Versus 2020. F&I revenue increased by $4.9 million, or 126.9%, to $8.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $3.9 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in F&I revenue was driven by our increase in retail unit sales and higher penetration of contract sales per unit sold.
2020 Versus 2019. F&I revenue increased by $0.8 million, or 25.1%, to $3.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $3.1 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to increased penetration of our F&I product offerings.
Lease Income, net
2021 Versus 2020. Lease income was $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
2020 Versus 2019. Lease income was $0.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $0.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Cost of Sales
2021 Versus 2020. Cost of sales increased by $140.6 million, or 130.9%, to $247.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $107.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increased average acquisition price of the vehicles we sold in that period combined with an increase in the number of vehicles sold. In addition, the increase was driven by an increase in fixed costs at the processing centers as we opened 14 hubs with processing centers.
2020 Versus 2019. Cost of sales increased by $13.6 million, or 14.5%, to $107.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $93.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in average sale price of $2,625.
Retail Vehicle Gross Profit
2021 Versus 2020. Retail vehicle gross profit decreased by $(4.3) million, or (59.7)%, to $2.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $7.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in retail gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulted from a decrease in retail gross profit per unit compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 and was offset by an increase in units sold, aided by more hubs in operation. The decrease in retail gross profit per unit was driven by a higher portion of our sales in the first quarter of 2021 falling under an alternative fee arrangement with a corporate sourcing partner that does not reimburse repair and shipping expenses and decreased profit margins in the third and fourth quarters due to a combination of elevated acquisition prices of inventory primarily sourced through auction in the second quarter and the lowering of retail prices relative to the acquisition costs as the inventory aged. Additionally, as a result of adjusting the carrying value of inventory to the lower of cost or net realizable value, gross profit decreased by $(0.8) million, reducing retail gross profit per unit by $83, for the year ended December 31, 2021.
2020 Versus 2019. Retail vehicle gross profit increased by $1.5 million, or 24.3%, to $7.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $5.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a shift in the sale of owned units to consigned units, which typically have higher margins.
Wholesale Vehicle Gross Loss
2021 Versus 2020. Wholesale vehicle gross loss increased by $1.2 million, to $(1.7) million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $(0.4) million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by the number of delisted consignment units, primarily from our largest corporate account that paused sourcing, and the cost incurred to ship and prepare those vehicles for sale at the time of consignment as well as selling aged dealer owned inventory that we were unable to sell through the retail channel at wholesale.
2020 Versus 2019. Wholesale vehicle gross loss improved by $0.4 million, or 49.2%, to $(0.4) million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $(0.8) million in the year ended December 31, 2019. This improvement was primarily driven by a decrease in negative gross profit per unit and a decrease in wholesale vehicle unit sales.
F&I Gross Profit
F&I revenue consists of 100% gross margin products for which there are no costs associated with the products. Therefore, changes in F&I gross profit and the associated drivers are identical to changes in F&I revenue and the associated drivers.
Components of SG&A
(1)Compensation and benefits includes all payroll and related costs, including benefits, and payroll taxes, except those related to preparing vehicles for sale, which are included in cost of sales, and those related to the development of software products for internal use, which are capitalized to software and depreciated over the estimated useful lives of the related assets.
(2)Other costs include all other selling, general and administrative expenses such as logistics and other administrative expenses.
2021 Versus 2020. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased by $75.6 million, to $93.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, from $17.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. Costs related to being a public company increased $16.3 million, primarily due to legal, accounting and insurance costs, compensation and benefits increased $21.4 million due to increased corporate headcount and new hub openings, marketing expense increased $19.0 million in connection with marketing higher levels of inventory online and our national expansion, occupancy costs increased $5.4 million in connection with the growth in number of hubs in 2021, and technology expense increased $8.6 million due to website enhancements the Company has begun.
2020 Versus 2019. Selling, general and administrative expenses decreased by $0.7 million, or (3.8)% to $17.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, from $18.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was due to a decrease in compensation and benefits costs of $(1.1) million and marketing expenses of $(1.0) million, partially offset by an increase in other costs of $1.3 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement the consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP, we also present the following non-GAAP measures: EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted retail GPU. We believe the presentation of both GAAP and non-GAAP financial measures provides investors with increased transparency into financial measures used by our management team, and it also improves investors’ understanding of our underlying operating performance and their ability to analyze our ongoing operating trends. All historic non-GAAP financial measures have been reconciled with the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
EBITDA is defined as net loss attributable to common stockholders adjusted to exclude interest expense, income tax expense and depreciation and amortization expense.
Adjusted EBITDA is EBITDA adjusted to exclude certain expenses related to the Company’s capital structure and management fee expense prior to the Merger, stock compensation expense and other non-operating income and expenses, including interest, investment gain/loss and nonrecurring income/expense.
Adjusted retail GPU is retail gross profit per unit adjusted to exclude the change in the inventory reserve for owned inventory to record inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Retail gross profit per unit is the aggregate retail and F&I gross profit in a given period divided by retail vehicles sold during that period.
Management believes the inclusion of supplementary adjustments to EBITDA applied in presenting Adjusted EBITDA is useful to investors in comparing the Company’s performance prior to the Merger and the Company’s performance following the Merger.
Management believes the inclusion of supplementary adjustments to retail gross profit per unit in presented Adjusted retail GPU is useful to investors in presenting the Company’s gross profit per unit on units actually sold during the period in comparing the Company’s performance to prior periods that did not have a material change in the inventory reserve.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted retail GPU have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of the results as reported under GAAP. These measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
The following tables reconcile EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to net loss attributable to common stockholders and Adjusted retail GPU to retail gross profit per unit for the periods presented:
(1)Adjusted gross profit per unit is calculated as gross profit for retail vehicles and finance and insurance, excluding any cost of sales associated with recording existing inventory to net realizable value, each of which is divided by the total number of retail vehicles sold in the period.
(2)The change in inventory reserve represents the impact on the Consolidated Statements of Operations related to the adjustment for lower of cost or net realizable value of inventory in the period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
Our main source of liquidity is cash generated from financing activities, which primarily includes proceeds from the Merger (see Note 3  - Merger in our consolidated financial statements). In connection with the Merger, pursuant to subscription agreements dated October 21, 2020 by and between Acamar Partners Acquisition Corp. (“Acamar Partners”) and certain strategic and accredited investors (the “PIPE Investors”), with respect to a private placement of shares of Acamar Partners Class A common stock, the Company issued and sold 12.5 million shares of Acamar Partners Class A common stock to the PIPE Investors at a price per share of $10.00 and an aggregate purchase price of $125.0 million.
Since inception, we have generally operated at a loss for most periods. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term marketable securities of $196.0 million. We believe our available cash, restricted cash, short-term marketable securities and liquidity available under the Ally Facility are sufficient to fund our operations for at least the next 12 months. We expect to continue to operate at a loss until we bring our hubs to maturity, achieve scale and are able to leverage our operating costs. Our hubs opened in 2021 have not been ramping to expected results and consequently have not provided the expected contribution to unit sales, revenue and gross profit. We may also seek additional funds as needed through alternative sources of liquidity, including equity or debt financings or other arrangements. However, additional funds may not be available when we need them on terms that are acceptable to us, or at all.
Debt and other obligations
On March 10, 2021, we entered into an Inventory Financing and Security Agreement (the “Ally Facility”) with Ally Bank, a Utah chartered state bank (“Ally Bank”), and Ally Financial, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Ally” and, together with Ally Bank, the “Lender”), pursuant to which the Lender could provide up to $30 million in financing, or such lesser sum which may be advanced to or on behalf of us from time to time, as part of our floorplan vehicle financing program. In June, the Company expanded the floor plan credit facility by $10 million to a total of $40 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $27.8 million principal outstanding under the Ally Facility, which we drew primarily to fund increased sourcing through vehicle purchases.
Under the Ally Facility, the Company is subject to financial covenants that require the Company to maintain at least 10% of the credit line in cash and cash equivalents, to maintain at least 10% of the credit line on deposit with Ally Bank and to maintain a minimum tangible net worth of $90 million calculated in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
Advances under the Ally Facility bear interest at a per annum rate designated from time to time by the Lender determined using a 365/360 simple interest method of calculation, unless expressly prohibited by law. The interest rate is currently the prime rate plus 2.50% per annum, or 5.75%. Advances under the Ally Facility, if not demanded earlier, are due and payable for each vehicle financed under the Ally Facility as and when such vehicle is sold, leased, consigned, gifted, exchanged, transferred, or otherwise disposed of. Interest under the Ally Facility is due and payable upon demand, but, in general, in no
event later than 60 days from the date of request for payment. Upon any event of default (including, without limitation, our obligation to pay upon demand any outstanding liabilities of the Ally Facility), the Lender may, at its option and without notice to us, exercise its right to demand immediate payment of all liabilities and other indebtedness and amounts owed to the Lender and its affiliates by us and our affiliates.
The Ally Facility is secured by a grant of a security interest in certain vehicle inventory and other assets of the Company.
Prior to our entry into the Ally Facility, we had a $12.0 million revolving floor plan facility available with AFC (the “AFC Facility”) to finance the acquisition of used vehicle inventory available on a revolving basis. The AFC Facility was secured by all of our assets. In connection with the entry into the Ally Facility, we repaid in full and terminated the AFC Facility.
On December 2, 2020, CarLotz issued a promissory note (the “Note”) to AFC. Under the terms of the Note, AFC agreed to make one advance to CarLotz upon request of $3.0 million. Amounts due under the Note accrued interest at 6.0% per year on a 365-day basis. The Note was due and payable on the earlier of the closing of the Merger and December 2, 2022. Amounts drawn on the Note were used for working capital purposes in the ordinary course of business. The Note was repaid upon the consummation of the Merger.
In April 2020, we received a loan totaling approximately $1.7 million from the Small Business Administration under the PPP to help us keep our workforce employed and avoid further headcount reduction during the COVID-19 crisis. The full amount of the PPP loan was repaid in connection with the closing of the Merger.
In December 2019, we entered into a note purchase agreement with AFC under which AFC agreed to purchase up to $5.0 million in notes, with the initial tranche equal to $3.0 million issued at closing and two additional tranches of at least $1.0 million on or prior to September 20, 2021, of which $0.5 million was issued prior to the completion of the Merger. The notes were converted into Former CarLotz common stock immediately prior to the consummation of the Merger and received the Merger consideration.
We are not a party to any off-balance sheet arrangements, including guarantee contracts, retained or contingent interests, certain derivative instruments and variable interest entities that either have, or are reasonably likely to have, a current or future material effect on our consolidated financial statements.
Cash Flows - Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $(111.3) million, primarily driven by net loss of $(39.9) million adjusted for non-cash credits of $(41.7) million and net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $(29.7) million. The non-cash adjustments primarily relate to a decrease in fair value of the warrants and earnout shares of $(99.3) million, partially offset by stock compensation of $51.1 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by an increase in inventories of $(29.5) million, an increase in accounts receivable of $(4.3) million and an increase in other assets (current and non-current, combined) of $(4.2) million, partially offset by an increase in accrued expenses of $9.0 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $(4.6) million, primarily driven by a net loss of $(6.6) million and non-cash charges with a $(0.5) million impact on operating cash flows, partially offset by net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $2.5 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily an increase of accounts payable of $4.1 million, an increase in accrued expenses of $8.0 million and an increase in other liabilities of $1.0 million, partially offset by an increase in other current assets of $6.4 million, an increase in inventory of $3.3 million, and an
increase in accounts receivable of $0.9 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily related to an decrease in fair value of the preferred stock tranche obligation of $(0.9) million offset by depreciation and amortization expense of property and equipment and lease vehicles of $0.2 million and $0.1 million, respectively.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in operating activities was $(5.5) million, primarily driven by a net loss of $(12.7) million adjusted for non-cash charges of $2.3 million and net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $4.9 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily related to change in fair value of redeemable convertible preferred stock tranche obligation of $1.4 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.5 million, loss due to disposition of property and equipment of $0.3 million and share-based compensation expense of $0.1 million. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by a decrease in inventories of $2.9 million, an increase in accounts payable of $1.4 million, an increase in accrued expenses of $0.5 million and an increase in other current and non-current liabilities of $0.8 million, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable of $0.8 million.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $(146.5) million, primarily driven by purchases of marketable securities of $(359.9) million, the purchase of property, equipment, and lease vehicles of $(11.9) million primarily related to our hubs opened in 2021 and capitalized software costs of $(14.6) million, partially offset by proceeds from sales and maturities of marketable securities of $239.9 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities of $(1.2) million was primarily driven by purchases of marketable securities of $(1.0) million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $(0.5) million, driven by $(0.2) million of purchases of property and equipment and $(0.3) million of purchases of leased vehicles.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $334.3 million, primarily driven by the issuance of common stock to the PIPE Investors and Former CarLotz shareholders of $435.0 million and borrowings on the floor plan facility of $171.9 million, partially offset by the payments made to existing shareholders of Former CarLotz as part of the Merger of $(62.7) million, transaction costs and advisory fees of $(47.6) million, payments on floorplan notes payable of $(150.1) million, payments made on accrued dividends of $(4.9) million, and the payment of cash consideration on options of $(2.5) million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $4.5 million, primarily driven by borrowings on the floorplan facility of $24.2 million and long-term debt borrowings of $5.3 million, partially offset by repayment of the floorplan note payable of $(25.0) million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by financing activities was $8.5 million, primarily driven by $8.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of redeemable convertible preferred stock, $39.8 million in proceeds from borrowings under the AFC Facility and $3.0 million of borrowings on long-term debt, partially offset by repayment of borrowings under the AFC Facility of $(41.7) million.
Material Contractual Obligations
The Company had contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 that are material to an assessment of the Company’s short- and long-term cash requirements. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has total outstanding debt of $27.8 million under the floorplan facility, which represents the principal amount outstanding due to the uncertainty of forecasting the timing of expected variable interest rate payments. Borrowings under the floorplan facility are payable when the underlying vehicle is sold, which is expected to be in 2022.
The Company has $56.8 million in total operating lease obligations, of which $6.8 million are due in 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements and related notes and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Management evaluates its accounting policies, estimates and judgments on an on-going basis. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Critical accounting policies are those policies that management believes are very important to the portrayal of our financial position and results of operations, and that require management to make estimates that are difficult, subjective or otherwise complex. Based on these criteria, management has identified revenue, valuation of inventory, equity-based compensation and the fair value of financial instruments as critical accounting policies. Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
Critical accounting estimates are estimates where the nature of the estimate is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment required and the impact of the estimate on financial condition or operating performance is material. Based on these criteria, management has identified the following critical accounting estimates:
Equity-Based Compensation
Equity-based compensation is subject to uncertainty as the value of options and earnout restricted stock units is subjective. Equity-based compensation is estimated at a point in time and expensed over the relevant period. Because equity-based compensation is estimated at a point in time, the estimate related to any specific grant does not change over the time period.
The fair value of options is valued using a Black Scholes pricing model. The assumptions used in a Black Scholes pricing model include the stock price on date of issuance, exercise price, expected term, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and the risk-free interest rate. The expected term, expected volatility and expected dividend yield are subjective assumptions that create estimation uncertainty.
The fair value of the earnout restricted stock units is valued using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. The assumptions used in the Monte-Carlo simulation model include the stock price on date of issuance, vesting conditions, contractual term, expected volatility and the risk-free interest rate. The expected volatility is the primary subjective assumption that creates estimation uncertainty. The expected stock volatility is based on a blend of our implied and historical volatility and the implied and historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies for a term equal to the remaining contractual term of the obligations. The risk-free interest rate was determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve for the remaining term. Because of the nature of the earnout restricted stock units, the Monte-Carlo simulation model also determines the timing of the expense.
Because of the magnitude of equity-based compensation small changes in the assumptions could have a material impact on the financial condition.
Determination of the Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Fair value of warrants
The fair value of the warrants is subject to uncertainty as the value of the warrants is subjective. Estimation uncertainty primarily arises from the method used to determine the fair value of the warrants and the variability of the warrant pricing on the specific date used in the valuation. The fair value of the public warrants is established directly from quoted prices in an active trading market. Despite differing terms for the private warrants, a market participant would look to the public price to determine the exit price. Based on this conclusion, both the public and private warrants value is based upon the market value in an active trading market.
Based on the change in the market value of the public warrants, the value of the warrants has changed from $39,024 on January 21, 2021 to $6,291 on December 31, 2021. The valuation is sensitive to the change in trading price of the warrants and will remain sensitive to these fluctuations in the future.
Fair value of earnout provision
The fair value of the earnout provision is subject to uncertainty as the value of the earnout is calculated through a Monte-Carlo simulation using subjective assumptions. Estimation uncertainty primarily arises from the method used to determine the fair value of the earnout provision and the assumptions used in the valuation. The assumptions used in the Monte-Carlo simulation model include the stock price on date of issuance, vesting conditions, contractual term, expected volatility and the risk-free interest rate. The expected volatility is the primary subjective assumption that creates estimation uncertainty. The expected stock volatility is based on a blend of our implied and historical volatility and the implied and historical volatility of publicly traded peer companies for a term equal to the remaining contractual term of the obligations. The risk-free interest rate was determined by reference to the U.S. Treasury yield curve for the remaining term.
Based primarily on the change in the stock price throughout the year, the value of the earnout provision has changed from $74,284 on January 21, 2021 to $7,679 on December 31, 2021. The valuation is especially sensitive to the change in trading price of CarLotz and will remain sensitive to these fluctuations in the future.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See the section titled “Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.