Item 7 - Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis summarizes the significant factors affecting our consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources during the two-year period ended January 28, 2022 (our fiscal years 2021 and 2020). Unless otherwise noted, all references herein for the years 2021, 2020, and 2019 represent the fiscal years ended January 28, 2022, January 29, 2021, and January 31, 2020, respectively. We intend for this discussion to provide the reader with information that will assist in understanding our financial statements, the changes in certain key items in those financial statements from year to year, and the primary factors that accounted for those changes, as well as how certain accounting principles affect our financial statements. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes to the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. This discussion and analysis is presented in four sections:
•Executive Overview
•Operations
•Financial Condition, Liquidity and Capital Resources
•Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
Performance Overview
Net sales for fiscal 2021 increased 7.4% over fiscal year 2020 to $96.3 billion. The increase in total sales was primarily driven by comparable sales growth. Comparable sales increased 6.9% over fiscal year 2020, driven by an 11.1% increase in comparable average ticket, partially offset by a 4.2% decrease in comparable customer transactions. Net earnings for fiscal 2021 increased 44.7% to $8.4 billion. Diluted earnings per common share increased 55.3% in fiscal year 2021 to $12.04 from $7.75 in 2020. Included in the fiscal 2020 results are a $1.1 billion pre-tax loss on extinguishment of debt from cash tender offers to purchase and retire an aggregate principal amount of $3.0 billion in outstanding notes, as well as operating costs related to the Canada restructuring actions. Adjusting for these items, diluted earnings per common share increased 35.9% to $12.04 in 2021 from adjusted diluted earnings per common share of $8.86 in 2020 (see the non-GAAP financial measures discussion).
For 2021, cash flows from operating activities were $10.1 billion, with $1.9 billion used for capital expenditures. Continuing to deliver on our commitment to return excess cash to shareholders, the Company repurchased $13.1 billion of common stock and paid $2.0 billion in dividends during the year.
In 2021, we experienced comparable sales increases in eleven of fifteen product categories and all fifteen U.S. regions. Our Total Home strategy continues to gain momentum as we provide a one-stop solution for both DIY and Pro customers. Throughout fiscal 2021, we maintained focus on the Pro customer with improved in-stock inventory levels and store layout, enhanced service offerings, and expanded brand and product offerings that meet their project needs. We enhanced the customer online shopping experience with improved search and navigation functionality and expanded on-trend inventory assortments. Our private brand product assortment has also elevated our performance with the DIY customer, especially in Home Décor. In addition, we have expanded our omnichannel fulfillment capabilities. During 2021, we converted three geographic areas to our market-based delivery model for big and bulky product. In this new model, product flows directly to customer homes from our distribution network, bypassing stores altogether. As part of our fulfillment capabilities, our customers can also now track appliance deliveries in real time and we continue to expand our same-day and next-day fulfillment options.
In the stores, our disciplined focus on driving operating leverage through our Perpetual Productivity Improvement (PPI) initiatives resulted in operational process improvements that reduced the amount of time our associates spend on tasking activities and can instead focus on serving our customers. As part of these initiatives, we recently launched a new store inventory management system that provides associates real-time visibility to inventory in their store and reduces non-productive hours spent looking for product. In addition, we expanded our simplified user interface introduced earlier in the year across the sales floor which accelerates the associate training process and allows associates to focus on customer service while reducing customer wait times.
Looking Forward
As part of our continued efforts around our Total Home strategy, we are focused on further enhancing our omnichannel capabilities in 2022 across three key areas: expanding our online assortment, enhancing the user experience, and improving
fulfillment. We will continue to expand our Lowes.com assortment to meet our customers’ design and lifestyle needs, while at the same time, enhancing the user experience with upgrades to the visualization and configuration tools we offer online. As we head into spring, we have leveraged our expanded supply chain network to position our in-stock inventory for our heavy selling season.
While there is uncertainty in the economy with rising interest rates and inflation, our outlook for the home improvement industry remains robust, and we believe we are well-positioned to accelerate our market share gains through our Total Home strategy.
OPERATIONS
The following tables set forth the percentage relationship to net sales of each line item of the consolidated statements of earnings, as well as the percentage change in dollar amounts from the prior year. This table should be read in conjunction with the following discussion and analysis and the consolidated financial statements, including the related notes to the consolidated financial statements.
The following table sets forth key metrics utilized by management in assessing business performance. This table should be read in conjunction with the following discussion and analysis and the consolidated financial statements, including the related notes to the consolidated financial statements.
1 A comparable location is defined as a retail location that has been open longer than 13 months. A location that is identified for relocation is no longer considered comparable in the month of its relocation. The relocated location must then remain open longer than 13 months to be considered comparable. A location we have decided to close is no longer considered comparable as of the beginning of the month in which we announce its closing. Comparable sales include online sales, which positively impacted the comparable sales increase in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020, and fiscal 2019 by approximately 150 basis points, 565 basis points, and 25 basis points, respectively.
2 Average ticket is defined as net sales divided by the total number of customer transactions.
3 Average store size selling square feet is defined as sales floor square feet divided by the number of stores open at the end of the period. The average Lowe’s-branded home improvement store has approximately 112,000 square feet of retail selling space.
4 Return on average assets is defined as net earnings divided by average total assets for the last five quarters.
5 Return on invested capital is calculated using a non-GAAP financial measure. Net earnings to average debt and shareholders’ (deficit)/equity is the most comparable GAAP ratio. See below for additional information and reconciliations of non-GAAP measures.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted Diluted Earnings Per Share
Adjusted diluted earnings per share is a non-GAAP financial measure. Management believes this non-GAAP financial measure provides useful insight for analysts and investors in evaluating what management considers the Company’s core financial performance. Adjusted diluted earnings per share excludes the impact of discrete items, further described below, not contemplated in the Company’s business outlook for fiscal 2020. Unless otherwise noted, the income tax effect of these adjustments is calculated using the marginal rate for the period. There were no non-GAAP adjustments in fiscal 2021.
Fiscal 2020 Impacts
•In the third quarter of fiscal 2020, the Company recognized a $1.1 billion loss on extinguishment of debt in connection with the cash tender offers on an aggregate principal amount of $3.0 billion in outstanding notes (Loss on extinguishment of debt).
•Beginning in the third quarter of fiscal 2019, the Company began a strategic review of its Canadian operations, and in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2019, the Company announced additional actions to improve future performance and profitability of its Canadian operations. As a result of this review and related actions, the Company recognized pre-tax operating costs of $45 million related to inventory write-downs and other closing costs in fiscal 2020 (Canada restructuring).
Adjusted diluted earnings per share should not be considered an alternative to, or more meaningful indicator of, the Company’s diluted earnings per common share as prepared in accordance with GAAP. The Company’s methods of determining this non-GAAP financial measure may differ from the method used by other companies and may not be comparable.
Return on Invested Capital
Return on Invested Capital (ROIC) is calculated using a non-GAAP financial measure. Management believes ROIC is a meaningful metric for analysts and investors as a measure of how effectively the Company is using capital to generate profits. Although ROIC is a common financial metric, numerous methods exist for calculating ROIC. Accordingly, the method used by our management may differ from the methods used by other companies. We encourage you to understand the methods used by another company to calculate ROIC before comparing its ROIC to ours.
We define ROIC as the rolling 12 months’ lease adjusted net operating profit after tax (Lease adjusted NOPAT) divided by the average of current year and prior year ending debt and shareholders’ (deficit)/equity. Lease adjusted NOPAT is a non-GAAP financial measure, and net earnings is considered to be the most comparable GAAP financial measure. The calculation of ROIC, together with a reconciliation of net earnings to Lease adjusted NOPAT, is as follows:
1 Income tax adjustment is defined as net operating profit multiplied by the effective tax rate, which was 24.7%, 24.6%, and 23.9% for 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
2 Average debt and shareholders’ (deficit)/equity is defined as average current year and prior year ending debt, including current maturities, short-term borrowings, and operating lease liabilities, plus the average current year and prior year ending total shareholders’ (deficit)/equity.
Fiscal 2021 Compared to Fiscal 2020
Net Sales - Net sales increased 7.4% to $96.3 billion in 2021. The increase in total sales was driven by comparable sales growth. Comparable sales increased 6.9% over the same period, driven by an 11.1% increase in comparable average ticket, partially offset by a 4.2% decline in comparable customer transactions. Comparable sales change during each quarter of the
fiscal year, as reported, were an increase of 25.9% in the first quarter, decline of 1.7% in the second quarter, increase of 2.2% in the third quarter, and increase of 5.0% in the fourth quarter.
During 2021, we experienced comparable sales increases in eleven of fifteen product categories, led by Electrical, Lumber, and Flooring. We delivered strong comparable sales in Electrical and Lumber due to strong unit demand from Pro customers, as well as unit price increases driven by inflation. New product offerings drove strong sales in Flooring, led by Vinyl Flooring. We experienced lower comparable sales in Paint, Hardware, and Lighting due to cycling prior year DIY demand at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Geographically, all fifteen U.S. regions and Canada experienced positive comparable sales.
Gross Margin - Gross margin as a percentage of sales for 2021 increased 29 basis points compared to 2020. Gross margin was positively impacted by approximately 65 basis points of total rate improvement driven by continued improvement in managing product costs and disciplined pricing strategies, as well as approximately 25 basis points of leverage from higher credit revenue. These benefits were partially offset by 35 basis points of deleverage due to product mix and 30 basis points of deleverage from supply chain costs.
SG&A - SG&A expense for 2021 leveraged 167 basis points as a percentage of sales compared to 2020. This was primarily driven by 115 basis points of leverage due to lower COVID-19 related expenses, including additional compensation to hourly front-line associates, emergency paid leave, and cleaning costs; 45 basis points of leverage in retail operating salaries due to increased sales and improved operating efficiencies as a result of our PPI initiatives; and 30 basis points of leverage due to costs associated with the reset of the layout of our U.S. stores in the prior year. These benefits were partially offset by 20 basis points of deleverage due to the fourth quarter discretionary bonus to front-line associates.
Depreciation and Amortization - Depreciation and amortization expense deleveraged 17 basis points for 2021 as a percentage of sales compared to 2020, driven by ongoing capital investments in store environment, store equipment, and technology projects. Property, less accumulated depreciation, decreased to $19.1 billion at January 28, 2022, compared to $19.2 billion at January 29, 2021.
Interest - Net - Net interest expense is comprised of the following:
Net interest expense in 2021 leveraged three basis points primarily as a result of increased sales in the current year, offset by interest expense related to the issuance of $2.0 billion unsecured notes in March 2021 and $2.0 billion unsecured notes in September 2021.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt - During the third quarter of 2020, we repurchased and retired $3.0 billion aggregate principal amount of our outstanding debt resulting in a loss on extinguishment of debt of $1.1 billion.
Income Tax Provision - Our effective income tax rate was 24.7% in 2021 compared to 24.6% in 2020.
Fiscal 2020 Compared to Fiscal 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity, and capital resources for the fiscal years ended January 29, 2021 and January 31, 2020, see “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 29, 2021, filed with the SEC on March 22, 2021.
FINANCIAL CONDITION, LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Sources of Liquidity
Cash flows from operations supplemented with our short-term and long-term borrowings, remain sufficient to fund our operations while allowing us to make strategic investments to support long-term growth and return excess cash to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases. As of January 28, 2022, we held $1.1 billion of cash and cash equivalents, as well as $4.0 billion in undrawn capacity on our revolving credit facilities. We believe these sources of liquidity and our continued access to the capital markets on both a short-term and long-term basis, as needed, are adequate to fund our operations and investments to grow our business, repay our debt as it becomes due, pay dividends, and fund our share repurchases over the next twelve months.
As of January 28, 2022, our material contractual obligations and commercial commitments consist of leases, long-term debt, purchase obligations, and letters of credit. See Note 6, Note 8, and Note 15 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”, of this Annual Report for amounts outstanding related to leases, long-term debt, and commitments, respectively, as of January 28, 2022.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities continued to provide the primary source of our liquidity. The decrease in net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended January 28, 2022, versus the year ended January 29, 2021, was due primarily to changes in working capital, partially offset by higher net earnings. Accounts payable increased for fiscal 2021 by $466 million compared to an increase of $3.2 billion in fiscal 2020, driving a reduction of $2.7 billion in operating cash flows for fiscal 2021. Inventory decreased operating cash flow for fiscal 2021 by approximately $1.4 billion compared to a decrease of $3.0 billion for fiscal 2020. The increase in accounts payable and inventory in the prior year was driven by a ramp up in inventory purchase volume to meet sustained customer demand at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the current year, we have continued to experience sustained demand levels and maintained a higher level of inventory and related accounts payable. Other operating liabilities decreased $570 million for fiscal 2021 compared to an increase of $813 million in fiscal 2020. The decrease in other operating liabilities in the current year compared to the prior year is primarily driven by COVID-related accrued discretionary compensation for hourly associates in the prior year and timing of tax payments.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities primarily consists of transactions related to capital expenditures.
Capital expenditures
Our capital expenditures generally consist of investments in our strategic initiatives to enhance our ability to serve customers, improve existing stores, and support expansion plans. Capital expenditures were $1.9 billion in 2021 and $1.8 billion in 2020. The following table provides the allocation of capital expenditures for 2021 and 2020:
1Includes merchandising resets, facility repairs, replacements of IT and store equipment, among other specific efforts.
2Represents investments related to our strategic focus areas aimed at improving customers’ experience and driving improved performance in the near and long term.
3Represents expenditures primarily related to land purchases, buildings, and personal property for new store projects and new corporate facilities projects as well as expenditures related to our international operations.
For 2022, our capital expenditures forecast is approximately $2.0 billion. The following table provides the allocation of our fiscal 2022 capital expenditures forecast:
Cash Flows Used in Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities primarily consist of transactions related to our debt, share repurchases, and cash dividend payments.
Total Debt
In 2021, we issued $4.0 billion of unsecured notes. This is comprised of $2.0 billion of unsecured notes issued in March 2021 and $2.0 billion of unsecured notes issued in September 2021, the proceeds of which were designated for general corporate purposes. In April 2021, we also entered into a $1.0 billion unsecured 364-day term loan facility (the 2021 Term Loan), which was repaid during fiscal 2021. In 2021, we also paid approximately $1.0 billion to retire scheduled debts at maturity.
In December 2021, we entered into a $2.0 billion five-year unsecured revolving third amended and restated credit agreement (the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement) with a syndicate of banks. The Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement amends and restates the Company’s amended and restated credit agreement, dated September 10, 2018 (the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement), to among other things (i) extend the maturity date of the revolving credit facility to December 2026 and (ii) increase the aggregate availability to a total of $2.0 billion.
Also in December 2021, we amended the five-year unsecured revolving credit agreement dated March 23, 2020 (the 2020 Credit Agreement) with a syndicate of banks. The amendment, among other things, increased the availability of the unsecured revolving credit agreement to $2.0 billion, maturing in March 2025. Subject to obtaining commitments from the lenders and satisfying other conditions specified in the 2020 Credit Agreement and the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, the Company may increase the combined aggregate availability of both agreements by an additional $1.0 billion.
The Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and the 2020 Credit Agreement (collectively, the Credit Agreements) support our commercial paper program. The amount available to be drawn under the Credit Agreements is reduced by the amount of borrowings under our commercial paper program. There were no outstanding borrowings under the Company’s commercial paper program, the 2020 Credit Agreement, or the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement as of January 28, 2022. There were no outstanding borrowings under the commercial paper program, the 2020 Credit Agreement, or the Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement as of January 29, 2021. Total combined availability under the 2020 Credit Agreement and the Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement as of January 28, 2022, was $4.0 billion.
The Third Amended and Restated Credit Agreement and the 2020 Credit Agreement contain customary representations, warranties, and covenants. We were in compliance with those covenants at January 28, 2022.
Our ratio of debt to capital (shareholder’s (deficit)/equity plus debt) was 124.2% and 93.8% as of January 28, 2022 and January 29, 2021, respectively.
The following table includes additional information related to our debt for 2021 and 2020:
Share Repurchases
We have an ongoing share repurchase program, authorized by the Company’s Board of Directors, that is executed through purchases made from time to time either in the open market or through private off-market transactions. We also withhold shares from employees to satisfy tax withholding liabilities on share-based payments. Shares repurchased are returned to authorized and unissued status. The following table provides, on a settlement date basis, the total number of shares repurchased, average price paid per share, and the total amount paid for share repurchases for 2021 and 2020:
As of January 28, 2022, we had $19.7 billion remaining under our share repurchase program with no expiration date. For 2022, we expect to repurchase shares totaling approximately $12.0 billion, subject to market conditions.
Dividends
In the third quarter of 2021, we increased our quarterly dividend payment by 33% to $0.80 per share. Our dividend payment dates are established such that dividends are paid in the quarter immediately following the quarter in which they are declared. The following table provides additional information related to our dividend payments for 2021 and 2020:
Capital Resources
We expect to continue to have access to the capital markets on both short-term and long-term bases when needed for liquidity purposes by issuing commercial paper or new long-term debt. The availability and the borrowing costs of these funds could be
adversely affected, however, by a downgrade of our debt ratings or a deterioration of certain financial ratios. The table below reflects our debt ratings by Standard & Poor’s (S&P) and Moody’s as of March 21, 2022, which is disclosed to provide an enhanced understanding of our sources of liquidity and the effect of our ratings on our cost of funds. Our debt ratings have enabled, and should continue to enable, us to refinance our debt as it becomes due at favorable rates in capital markets. Our commercial paper and senior debt ratings may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organization, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating.
There are no provisions in any agreements that would require early cash settlement of existing debt or leases as a result of a downgrade in our debt rating or a decrease in our stock price. In addition, we do not believe it will be necessary to repatriate significant cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments held in foreign affiliates to fund domestic operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements and notes to consolidated financial statements presented in this Annual Report requires us to make estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, sales and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. We base these estimates on historical results and various other assumptions believed to be reasonable, all of which form the basis for making estimates concerning the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily available from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 1 to the consolidated financial statements included herein. We believe that the following accounting policies affect the most significant estimates and management judgments used in preparing the consolidated financial statements.
Merchandise Inventory
Description
We record an obsolete inventory reserve for the anticipated loss associated with selling inventories below cost. This reserve is based on our current knowledge with respect to inventory levels, sales trends and historical experience. During 2021, our reserve decreased approximately $14 million to $168 million as of January 28, 2022.
We also record an inventory reserve for the estimated shrinkage between physical inventories. This reserve is based primarily on actual shrink results from previous physical inventories. During 2021, the inventory shrink reserve increased approximately $49 million to $414 million as of January 28, 2022, in response to higher volumes and estimated shrinkage rates based on results from previous physical inventories.
In addition, we receive funds from vendors in the normal course of business, principally as a result of purchase volumes, sales, early payments or promotions of vendors’ products. Generally, these vendor funds do not represent the reimbursement of specific, incremental and identifiable costs that we incurred to sell the vendor’s product. Many of the vendor funds associated with these purchases are earned under agreements that are negotiated on an annual basis or shorter. The funds are recorded as a reduction to the cost of inventory as they are earned. As the related inventory is sold, the amounts are recorded as a reduction to cost of sales. Funds that are determined to be reimbursements of specific, incremental and identifiable costs incurred to sell vendors’ products are recorded as an offset to the related expense.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
We do not believe that our merchandise inventories are subject to significant risk of obsolescence in the near term, and we have the ability to adjust purchasing practices based on anticipated sales trends and general economic conditions. However, changes in consumer purchasing patterns or a deterioration in product quality could result in the need for additional reserves. Likewise, changes in the estimated shrink reserve may be necessary, based on the timing and results of physical inventories. We also apply judgment in the determination of levels of obsolete inventory and assumptions about net realizable value.
For vendor funds, we develop accrual rates based on the provisions of the agreements in place. Due to the diversity of the individual vendor agreements, we perform analyses and review historical purchase trends and volumes throughout the year, adjust accrual rates as appropriate and confirm actual amounts with select vendors to ensure the amounts earned are
appropriately recorded. Amounts accrued throughout the year could be impacted if actual purchase volumes differ from projected purchase volumes, especially in the case of programs that provide for increased funding when graduated purchase volumes are met.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to establish our inventory valuation or the related reserves for obsolete inventory or inventory shrinkage during the past three fiscal years. We believe that we have sufficient current and historical knowledge to record reasonable estimates for both of these inventory reserves. However, it is possible that actual results could differ from recorded reserves. A 10% change in either the amount of products considered obsolete or the weighted average estimated loss rate used in the calculation of our obsolete inventory reserve would have affected net earnings by approximately $13 million for 2021. A 10% change in the estimated shrinkage rate included in the calculation of our inventory shrink reserve would have affected net earnings by approximately $31 million for 2021.
We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to recognize vendor funds during the past three fiscal years. If actual results are not consistent with the assumptions and estimates used, we could be exposed to additional adjustments that could positively or negatively impact gross margin and inventory. However, substantially all receivables associated with these activities do not require subjective long-term estimates because they are collected within the following fiscal year. Adjustments to gross margin and inventory in the following fiscal year have historically not been material.
Long-Lived Asset Impairment
Description
We review the carrying amounts of locations whenever certain events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable. When evaluating locations for impairment, our asset group is at an individual location level, as that is the lowest level for which cash flows are identifiable. Cash flows for individual locations do not include an allocation of corporate overhead.
We evaluate locations for triggering events relating to long-lived asset impairment on a quarterly basis to determine when a location’s assets may not be recoverable. For operating locations, our primary indicator that assets may not be recoverable is consistently negative cash flow for a twelve month period for those locations that have been open in the same location for a sufficient period of time to allow for meaningful analysis of ongoing operating results. Management also monitors other factors when evaluating operating locations for impairment, including individual locations’ execution of their operating plans and local market conditions, including incursion, which is the opening of either other Lowe’s locations or those of a direct competitor within the same market. We also consider there to be a triggering event when there is a current expectation that it is more likely than not that a given location will be closed or otherwise disposed of significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life.
A potential impairment has occurred if projected future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use and eventual disposition of the location’s assets are less than the carrying amount of the assets. The carrying value of a location’s asset group includes inventory, property, operating and finance lease right-of-use assets and operating liabilities including inventory payables, salaries payable and operating lease liabilities. Financial and nonoperating liabilities are excluded from the carrying value of the asset group. When determining the stream of projected future cash flows associated with an individual operating location, management makes assumptions, incorporating local market conditions, about key store variables including sales growth rates, gross margin and controllable expenses, such as store payroll and operating expense, as well as asset residual values or lease rates. Operating lease payments are included in the projected future cash flows. Financing lease payments are excluded from the projected future cash flows. An impairment loss is recognized when the carrying amount of the operating location is not recoverable and exceeds its fair value.
We use an income approach to determine the fair value of our individual operating locations, which requires discounting projected future cash flows. This involves making assumptions regarding both a location’s future cash flows, as described above, and an appropriate discount rate to determine the present value of those future cash flows. We discount our cash flow estimates at a rate commensurate with the risk that selected market participants would assign to the cash flows. The selected market participants represent a group of other retailers with a market footprint similar in size to ours.
We use a market approach to determine the fair value of our individual locations identified for closure. This involves making assumptions regarding the estimated selling prices or estimated lease rates by obtaining information from property brokers or appraisers in the specific markets being evaluated. The information includes comparable sales of similar assets and assumptions about demand in the market for purchase or lease of these assets.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
Our impairment evaluations require us to apply judgment in determining whether a triggering event has occurred, including the evaluation of whether it is more likely than not that a location will be closed significantly before the end of its previously estimated useful life. Our impairment loss calculations require us to apply judgment in estimating expected future cash flows, including estimated sales, margin, and controllable expenses, assumptions about market performance for operating locations, and estimated selling prices or lease rates for locations identified for closure. We also apply judgment in estimating asset fair values, including the selection of an appropriate discount rate for fair values determined using an income approach.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
During fiscal years 2021 and 2020, long-lived asset impairment recorded within selling, general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statements of earnings was immaterial. We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to estimate the future cash flows of operating locations or locations identified for closure during the past three fiscal years. If the actual results are not consistent with the assumptions and judgments we have made in determining whether it is more likely than not that a location will be closed significantly before the end of its useful life or in estimating future cash flows and determining asset fair values, our actual impairment losses could vary from our estimated impairment losses. In the event that our estimates vary from actual results, we may record additional impairment losses, which could be material to our results of operations.
Self-Insurance
Description
We are self-insured for certain losses relating to workers’ compensation, automobile, general and product liability, extended protection plans, and certain medical and dental claims. We have excess insurance coverage above certain retention amounts to limit exposure from single events and earnings volatility. Our self-insured retention or deductible, as applicable, is limited to $2 million per occurrence involving workers’ compensation, $10 million per occurrence involving general or product liability, and $10 million per occurrence involving automobile. We do not have any excess insurance coverage for self-insured extended protection plan or medical and dental claims. Self-insurance claims filed and claims incurred but not reported are accrued based upon our estimates of the discounted ultimate cost for self-insured claims incurred using actuarial assumptions followed in the insurance industry and historical experience. During 2021, our self-insurance liabilities increased approximately $23 million to $1.1 billion as of January 28, 2022.
Judgments and uncertainties involved in the estimate
These estimates are subject to changes in the regulatory environment, utilized discount rate, projected exposures including payroll, sales and vehicle units, as well as the frequency, lag and severity of claims.
Effect if actual results differ from assumptions
We have not made any material changes in the methodology used to establish our self-insurance liability during the past three fiscal years. Although we believe that we have the ability to reasonably estimate losses related to claims, it is possible that actual results could differ from recorded self-insurance liabilities. A 10% change in our self-insurance liability would have affected net earnings by approximately $84 million for 2021. A 100 basis point change in our discount rate would have affected net earnings by approximately $23 million for 2021.