ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto and other financial information included elsewhere in this report.
As used in the discussion below, “we,” “our,” and “us” refers to the historical financial results of Lipocine.
Forward Looking Statements
This section and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, that involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements provide current expectations of future events based on certain assumptions and include any statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact. Forward-looking statements may refer to such matters as products, product benefits, pre-clinical and clinical development timelines, clinical and regulatory expectations and plans, anticipated financial performance, future revenues or earnings, business prospects, projected ventures, new products and services, anticipated market performance, future expectations for liquidity and capital resources needs and similar matters. Such words as “may”, “will”, “expect”, “continue”, “estimate”, “project”, and “intend” and similar terms and expressions are intended to identify forward looking statements. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and our actual results may differ significantly from the results discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in Part I, Item 1A (Risk Factors) of this Form 10-K. Except as required by applicable law, we assume no obligation to revise or update any forward-looking statements for any reason.
Overview of Our Business
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on applying our oral drug delivery technology for the development of pharmaceutical products focusing on neuroendocrine and metabolic disorders. Our proprietary delivery technologies are designed to improve patient compliance and safety through orally available treatment options. Our primary development programs are based on oral delivery solutions for poorly bioavailable drugs. We have a portfolio of differentiated innovative product candidates that target high unmet needs for neurological and psychiatric CNS disorders, liver diseases, and hormone supplementation for men and women.
We entered into a license agreement for the development and commercialization our product candidate, TLANDO®, an oral testosterone replacement therapy (“TRT”) comprised of testosterone undecanoate (“TU”). TLANDO is a registered trademark assigned to Antares. On October 14, 2021, we entered into a license agreement (the “Antares License Agreement”) with Antares Pharma, Inc. (“Antares” or our “Licensee”), pursuant to which we granted to Antares an exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicensable right and license to develop and commercialize, upon final approval of TLANDO from the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”), the TLANDO product for TRT in the U.S. Any FDA required post-marketing studies will also be the responsibility of our licensee, Antares. Prior to entering into the License Agreement, on December 8, 2020, we received tentative approval from the FDA regarding our new drug application (“NDA”) filed in February 2020 for TLANDO as a TRT in adult males for conditions associated with a deficiency of endogenous testosterone, also known as hypogonadism. In granting tentative approval, the FDA concluded that TLANDO has met all required quality, safety and efficacy standards necessary for approval. However, TLANDO has not received final approval and is not eligible for final approval to market in the U.S. until the expiration of the exclusivity period previously granted to Clarus Therapeutics, Inc. (“Clarus”) with respect to Jatenzo®, which expires on March 27, 2022. The FDA has affirmed to Antares the acceptance of the resubmission of the NDA for TLANDO filed on January 28, 2022. The FDA has designated the NDA as a Class 1 resubmission with a two-month review goal period and set a target action date of March 28, 2022 under the Prescription Drug User Fee Act (PDUFA).
Additional pipeline candidates include: LPCN 1148 comprising a novel prodrug of testosterone, testosterone laurate (“TL”), for the management of decompensated cirrhosis; LPCN 1144, an oral prodrug of androgen receptor modulator for the treatment of non-cirrhotic non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (“NASH”) which has completed phase 2 testing; LPCN 1111 (TLANDO® XR), a next generation oral TRT product comprised of testosterone tridecanoate (“TT”) with the potential for once daily dosing which has completed Phase 2 testing; LPCN 1107, potentially the first oral hydroxy progesterone caproate (“HPC”) product indicated for the prevention of recurrent preterm birth (“PTB”), which has completed a dose finding clinical study in pregnant women and has been granted orphan drug designation by the FDA; and neuroactive steroids (“NAS”) including LPCN 1154 for postpartum depression (PPD) and LPCN 2101 for epilepsy.
To date, we have funded our operations primarily through the sale of equity securities, debt and convertible debt and through up-front payments, research funding and royalty and milestone payments from our license and collaboration arrangements. We have not generated any revenues from product sales and while we expect to generate royalties from our licensee’s sales of TLANDO, we do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless from our other product candidates unless and until approval.
We have incurred losses in most years since our inception. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $172.7 million. Income and losses fluctuate year to year, primarily depending on the nature and timing of research and development occurring on our product candidates. Our net loss was $634,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Substantially all of our operating losses resulted from expenses incurred in connection with our product candidate development programs, our research activities and general and administrative costs, including on-going litigation, associated with our operations.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we:
● conduct further development of our other product candidates, including LPCN 1148 and LPCN 1144;
● continue our research efforts;
● research new products or new uses for our existing products;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
● provide general and administrative support for our operations, including on-going litigation.
To fund future long-term operations, including the potential commercialization of any of our product candidates, we will need to raise additional capital. The amount and timing of future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including capital market conditions, regulatory requirements and outcomes related to TLANDO, regulatory requirements related to our other product development programs, the timing and results of our ongoing development efforts, the potential expansion of our current development programs, potential new development programs, our ability to license our products to third parties, the pursuit of various potential commercial activities and strategies associated with our development programs and related general and administrative support. We anticipate that we will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, such as potential license, partnering and collaboration agreements. We cannot be certain that anticipated additional financing will be available to us on favorable terms, in amounts sufficient to fund our operations, or at all. Although we have previously been successful in obtaining financing through public and private equity securities offerings and our license and collaboration agreements, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so in the future.
Corporate Strategy
Our goal is to become a leading biopharmaceutical company focused on applying our proprietary drug delivery technology for the development of pharmaceutical products focusing on neuroendocrine and metabolic disorders. The key components of our strategy are to:
Build a diversified multi-asset pipeline of novel therapies. We intend to employ a value-driven strategy based on our proprietary technology platform to identify and develop product candidates for neuroendocrine and metabolic disorders including Central Nervous System (CNS) disorders and end stage diseases such as decompensated cirrhosis. We intend to focus on product candidates that we believe are differentiated, have attractive profiles, and address a clear unmet medical need that we can advance quickly and efficiently into late-stage development.
Advance LPCN 1148, a unique prodrug of androgen receptor agonist to manage end stage (decompensated) liver cirrhosis disease. We believe LPCN 1148, a novel prodrug of testosterone, could address a significant unmet medical need in patients with decompensated liver cirrhosis accompanied with muscle disorder such as secondary sarcopenia. Sarcopenia in male cirrhotic patients is known to be independently associated with poor outcomes including quality of life, increased decompensation events such as hepatic encephalopathy, increased hospital admissions, and increased mortality rate. We believe LPCN 1148 may be eligible for an orphan drug designation. Enrollment in a multi-center placebo-controlled phase 2 trial is currently ongoing.
Support our licensee in commercialization of our licensed oral TRT option. We believe the TRT market needs a differentiated, convenient oral option. We have exclusively licensed rights to TLANDO to Antares for commercialization of TLANDO in the US. We plan to support our licensee’s efforts to effectively enable the availability of TLANDO to patients in a timely manner, in addition to receiving milestone and royalty payments associated with TLANDO commercialization as agreed to in the Antares License Agreement.
Develop partnership(s) to continue the advancement of pipeline assets. We continuously strive to prioritize our resources in seeking co-development partnerships of our pipeline assets. We currently plan to explore partnering of LPCN 1144, our candidate for treatment of non-cirrhotic NASH, LPCN 1107, our candidate for prevention of pre-term birth, and LPCN 1111, a once-a-day therapy candidate for TRT.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenues from product sales and do not expect to do so until one of our product candidates receives approval from the FDA. Revenues to date have been generated substantially from license fees, royalty and milestone payments and research support from our licensees. Since our inception through December 31, 2021, we have generated $44.2 million in revenue under our various license and collaboration arrangements and from government grants. We have entered into the Antares license agreement with the potential for revenue from future milestones and royalties, but we may never generate revenues from any of our clinical or preclinical development programs or licensed products as we may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval or commercializing any of these product candidates.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits, stock-based compensation and related personnel costs, fees paid to external service providers such as contract research organizations and contract manufacturing organizations, contractual obligations for clinical development, clinical sites, manufacturing and scale-up for late-stage clinical trials, formulation of clinical drug supplies, and expenses associated with regulatory submissions. Research and development expenses also include an allocation of indirect costs, such as those for facilities, office expense, travel, and depreciation of equipment based on the ratio of direct labor hours for research and development personnel to total direct labor hours for all personnel. We expense research and development expenses as incurred. Since our inception, we have spent approximately $128.5 million in research and development expenses through December 31, 2021.
On December 8, 2020, we received tentative approval from the FDA regarding our NDA filed in February 2020 for TLANDO as a TRT in adult males for conditions associated with a deficiency of endogenous testosterone, also known as hypogonadism. In granting tentative approval, the FDA concluded that TLANDO has met all required quality, safety and efficacy standards necessary for approval. However, TLANDO has not received final approval and is not eligible for final approval to market in the U.S. until the expiration of the exclusivity period previously granted to Clarus with respect to Jatenzo®, which expires on March 27, 2022. On October 14, 2021, we entered into the Antares License Agreement with Antares, pursuant to which we granted to Antares an exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicensable right and license to develop and commercialize, upon final approval of TLANDO from the FDA, our TLANDO product with respect to TRT in the U.S. The Antares License Agreement also provides Antares with an option, exercisable on or before March 31, 2022, to license TLANDO XR. Under the terms of the Antares License Agreement, all future research and development activities for TLANDO will be conducted and paid for by Antares. Any further expenditures, if needed, are subject to numerous uncertainties regarding timing and cost to completion.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs as we develop our product candidates: ongoing phase 2 study with LPCN 1148, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1111, LPCN 1107 and NAS including LPCN 1154 and LPCN 2101.
In general, the cost of clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a project as a result of uncertainties in clinical development, including, among others:
● the number of sites included in the trials;
● the length of time required to enroll suitable subjects;
● the duration of subject follow-ups;
● the length of time required to collect, analyze and report trial results;
● the cost, timing and outcome of regulatory review; and
● potential changes by the FDA in clinical trial and NDA filing requirements.
We have also incurred significant manufacturing costs to prepare launch supplies for TLANDO. However, any additional expenditures required to prepare for a commercial launch of TLANDO, should it be approved, will be paid by Antares.
Future research and development expenditures are subject to numerous uncertainties regarding timing and cost to completion, including, among others:
● the timing and outcome of regulatory filings and FDA reviews and actions for product candidates;
● our dependence on third-party manufacturers for the production of satisfactory finished product for registration and launch should regulatory approval be obtained on any of our product candidates;
● the potential for future license or co-promote arrangements for our product candidates, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our future plans and capital requirements; and
● the effect on our product development activities of actions taken by the FDA or other regulatory authorities.
A change of outcome for any of these variables with respect to our product development candidates could mean a substantial change in the costs and timing associated with these efforts, will require us to raise additional capital, and may require us to reduce operations.
Given the stage of clinical development and the significant risks and uncertainties inherent in the clinical development, manufacturing and regulatory approval process, we are unable to estimate with any certainty the time or cost to complete the development of LPCN 1148, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1111, LPCN 1107, NAS including LPCN 1154 and LPCN 2101 and other product candidates. Clinical development timelines, the probability of success and development costs can differ materially from expectations and results from our clinical trials may not be favorable. If we are successful in progressing NAS, LPCN 1148, LPCN 1111, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1107, or other product candidates into later stage development, we will require additional capital. The amount and timing of our future research and development expenses for these product candidates will depend on the preclinical and clinical success of both our current development activities and potential development of new product candidates, as well as ongoing assessments of the commercial potential of such activities.
Summary of Research and Development Expense
We are conducting on-going clinical and regulatory activities with most of our product candidates. Additionally, we incur costs for our other research programs. The following table summarizes our research and development expenses:
We expect research and development expenses to increase in the future as we complete on-going clinical studies, including the LiFT Phase 2 OLE clinical study with LPCN 1144 and the Phase 2 study with LPCN 1148, and as we conduct future clinical studies with LPCN 1107 and our oral neuroactive steroids. However, if we are unable to raise additional capital, we may need to reduce research and development expenses in order to extend our ability to continue as a going concern.
Summary of General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related benefits, including stock-based compensation related to our executive, finance, business development, and support functions. Other general and administrative expenses include rent and utilities, travel expenses, professional fees for auditing, tax and legal services, litigation settlement and market research and market analytics.
General and administrative expenses also include expenses for the cost of preparing, filling and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims, including the patent interference and patent infringement lawsuits against Clarus.
We expect that general and administrative expenses will decrease in the future as we expect to incur decreased legal fees due to the global settlement agreement (“Global Agreement”) with Clarus. We expect that such decreases will be offset by other increases as we mature as a public company, including legal and consulting fees, accounting and audit fees, director fees, increased directors’ and officers’ insurance premiums, fees for investor relations services and enhanced business and accounting systems, litigation costs, professional fees and other costs. However, if we are unable to raise additional capital, we may need to further reduce general and administrative expenses in order to extend our ability to continue as a going concern.
Summary of Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities and interest expense incurred on our outstanding Loan and Security Agreement and losses (gains) on our warrant liability.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
We recognized license revenue of $16.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to no license revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. License revenue in 2021 primarily related to licensing fees, minimum royalties and the sale of finished goods inventory we received in accordance with the Antares Licensing Agreement for TLANDO which was signed on October 14, 2021. Additionally, we recognized $55,000 in license revenue in 2021 related to payments received from Spriaso under a licensing agreement in the cough and cold field.
Research and Development Expenses
We recorded research and development expenses of $7.7 million and $9.7 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. The decrease in research and development expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $3.6 million decrease in contract research organization expense and outside consulting costs related to the LPCN 1144 LiFT Phase 2 clinical study in NASH subjects, a $1.1 million decrease in costs associated with TLANDO and a $197,000 net decrease in personnel expense which was mainly due to a decrease in bonus and stock compensation expense offset by increases in salaries partially due to headcount increases, as well as decreases in other R&D expenses of 37,000. These decreases were offset by a $1.5 million increase in costs related to LPCN 1154, a $892,000 increase in costs associated with LPCN 1148 and a $460,000 increase in costs for LPCN 1107.
General and Administrative Expenses
We recorded general and administrative expenses of $5.3 million and $8.2 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020. The decrease in general and administrative expenses during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $2.5 million decrease in legal costs in 2021 as compared to 2020 relating to a decrease in the following legal activities: lawsuit filed against Clarus Therapeutics Inc. for patent infringement in April 2019 and the on-going class action lawsuit defense; and, a decrease of $584,000 in personnel costs mainly due a reduction in bonus and stock compensation expense. These decreases were offset by a $153,000 increase in corporate insurance expenses and a $10,000 increase in other general and administrative expenses.
Interest and Investment Income
The decrease in interest and investment income during the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to lower interest rates in 2021 compared to 2020, despite higher cash and marketable investment securities balances.
Interest Expense
The decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 is due to a decrease in interest expense on our Loan and Security Agreement with SVB, mainly as a result of lower principal balances in 2021 compared to 2020.
Unrealized Loss (Gain) on Warrant Liability
We recorded a $356,000 gain and a $2.9 million loss, respectively, on warrant liability during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 related to the change in the fair value of outstanding common stock warrants issued in the November 2019 Offering. The gain in 2021 was attributable to a decrease in the value of warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 due to a small decrease in the number of warrants outstanding, a decrease in our stock price, and a shorter term remaining on the outstanding warrants. The loss in 2020 was mainly attributable to an increase in the value of both warrants exercised during the year and warrants outstanding as of December 31, 2020 as compared to December 31, 2019 due to an increase in our stock price. There were 10,000 and 10,895,970 common stock warrants from the November 2019 Offering exercised during 2021 and 2020, respectively. The warrants are classified as a liability due to a provision contained within the warrant agreement which allows the warrant holder the option to elect to receive an amount of cash equal to the value of the warrants as determined in accordance with the Black-Scholes option pricing model with certain defined assumptions upon a change of control. The warrant liability will continue to fluctuate in the future based on inputs to the Black-Scholes model including our current stock price, the remaining life of the warrants, the volatility of our stock price, the risk-free interest rate and the number of common stock warrants outstanding.
Litigation Settlement
We recorded an expense of $4.0 million and zero, respectively, on litigation settlement during 2021 and 2020 related to the Global Agreement with Clarus to resolve all outstanding claims in the on-going intellectual property litigation between the two companies as well as the on-going interference proceeding between the two companies. Under the terms of the settlement, we agreed to pay Clarus $4.0 million payable as follows: $2.5 million immediately, $1.0 million on July 13, 2022 and $500,000 on July 13, 2023. No future royalties are owing from either party. Under the terms of the Global Agreement, Lipocine and Clarus have agreed to dismiss the Lipocine Inc. v Clarus Therapeutics, Inc., No 19-cv-622 (WCB) litigation presently pending in the U.S. District Court for the District of Delaware. Also, both parties have reached an agreement on the interference proceedings captioned Clarus Therapeutics, Inc. v. Lipocine Inc., Interference No. 106,128 presently pending in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, our operations have been primarily financed through sales of our equity securities, debt and payments received under our license and collaboration arrangements. We have devoted our resources to funding research and development programs, including discovery research, preclinical and clinical development activities. We have incurred operating losses in most years since our inception and we expect to continue to incur operating losses into the foreseeable future as we advance clinical development of LPCN 1111, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1148, LPCN 1107, oral neuroactive steriods and any other product candidate, including continued research efforts.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $46.6 million of unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and marketable investment securities compared to $19.7 million at December 31, 2020. Additionally, as of December 31, 2020 we had $5.0 million of restricted cash, which was required to be maintained as cash collateral under the SVB Loan and Security Agreement until TLANDO is approved by the FDA. However, on February 16, 2021, we amended the Loan and Security Agreement with SVB to, among other things, remove the cash collateral requirement.
On October 14, 2021, we entered into the Antares License Agreement with Antares, pursuant to which we granted to Antares an exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicensable right and license to develop and commercialize, upon final approval of TLANDO from the FDA, our TLANDO product with respect to TRT in the U.S. The Antares License Agreement also provides Antares with an option, exercisable on or before March 31, 2022, to license TLANDO XR. Upon execution of the Antares License Agreement, Antares paid to us an initial payment of $11.0 million. Antares has also agreed to make certain minimum royalty payments in the future and, since these future minimum royalties are variable consideration deemed to be probable, $4 million in revenue has been recognized in 2021 for the minimum royalties to be received in the future. In addition, Antares agreed to purchase finished goods manufactured by Lipocine in anticipation of commercial scale-up for approximately $1 million. Antares will also make additional payments of $5.0 million to us on each of January 1, 2025 and January 1, 2026, provided that certain conditions are satisfied. We are also eligible to receive milestone payments of up to $160.0 million in the aggregate, depending on the achievement of certain sales milestones in a single calendar year with respect to all products licensed by Antares under the Antares License Agreement. In addition, upon commercialization, we will receive tiered royalty payments at rates ranging from percentages in the mid-teens to up to 20% of net sales of TLANDO in the United States, subject to certain minimum royalty obligations. If Antares exercises its option to license TLANDO XR, we will be entitled to an additional payment of $4.0 million, as well as development milestone payments of up to $35.0 million in the aggregate and tiered royalty payments at rates ranging from percentages in the mid-teens to 20% of net sales of TLANDO XR in the United States. Our ability to realize benefits from the Antares License Agreement, including milestone and royalty payments, is subject to a number of risks. We may not realize milestone or royalty payments in anticipated amounts, or at all.
On January 28, 2021, we completed a public offering of securities registered under an effective registration statement filed pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (“January 2021 Offering”). The gross proceeds from the January 2021 Offering were approximately $28.7 million, before deducting underwriter fees and other offering expenses of $1.9 million. In the January 2021 Offering, we sold 16,428,571 shares of our common stock.
On April 21, 2020, we entered into a loan (the “Loan”) from SVB in the aggregate amount of $234,000, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program (the “PPP”) under Division A, Title I of the CARES Act, which was enacted March 27, 2020. The Loan, which was in the form of a note dated April 21, 2020, originally matured on April 21, 2022, and bears interest at a rate of 1.0% per annum, payable monthly commencing on November 21, 2020. Under the terms of the PPP, certain amounts of the Loan may be forgiven if they are used for qualifying expenses as described in the CARES Act. On November 2, 2020, we were notified by the Small Business Administration that our PPP Loan had been forgiven.
On February 27, 2020, we completed a registered direct offering of securities registered under an effective registration statement filed pursuant to the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (“February 2020 Offering”). The gross proceeds from the February 2020 Offering were approximately $6.0 million, before deducting placement agent fees and other offering expenses of $347,000. In the February 2020 Offering, the Company sold 10,084,034 Class A Units, with each Class A Unit consisting of one share of common stock and a one-half of one common warrant to purchase one share of common stock, at a price of $0.595 per Class A Unit. The common stock warrants were immediately exercisable at an exercise price of $0.53 per share, subject to adjustment, and expire on February 27, 2025. By their terms, however, the common stock warrants cannot be exercised at any time that the common stock warrant holder would beneficially own, after such exercise, more than 4.99% (or, at the election of the holder, 9.99%) of the shares of common stock then outstanding after giving effect to such exercise.
On January 5, 2018, we entered into the Loan and Security Agreement with SVB pursuant to which SVB agreed to lend us $10.0 million. The principal borrowed under the Loan and Security Agreement bears interest at a rate equal to the Prime Rate, as reported in money rates section of The Wall Street Journal or any successor publication representing the rate of interest per annum then in effect, plus one percent per annum, which interest is payable monthly. Additionally on April 1, 2020, we entered into a Deferral Agreement with SVB. Under the Deferral Agreement, principal repayments were deferred by six months and we were only required to make monthly interest payments during the deferral period. The Loan matures on June 1, 2022. Previously, we were only required to make monthly interest payments until December 31, 2018, following which we also made equal monthly payments of principal and interest until the signing of the Deferral Agreement. We will also be required to pay an additional final payment at maturity equal to $650,000 (the “Final Payment Charge”). At our option, we may prepay all amounts owed under the Loan and Security Agreement (including all accrued and unpaid interest and the Final Payment Charge). In connection with the Loan and Security Agreement, we granted to SVB a security interest in substantially all of our assets now owned or hereafter acquired, excluding intellectual property and certain other assets. In addition, as TLANDO was not approved by the FDA by May 31, 2018, we were required to maintain $5.0 million of cash collateral at SVB until such time as TLANDO is approved by the FDA. However, on February 16, 2021, we amended the Loan and Security Agreement with SVB to, among other things, remove the financial trigger and financial trigger release event provisions requiring us to maintain a minimum cash collateral value and collateral pledge thereof. While any amounts are outstanding under the Loan and Security Agreement, we are subject to a number of affirmative and negative covenants, including covenants regarding dispositions of property, business combinations or acquisitions, incurrence of additional indebtedness and transactions with affiliates, among other customary covenants. The credit facility also includes events of default, the occurrence and continuation of which could cause interest to be charged at the rate that is otherwise applicable plus 5.0% and would provide SVB, as collateral agent, with the right to exercise remedies against us and the collateral securing the credit facility, including foreclosure against the property securing the credit facilities, including our cash. These events of default include, among other things, any failure by us to pay principal or interest due under the credit facility, a breach of certain covenants under the credit facility, the Company’s insolvency, a material adverse change, and one or more judgments against us in an amount greater than $100,000 individually or in the aggregate.
On March 6, 2017, we entered into the Sales Agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. (“Cantor”) pursuant to which we may issue and sell, from time to time, shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to the amount we have registered on an effective registration statement pursuant to which the offering is being made. We currently have registered up to $50.0 million for sale under the Sales Agreement, pursuant to our Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-250072) (the “Form S-3”), through Cantor as our sales agent. Cantor may sell our common stock by any method permitted by law deemed to be an “at the market offering” as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, including sales made directly on or through the NASDAQ Capital Market or any other existing trade market for our common stock, in negotiated transactions at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to prevailing market prices, or any other method permitted by law. Cantor uses its commercially reasonable efforts consistent with its normal trading and sales practices and applicable law and regulations to sell these shares. We pay Cantor 3.0% of the aggregate gross proceeds from each sale of shares under the Sales Agreement. We have also provided Cantor with customary indemnification rights.
The shares of our common stock sold under the Sales Agreement are sold and issued pursuant to our Form S-3, which was previously declared effective by the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the related prospectus and one or more prospectus supplements.
We are not obligated to make any sales of our common stock under the 2020 Sales Agreement. The offering of our common stock pursuant to the 2020 Sales Agreement will terminate upon the termination of the 2020 Sales Agreement as permitted therein. We and Cantor may each terminate the 2020 Sales Agreement at any time upon ten days’ prior notice.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold 1,811,238 shares of our common stock pursuant to our current Registration Statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-250072), resulting in net proceeds of approximately $3.4 million under the sales agreement which is net of $112,000 in expenses consisting of commissions paid to Cantor in connection with these sales and other offering and accounting costs. As of December 31, 2021, we had $41.2 million available for sale under the Sales Agreement.
We believe that our existing capital resources, together with interest thereon, will be sufficient to meet our projected operating requirements through at least March 31, 2023 which include on-going clinical studies for LPCN 1148, LPCN 1154, LPCN 2101, and future clinical studies for LPCN 1144, LPCN 1107 and possible other oral neuroactive steroids, compliance with regulatory requirements, and satisfaction of our obligations under the settlement agreement with Clarus. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect if additional activities are performed by us including new clinical studies for LPCN 1111, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1148, LPCN 1107 and oral neuroactive steroids. While we believe we have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to fund our projected operating requirements through at least March 31, 2023, we will need to raise additional capital at some point through the equity or debt markets or through additional out-licensing activities, either before or after March 31, 2023, to support our operations. If we are unsuccessful in raising additional capital, our ability to continue as a going concern will be limited. Further, our operating plan may change, and we may need additional funds to meet operational needs and capital requirements for product development, regulatory compliance and clinical trial activities sooner than planned. In addition, our capital resources may be consumed more rapidly if we pursue additional clinical studies for LPCN 1111, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1148, LPCN 1107 and oral neuroactive steroids. Conversely, our capital resources could last longer if we reduce expenses, reduce the number of activities currently contemplated under our operating plan or if we terminate, modify or suspend on-going clinical studies. We can raise capital pursuant to the Sales Agreement but may choose not to issue common stock if our market price is too low to justify such sales in our discretion. In addition, we currently have 5,223,779 unissued and unreserved shares available for issuance at December 31, 2021. Without sufficient shares available for issuance, our ability to raise capital through sales of equity, including under the Sales Agreement, is limited. There are numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development and, subject to approval by the FDA, commercialization of our product candidates. There are numerous risks and uncertainties impacting our ability to enter into collaborations with third parties to participate in the development and potential commercialization of our product candidates, and the potential benefits to us of such arrangements, including the Antares License Agreement. Licensees of our product candidates, including Antares, may not successfully commercialize our products and, as a result, we may not receive anticipated royalty or other payments under such arrangements. Additionally, TLANDO is not eligible for final FDA approval until March 28, 2022 and, therefore, we do not expect to receive any royalty or milestone payments until after such time, if any such payments will be received at all. We are unable to precisely estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenditures associated with our anticipated or unanticipated clinical studies and ongoing development efforts. All of these factors affect our need for additional capital resources. To fund future operations, we will need to ultimately raise additional capital and our requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
● the scope, rate of progress, results and cost of our clinical studies, preclinical testing and other related activities for all of our product candidates, including LPCN 1111, LPCN 1144, LPCN 1148, LPCN 1107 and oral neuroactive steriods;
● the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies, and establishing commercial supplies, of our product candidates and any products that we may develop;
● the cost and timing of establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities, if any;
● the terms and timing of any collaborative, licensing, settlement and other arrangements that we may establish;
● the number and characteristics of product candidates that we pursue;
● the cost, timing and outcomes of regulatory approvals;
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales, profit sharing or royalties, if any, from our potential products;
● the cost of preparing, filing, prosecuting, defending and enforcing any patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products or technologies, although we currently have no commitments or agreements relating to any of these types of transactions; and
● the extent to which we grow significantly in the number of employees or the scope of our operations.
Funding may not be available to us on favorable terms, or at all. Also, market conditions may prevent us from accessing the debt and equity capital markets, including sales of our common stock through the Sales Agreement. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing when needed, we may have to delay, reduce the scope of or suspend one or more of our clinical studies, research and development programs or, if any of our product candidates receive approval from the FDA, commercialization efforts. We may seek to raise any necessary additional capital through a combination of public or private equity offerings, including the Sales Agreement, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, licensing arrangements and other marketing and distribution arrangements. These arrangements may not be available to us or available on terms favorable to us. To the extent that we raise additional capital through marketing and distribution arrangements, other collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our product candidates, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we do raise additional capital through public or private equity offerings, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences, warrants or other terms that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights or further complicate raising additional capital in the future. If we raise additional capital through debt financing, we may be subject to covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we are unable, for any reason, to raise needed capital, we will have to reduce costs, delay research and development programs, liquidate assets, dispose of rights, commercialize products or product candidates earlier than planned or on less favorable terms than desired or reduce or cease operations.
Sources and Uses of Cash
The following table provides a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, net cash used in operating activities was $4.4 million and $15.3 million, respectively.
Net cash used in operating activities during 2021 and 2020 was primarily attributable to cash outlays to support on-going operations, including research and development expenses and general and administrative expenses. During 2021 and 2020, we were performing activities related to the LPCN 1144 LiFT Phase 2 paired biopsy clinical study. During 2021, we were also conducting a Phase 2 clinical trial with LPCN 1148 and we entered into the Global Agreement with Clarus. During 2020, we were also performing activities around the submission of the TLANDO NDA.
Net Cash Used In/Provided by Investing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $43.8 million compared to cash provided by investing activities in 2020 of $3.9 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during 2021 was primarily the result of purchasing marketable investment securities, net, of $43.8 million. Net cash provided by investing activities in 2020 was primarily the result of utilizing marketable securities, net, of $3.9 million. There were $8,000 and zero capital expenditures for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
During the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $26.9 million and $20.9 million, respectively.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2021 was attributable to the net proceeds from the sale of 16,428,571 shares of common stock pursuant to January 2021 Offering resulting in net proceeds of $26.8 million and $3.4 million in proceeds from the sale of 1,811,238 shares of common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement with Cantor, offset by $3.3 million in debt principal repayments under the SVB Loan and Security Agreement.
Net cash provided by financing activities during 2020 was primarily attributable to $9.0 million in proceeds from the sale of 6,576,300 shares of commons stock pursuant to the ATM Offering, $7.7 million in proceeds from the exercise of warrants, $5.7 million in proceeds from the sale of 10,084,034 shares of common stock pursuant to the February 2020 Offering and $234,000 in loan proceeds under the Payment Protection Program, offset by $1.7 million in debt principal repayments under the SVB Loan and Security Agreement.
Employee stock option exercises provided approximately $7,000 of cash during 2021 and there were no employee stock option exercises during 2020. Proceeds from the exercise of employee stock options vary from period to period based upon, among other factors, fluctuations in the market price of our common stock relative to the exercise price of such options.
Contractual Commitments and Contingencies
Long-Term Debt Obligations and Interest on Debt
On January 5, 2018, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement with SVB pursuant to which SVB agreed to lend us $10.0 million. The principal borrowed under the Loan and Security Agreement bears interest at a rate equal to the Prime Rate plus one percent per annum, which interest is payable monthly. The loan matures on June 1, 2022 and we are required to make equal monthly payments of principal and interest for the remaining term of the loan beginning on November 1, 2020 although there was a principal deferment period of six months beginning on April 1, 2020 through October 31, 2020 due to COVID-19. We will also be required to pay the $650,000 Final Payment Charge at maturity.
Purchase Obligations
We enter into contracts and issue purchase orders in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations for clinical trials and clinical and commercial supply manufacturing and with vendors for preclinical research studies, research supplies and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice and are cancellable obligations.
Operating Leases
In August 2004, we entered into an agreement to lease our facility in Salt Lake City, Utah consisting of office and laboratory space which serves as our corporate headquarters. On January 24, 2022, we modified and extended the lease through February 28, 2023.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”). In preparing our financial statements, we are required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. We have identified the following accounting policies that we believe require application of management’s most subjective judgments, often requiring the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our actual results could differ from these estimates and such differences could be material.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 of our annual financial statements included in this filing, we believe the following accounting policies to be critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (Topic 606) with amendments in 2015 (ASU 2015-14) and 2016 (ASU 2016-8, ASU 2016-10, ASU 2016-12 and ASU 2016-20). The updated standard is a new comprehensive revenue recognition model that requires revenue to be recognized in a manner that depicts the transfer of goods or services to a customer at an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be received in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance also requires disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers. We adopted this pronouncement effective January 1, 2017. We recognized revenue of $16.1 million in 2021 under agreements with Antares Pharma, Inc. and Spriaso LLC, and no revenue in 2020.
We may provide research and development services under collaboration arrangements to advance the development of jointly owned products. We record the expenses incurred and reimbursed on a net basis in research and development expense.
As of December 31, 2021, we do not have any active collaboration agreements except for an agreement to provide joint research and development services through January 23, 2015. This agreement was assigned to Spriaso as is further described in Note 12 “Agreement with Spriaso, LLC” of this form 10-K.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our expense accruals for contract research, contract manufacturing and other contract services are based on estimates of the fees associated with services provided by the contracting organizations. Payments under some of the contracts we have with such parties depend on factors such as successful enrollment of patients, site initiation and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If possible, we obtain information regarding unbilled services directly from these service providers. However, we may be required to estimate these services based on other information available to us. If we underestimate or overestimate the activity or fees associated with a study or service at a given point in time, adjustments to research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods. Subsequent changes in estimates may result in a material change in our accruals.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for grants of stock option awards, restricted stock units and restricted stock under our Incentive Plan to employees, nonemployees and nonemployee members of our board of directors based on the grant-date fair value of those awards. The grant-date fair value of an award is generally recognized as compensation expense over the award’s requisite service period. In addition, we have granted performance-based stock option awards and restricted stock grants, which vest based upon our satisfying certain performance conditions. Potential compensation cost, measured on the grant date, related to these performance options will be recognized only if, and when, we estimate that these options will vest, which is based on whether we consider the options’ performance conditions to be probable of attainment. Our estimates of the number of performance-based options that will vest will be revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods.
We use the Black-Scholes model to compute the estimated fair value of stock option awards. Using this model, fair value is calculated based on assumptions with respect to (i) expected volatility of our common stock price, (ii) the periods of time over which employees and members of the board of directors are expected to hold their options prior to exercise (expected term), (iii) expected dividend yield on the common stock, and (iv) risk-free interest rates. Stock-based compensation expense also includes an estimate, which is made at the time of grant, of the number of awards that are expected to be forfeited. This estimate is revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
As of December 31, 2021, there was $1.4 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to unvested share-based compensation arrangements granted under the Company’s stock option plan.
Warrant Liability
In connection with the November 2019 public offering, we issued warrants to purchase common stock. The warrants require us to pay such holders an amount of cash in the event of a fundamental transaction, as defined in the warrant agreement. As the cash payment is at the option of the warrant holder, we account for the common stock warrants as a liability, which is adjusted to fair value each reporting period as well as upon exercise of such warrants. The Company estimates the fair value of the warrant liability based on a hypothetical payout associated with a fundamental transaction. The fair value estimate utilizes a pricing model and unobservable inputs. Unlike the fair value of other assets and liabilities which are readily observable and therefore more easily independently corroborated, the warrants are not actively traded, and fair value is determined based on significant judgments regarding models, unobservable inputs and valuation methodologies.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the warrant liability was $796,000 and $1.2 million, respectively.
Accounting Standards Issued Not Adopted
Refer to Note 13 in “Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements” for a discussion of new accounting standards.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
None.