ITEM 7.  MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included herein. Among other things, those financial statements include more detailed information regarding the basis of presentation for the following information. The financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP and are presented in U.S. dollars unless otherwise indicated. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under "Item 1A - Risk Factors," "Forward-Looking Statements" and elsewhere in this report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a Marshall Islands corporation, headquartered in the United States, focused on owning and operating VLGCs. Our fleet currently consists of twenty-two VLGCs, including nineteen new fuel-efficient 84,000 cbm ECO VLGCs, one 82,000 cbm VLGC, and two time chartered-in VLGCs.
Our nineteen ECO VLGCs, which incorporate fuel efficiency and emission-reducing technologies and certain custom features, were acquired by us for an aggregate purchase price of $1.4 billion and delivered to us between July 2014 and February 2016, seventeen of which were delivered during calendar year 2015 or later.
On April 1, 2015, Dorian and Phoenix began operations of the Helios Pool, which entered into pool participation agreements for the purpose of establishing and operating, as charterer, under a variable rate time charter to be entered into with owners or disponent owners of VLGCs, a commercial pool of VLGCs whereby revenues and expenses are shared. The vessels entered into the Helios Pool may operate either in the spot market, pursuant to COAs or on time charters of two years' duration or less. As of May 27, 2022, twenty of our twenty-two VLGCs, including the two time chartered-in vessels, were deployed in the Helios Pool.
Our customers, either directly or through the Helios Pool, include or have included global energy companies such as Exxon Mobil Corp., Chevron Corp., China International United Petroleum & Chemicals Co., Ltd., Royal Dutch Shell plc, Equinor ASA, Total S.A., and Sunoco LP, commodity traders such as Glencore plc, Itochu Corporation, Bayegan Group, Vilma Oil SL, and the Vitol Group and importers such as E1 Corp., Indian Oil Corporation, SK Gas Co. Ltd., Astomos Energy Corporation, and Oriental Energy Company Ltd. or subsidiaries of the foregoing. For the year ended March 31, 2022, the Helios Pool accounted for 90% of our total revenues. No other individual charterer accounted for more than 10%. Within the Helios Pool, no charterers represented more than 10% of net pool revenues-related party. For the year ended March 31, 2021, the Helios Pool accounted for 93% of our total revenues. No other individual charterer accounted for more than 10%. Within the Helios Pool, one charterer represented 16% of net pool revenues-related party. For the year ended March 31, 2020, the Helios Pool accounted for 89% of our total revenues. No other individual charterer accounted for more than 10%. Within the Helios Pool, two charterers represented 12% and 11%, respectively of net pool revenues-related party. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors-We operate exclusively in the LPG shipping industry. Due to the general lack of industry diversification, adverse developments in the LPG shipping industry may adversely affect our business, financial condition and operating results” and “Item 1A. Risk Factors-We expect to be dependent on a limited number of customers for a material part of our revenues, and failure of such customers to meet their obligations could cause us to suffer losses or negatively impact our results of operations and cash flows.”
We continue to pursue a balanced chartering strategy by employing our vessels on a mix of multi-year time charters, some of which may include a profit-sharing component, shorter-term time charters, spot market voyages and COAs. Two of our vessels are currently on fixed time charters outside of the Helios Pool. See “Item 1. Business-Our Fleet” above for more information.
Recent Developments
Prepayment of the 2015 AR Facility
On April 21, 2022, we prepaid $25.0 million of the 2015 AR Facility’s then outstanding principal using cash on hand, consisting of $11.1 million of the commercial tranche, $11.1 million of the KEXIM direct tranche, and $2.8 million of the Korea Trade Insurance Corporation (“K-sure”) insured tranche.
Dividend
On May 5, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $2.50 per share of the Company’s common stock to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on May 16, 2022, totaling $100.3 million. We expect to pay $99.7 million on or about June 2, 2022 and the remaining $0.6 million will be deferred until certain shares of restricted stock vest.
Cougar Japanese Financing
On May 19, 2022, we refinanced a 2015-built VLGC, the Cougar, pursuant to a memorandum of agreement and a bareboat charter agreement. In connection therewith, we transferred the Cougar to the buyer for $70.0 million and, as part of the agreement, Dorian Shanghai LPG Transport LLC, our wholly-owned subsidiary, bareboat-chartered the vessel back for a period of 10 years, with purchase options from the end of year three onwards with a mandatory buyout by 2032. We continue to technically manage, commercially charter, and operate the Cougar. We received $50.0 million in cash as part of the transaction with $20.0 million to be retained by the buyer as a deposit (the “Cougar Deposit”), which can be used by us towards the repurchase of the vessel either pursuant to our exercise of one of the early buyout options or at the end of the 10-year bareboat charter term. The refinancing proceeds of $50.0 million were used to prepay $20.0 million of the 2015 AR Facility’s then outstanding principal amount. The remaining proceeds will be used to pay legal fees associated with this transaction and for general corporate purposes. This transaction will be treated as a financing transaction and the Cougar will continue to be recorded as an asset on our balance sheet. This debt financing has a floating interest rate of three-month SOFR plus a margin of 2.45%, not including financing costs of $0.3 million, monthly broker commission fees of 1.25% over the 10-year term on interest and principal payments made, broker commission fees of 0.5% on the exercise of the purchase option or obligation excluding the Cougar Deposit, and a quarterly fixed straight-line principal obligation of approximately $0.9 million over the 10-year term with a balloon payment of $14.0 million.
Vessel Deployment-Spot Voyages, Time Charters, COAs, and Pooling Arrangements
We seek to employ our vessels in a manner that maximizes fleet utilization and earnings upside through our chartering strategy in line with our goal of maximizing shareholder value and returning capital to shareholders when appropriate, taking into account fluctuations in freight rates in the market and our own views on the direction of those rates in the future. As of May 27, 2022, twenty of our twenty-two VLGCs, including the two time chartered-in vessels, were employed in the Helios Pool, which includes time charters with a term of less than two years.
A spot market voyage charter is generally a contract to carry a specific cargo from a load port to a discharge port for an agreed upon freight per ton of cargo or a specified total amount. Under spot market voyage charters, we pay voyage expenses such as port and fuel costs. A time charter is generally a contract to charter a vessel for a fixed period of time at a set daily or monthly rate. Under time charters, the charterer pays voyage expenses such as port and fuel costs. Vessels operating on time charters provide more predictable cash flows, but can yield lower profit margins than vessels operating in the spot market during periods characterized by favorable market conditions. Vessels operating in the spot market generate revenues that are less predictable but may enable us to capture increased profit margins during periods of improvements in the freight market although we are exposed to the risk of a decline in the freight market and lower utilization. Pools generally consist of a number of vessels which may be owned by a number of different ship owners which operate as a single marketing entity in an effort to produce freight efficiencies. Pools typically employ experienced commercial charterers and operators who have close working relationships with customers and brokers while technical management is typically the responsibility of each ship owner. Under pool arrangements, vessels typically enter the pool under a time charter agreement whereby the cost of bunkers and port expenses are borne by the charterer (i.e., the pool)
and operating costs, including crews, maintenance and insurance are typically paid by the owner of the vessel. Pools, in return, typically negotiate charters with customers primarily in the spot market. Since the members of a pool typically share in the revenue generated by the entire group of vessels in the pool, and since pools operate primarily in the spot market, including the pool in which we participate, the revenue earned by vessels placed in spot market related pools is subject to the fluctuations of the spot market and the ability of the pool manager to effectively employ its fleet. We believe that vessel pools can provide cost-effective commercial management activities for a group of similar class vessels and potentially result in lower waiting times and higher earnings.
COAs relate to the carriage of multiple cargoes over the same or several routes at pre-agreed terms, volumes and periods and enables the COA holder to nominate and lift cargoes, without controlling tonnage themselves or having their own vessel in position. COAs are usually based on voyage terms, where all of the vessel's operating, voyage and capital costs are borne by the ship owner.
On April 1, 2015, Dorian and Phoenix began operation of the Helios Pool, which is a pool of VLGC vessels. We believe that the operation of certain of our VLGCs in this pool allows us to achieve better market coverage and utilization. Vessels entered into the Helios Pool are commercially managed jointly by Dorian LPG (DK) ApS, our wholly-owned subsidiary, and Phoenix. The members of the Helios Pool share in the net pool revenues generated by the entire group of vessels in the pool, weighted according to certain technical vessel characteristics, and net pool revenues (see Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included herein) are distributed as variable rate time charter hire to each participant. The vessels entered into the Helios Pool may operate either in the spot market, COAs, or on time charters of two years' duration or less. As of May 27, 2022, the Helios Pool operated twenty-two VLGCs, including twenty vessels from our fleet and two Phoenix vessels.
For further description of our business, please see “Item 1. Business” above.
Important Financial and Operational Terms and Concepts
We use a variety of financial and operational terms and concepts in the evaluation of our business and operations including the following:
Vessel Revenues. Our revenues are driven primarily by the number of vessels in our fleet, the number of days during which our vessels operate and the daily rates that our vessels earn under our charters, which, in turn, are affected by a number of factors, including levels of demand and supply in the LPG shipping industry; the age, condition and specifications of our vessels; the duration of our charters; the timing of when any profit-sharing arrangements are earned; the amount of time that we spend positioning our vessels; the availability of our vessels, which is related to the amount of time that our vessels spend in drydock undergoing repairs and the amount of time required to perform necessary maintenance or upgrade work; and other factors affecting rates for LPG vessels.
We generate revenue by providing seaborne transportation services to customers pursuant to three types of contractual relationships:
Pooling Arrangements. As from April 1, 2015, we began operation of the Helios Pool. Net pool revenues-related party for each vessel is determined in accordance with the profit-sharing terms specified within the pool agreement for the Helios Pool. In particular, the pool manager aggregates the revenues and voyage expenses of all of the pool participants and Helios Pool general and administrative expenses and distributes the net earnings to participants based on:
● pool points (vessel attributes such as cargo carrying capacity, fuel consumption, and speed are taken into consideration); and
● number of days the vessel was on-hire in the Helios Pool in the period.
For the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, approximately 89.8%, 92.6% and 89.4% of our revenue, respectively, was generated through the Helios Pool as net pool revenues-related party.
Voyage Charters. A voyage charter, or spot charter, is a contract for transportation of a specified cargo between two or more designated ports. This type of charter is priced on a current or "spot" market rate, typically on a price per ton of product carried. Under voyage charters, we are responsible for all of the voyage expenses in addition to providing the crewing and other vessel operating services. Revenues for voyage charters are more volatile as they are typically tied to prevailing market rates at the time of the voyage. Our gross revenue under voyage charters is generally higher than under comparable time charters so as to compensate us for bearing all voyage expenses. As a result, our revenue and voyage expenses may vary significantly depending on our mix of time charters and voyage charters. None of our revenue was generated pursuant to voyage charters from our VLGCs not in the Helios Pool for the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020.
Time Charters. A time charter is a contract under which a vessel is chartered for a defined period of time at a fixed daily or monthly rate. Under time charters, we are responsible for providing crewing and other vessel operating services, the cost of which is intended to be covered by the fixed rate, while the customer is responsible for substantially all of the voyage expenses, including bunker fuel consumption, port expenses and canal tolls. LPG is typically transported under a time charter arrangement, with terms ranging up to seven years. In addition, we may also have profit-sharing arrangements with some of our customers that provide for additional payments above a floor monthly rate (usually up to an agreed ceiling) based on the actual, average daily rate quoted by the Baltic Exchange for VLGCs on the benchmark Ras Tanura-Chiba route over an agreed time period converted to a time charter equivalent (“TCE”) monthly rate. For the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, approximately 8.2%, 6.2% and 10.2%, respectively, of our revenue was generated pursuant to time charters from our VLGCs not in the Helios Pool.
Other Revenues, net. Other revenues, net represent income from charterers, including the Helios Pool, relating to reimbursement of expenses such as costs for security guards and war risk insurance for voyages operating in high-risk areas. For the years ended March 31, 2022, 2021, and 2020, approximately 2.0%, 1.2% and 0.4%, respectively, of our revenue was generated pursuant to other revenues, net.
Of these revenue streams, revenue generated from voyage charter agreements is further described in our revenue recognition policy as described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements. Revenue generated from pools and time charters is accounted for as revenue earned under recently adopted accounting guidance to update the requirements of financial accounting and reporting for lessees and lessors as described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Calendar Days. We define calendar days as the total number of days in a period during which each vessel in our fleet was owned or operated pursuant to a bareboat charter. Calendar days are an indicator of the size of the fleet over a period and affect both the amount of revenues and the amount of expenses that are recorded during that period.
Time Chartered-in Days. We define time chartered-in days as the aggregate number of days in a period during which we time chartered-in vessels from third parties. Time chartered-in days are an indicator of the size of the fleet over a period and affect both the amount of revenues and the amount of charter hire expenses that are recorded during that period.
Available Days. We define available days as the sum of calendar days and time chartered-in days (collectively representing our commercially-managed vessels) less aggregate off hire days associated with major repairs and scheduled maintenance, which include drydockings, vessel upgrades or special or intermediate surveys. We use available days to measure the aggregate number of days in a period that our vessels should be capable of generating revenues.
Operating Days. We define operating days as available days less the aggregate number of days that the commercially-managed vessels in our fleet are off-hire for any reason other than major repairs and scheduled maintenance. We use operating days to measure the number of days in a period that our operating vessels are on hire.
Drydocking. We must periodically drydock each of our vessels for any major repairs and maintenance and for inspection of the underwater parts of the vessel that cannot be performed while the vessels are operating and for any modifications to comply with industry certification or governmental requirements. The classification societies provide
guidelines applicable to LPG vessels relating to extended intervals for drydocking. Generally, we are required to drydock a vessel under 15 years of age once every five years unless an extension of the drydocking to seven and one-half years is granted by the classification society and the vessel is not older than 20 years of age. We capitalize costs directly associated with the drydockings that extend the life of the vessel and amortize these costs on a straight-line basis over the period through the date the next survey is scheduled to become due under the "Deferral" method permitted under U.S. GAAP. Costs incurred during the drydocking period which relate to routine repairs and maintenance are expensed as incurred. The number of drydockings undertaken in a given period and the nature of the work performed determine the level of drydocking expenditures.
Fleet Utilization. We calculate fleet utilization by dividing the number of operating days during a period by the number of available days during that period. An increase in non-scheduled off-hire days, including waiting time, would reduce our operating days, and therefore, our fleet utilization. We use fleet utilization to measure our ability to efficiently find suitable employment for our vessels.
Time Charter Equivalent Rate. TCE rate is a measure of the average daily revenue performance of a vessel. TCE rate is a shipping industry performance measure used primarily to compare period-to-period changes in a shipping company’s performance despite changes in the mix of charter types (such as time charters, voyage charters) under which the vessels may be employed between the periods. Our method of calculating TCE rate is to divide revenue net of voyage expenses by operating days for the relevant time period.
Voyage Expenses. Voyage expenses are all expenses unique to a particular voyage, including bunker fuel consumption, port expenses, canal fees, charter hire commissions, war risk insurance and security costs. Voyage expenses are typically paid by us under voyage charters and by the charterer under time charters, including our VLGCs chartered to the Helios Pool. Accordingly, we generally only incur voyage expenses for our own account when performing voyage charters or during repositioning voyages between time charters for which no cargo is available or travelling to or from drydocking. We generally bear all voyage expenses under voyage charters and, as such, voyage expenses are generally greater under voyage charters than time charters. As a result, our voyage expenses may vary significantly depending on our mix of time charters and voyage charters.
Charter Hire Expenses. We time charter hire certain vessels from third-party owners or operators for a contracted period and rate in order to charter the vessels to our customers. Charter hire expenses include vessel operating lease expense incurred to charter-in these vessels.
Vessel Operating Expenses. Vessel operating expenses are expenses that are not unique to a specific voyage. Vessel operating expenses are paid by us under each of our charter types. Vessel operating expenses include crew wages and related costs, the costs for lubricants, insurance, expenses relating to repairs and maintenance, the cost of spares and consumable stores, tonnage taxes and other miscellaneous expenses. Our vessel operating expenses will increase with the expansion of our fleet and are subject to change because of higher crew costs, higher insurance premiums, unexpected repair expenses and general inflation. Furthermore, we expect maintenance costs will increase as our vessels age and during periods of drydock.
Daily Vessel Operating Expenses. Daily vessel operating expenses are calculated by dividing vessel operating expenses by calendar days for the relevant time period.
Depreciation and Amortization. We depreciate our vessels on a straight-line basis using an estimated useful life of 25 years from initial delivery from the shipyard and after considering estimated salvage values.
We amortize the cost of deferred drydocking expenditures on a straight-line basis over the period through the date the next drydocking/special survey is scheduled to become due.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses principally consist of the costs incurred in the corporate administration of the vessel and non-vessel owning subsidiaries. We have granted restricted stock awards to certain of our officers, directors, employees and non-employee consultants that vest over various periods (see Note 13 to our consolidated financial statements included herein). Granting of restricted stock results in an increase in
expenses. Compensation expense for employees is measured at the grant date based on the estimated fair value of the awards and is recognized over the vesting period and for nonemployees is re-measured at the end of each reporting period based on the estimated fair value of the awards on that date and is recognized over the vesting period.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP, which requires us to make estimates in the application of our accounting policies based on our best assumptions, judgments and opinions. On a regular basis, management reviews the accounting policies, assumptions, estimates and judgments to ensure that our consolidated financial statements are presented fairly and in accordance with U.S. GAAP. However, because future events and their effects cannot be determined with certainty, actual results could differ from our assumptions and estimates, and such differences could be material. Accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial statements because they inherently involve significant judgments and uncertainties. For a description of our material accounting policies, see Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included herein.
Vessel Depreciation. The cost of our vessels less their estimated residual value is depreciated on a straight-line basis over the vessels' estimated useful lives. We estimate the useful life of each of our vessels to be 25 years from the date the vessel was originally delivered from the shipyard. Based on the current market and the types of vessels we have in our fleet, the residual values of our vessels are based upon a value of approximately $400 per lightweight ton. An increase in the useful life of our vessels or in their residual value would have the effect of decreasing the annual depreciation charge and extending it into later periods. An increase in the useful life of a vessel may occur as a result of superior vessel maintenance performed, favorable ocean going and weather conditions the vessel is subjected to, superior quality of the shipbuilding or yard, or high freight market rates, which result in owners scrapping the vessels later due to the attractive cash flows. A decrease in the useful life of our vessels or in their residual value would have the effect of increasing the annual depreciation charge and possibly result in an impairment charge. A decrease in the useful life of a vessel may occur as a result of poor vessel maintenance performed, harsh ocean going and weather conditions the vessel is subjected to, or poor quality of the shipbuilding or yard. If regulations place limitations over the ability of a vessel to trade on a worldwide basis, we will adjust the vessel's useful life to end at the date such regulations preclude such vessel's further commercial use.
Impairment of vessels. We review our vessels for impairment when events or circumstances indicate the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. In addition, we compare independent appraisals to our carrying value for indicators of impairment to our vessels. When such indicators are present, an asset is tested for recoverability by comparing the estimate of future undiscounted net operating cash flows expected to be generated by the use of the asset over its remaining useful life and its eventual disposition to its carrying amount. An impairment charge is recognized if the carrying value is in excess of the estimated future undiscounted net operating cash flows. The impairment loss is measured based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair market value of the asset. The new lower cost basis would result in a lower annual depreciation than before the impairment.
Our estimates of fair market value assume that our vessels are all in good and seaworthy condition without need for repair and if inspected would be certified in class without notations of any kind. Our estimates are based on information available from various industry sources, including:
● reports by industry analysts and data providers that focus on our industry and related dynamics affecting vessel values;
● news and industry reports of similar vessel sales;
● approximate market values for our vessels or similar vessels that we have received from shipbrokers, whether solicited or unsolicited, or that shipbrokers have generally disseminated;
● offers that we may have received from potential purchasers of our vessels; and
● vessel sale prices and values of which we are aware through both formal and informal communications with shipowners, shipbrokers, industry analysts and various other shipping industry participants and observers.
As we obtain information from various industry and other sources, our estimates of fair market value are inherently uncertain. In addition, vessel values are highly volatile; as such, our estimates may not be indicative of the current or future fair market value of our vessels or prices that we could achieve if we were to sell them.
As of March 31, 2022 and 2021, independent appraisals of the commercially and technically-managed VLGCs in our fleet had no indicators of impairment on any of our VLGCs in accordance with ASC 360 Property, Plant, and Equipment. No impairment charges were recognized for the years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021.
As of March 31, 2020, independent appraisals of the commercially and technically-managed VLGCs in our fleet had indicators of impairment on ten of our VLGCs in accordance with ASC 360 Property, Plant, and Equipment. We determined estimated net operating cash flows for these VLGCs by applying various assumptions regarding future time charter equivalent revenues net of commissions, operating expenses, scheduled drydockings, expected offhire and scrap values. These assumptions were based on historical data as well as future expectations. We estimated spot market rates by obtaining the trailing 10-year historical average spot market rates, as published by maritime industry researchers. Estimated outflows for operating expenses and drydocking expenses were based on historical and budgeted costs and were adjusted for assumed inflation. Utilization was based on our historical levels achieved in the spot market and estimates of a residual value consistent with scrap rates used in management's evaluation of scrap value. Such estimates and assumptions regarding expected net operating cash flows require considerable judgment and were based upon historical experience, financial forecasts and industry trends and conditions. Therefore, based on this analysis, we concluded that no impairment charge was necessary because we believe the vessel carrying values are recoverable. No impairment charges were recognized for the year ended March 31, 2020.
In addition, we performed a sensitivity analysis as of March 31, 2020 to determine the effect on recoverability of changes in TCE rates. The sensitivity analysis suggests that we would not incur an impairment charge on any of the commercially and technically-managed VLGCs in our fleet if daily TCE rates based on the 10-year historical average spot market rates were reduced by 30%. An impairment charge of approximately $11.3 million on six of our VLGCs would be triggered by a reduction of 40% in the 10-year historical average spot market rates.
The amount, if any, and timing of any impairment charges we may recognize in the future will depend upon the then current and expected future charter rates and vessel values, which may differ materially from those used in our estimates as of March 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
The table set forth below indicates the carrying value of each commercially and technically-managed vessel in our fleet as of March 31, 2022 and 2021 at which times none of the vessels listed in the table below was being held for sale:
(1) Carrying value for purposes of evaluating our vessels for impairment includes the carrying value of the vessel and unamortized deferred charges related to drydocking of the vessel. Refer to our accounting policies in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for vessels carrying values and deferred drydocking costs. As of March 31, 2022, the carrying value and unamortized deferred charges related to drydocking of none of our vessels exceeded their estimated market value. On an aggregate fleet basis, the estimated market value of our vessels was higher than their carrying value and unamortized deferred charges related to drydocking as of March 31, 2022 by $85.1 million. There were no indications of impairment on any of our vessels and no impairment was recorded during the year ended March 31, 2022 as we believed that the carrying value of our vessels was fully recoverable.
(2) Carrying value for purposes of evaluating our vessels for impairment includes the carrying value of the vessel and unamortized deferred charges related to drydocking of the vessel. Refer to our accounting policies in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements for vessels carrying values and deferred drydocking costs. As of March 31, 2021, the carrying value and unamortized deferred charges related to drydocking of none of our vessels exceeded their estimated market value. On an aggregate fleet basis, the estimated market value of our vessels was higher than their carrying value and unamortized deferred charges related to drydocking as of March 31, 2021 by $82.1 million. There were no indications of impairment on any of our vessels and no impairment was recorded during the year ended March 31, 2021.
Drydocking and special survey costs. We must periodically drydock each of our vessels to comply with industry standards, regulatory requirements and certifications. The classification societies provide guidelines applicable to LPG vessels relating to extended intervals for drydocking. Generally, we are required to drydock a vessel under 15 years of age once every five years unless an extension of the drydocking to seven and one-half years is granted by the classification society and the vessel is not older than 20 years of age.
Drydocking costs are accounted under the deferral method whereby the actual costs incurred are deferred and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the period through the date the next drydocking is scheduled to become due. Costs deferred include expenditures incurred relating to shipyard costs, hull preparation and painting, inspection of hull structure and mechanical components, steelworks, machinery works, and electrical works. Drydocking costs do not include vessel operating expenses such as replacement parts, crew expenses, provisions, luboil consumption, and insurance during the
drydock period. Expenses related to regular maintenance and repairs of our vessels are expensed as incurred, even if such maintenance and repair occurs during the same time period as our drydocking.
If a drydocking is performed prior to the scheduled date, the remaining unamortized balances are immediately written off. Unamortized balances of vessels that are sold are written-off and included in the calculation of the resulting gain or loss in the period of the vessel's sale. The nature of the work performed and the number of drydockings undertaken in a given period determine the level of drydocking expenditures.
Fair Value of Derivative Instruments. We use derivative financial instruments to manage interest rate risks. The fair value of our interest rate swap agreements is the estimated amount that we would receive or pay to terminate the agreements at the reporting date, taking into account current interest rates and the current credit worthiness of both us and the swap counterparties. The estimated amount is the present value of estimated future cash flows, being equal to the difference between the benchmark interest rate and the fixed rate in the interest rate swap agreement, multiplied by the notional principal amount of the interest rate swap agreement at each interest reset date.
The fair value of our interest swap agreements at the end of each period is most significantly affected by the interest rate implied by the LIBOR interest yield curve, including its relative steepness. Interest rates have experienced significant volatility in recent years in both the short and long term. While the fair value of our interest rate swap agreements is typically more sensitive to changes in short-term rates, significant changes in the long-term benchmark interest rates also materially impact our interest.
The fair value of our interest swap agreements is also affected by changes in our own and our counterparty specific credit risk included in the discount factor. Our estimate of our counterparty's credit risk is based on the credit default swap spread of the relevant counterparty which is publicly available. The process of determining our own credit worthiness requires significant judgment in determining which source of credit risk information most closely matches our risk profile, which includes consideration of the margin we would be able to secure for future financing. A 10% increase / decrease in our own or our counterparty credit risk would not have had a significant impact on the fair value of our interest rate swaps.
The LIBOR interest rate yield curve and our specific credit risk are expected to vary over the life of the interest rate swap agreements. The larger the notional amount of the interest rate swap agreements outstanding and the longer the remaining duration of the interest rate swap agreements, the larger the impact of any variability in these factors will be on the fair value of our interest rate swaps. We economically hedge the interest rate exposure on a significant amount of our long-term debt and for long durations. As such, we have experienced, and we expect to continue to experience, material variations in the period-to-period fair value of our derivative instruments.
Although we measure the fair value of our derivative instruments utilizing the inputs and assumptions described above, if we were to terminate the interest rate swap agreements at the reporting date, the amount we would pay or receive to terminate the derivative instruments may differ from our estimate of fair value. If the estimated fair value differs from the actual termination amount, an adjustment to the carrying amount of the applicable derivative asset or liability would be recognized in earnings for the current period. Such adjustments have been and could be material in the future.
Results of Operations For The Year Ended March 31, 2022 As Compared To The Year Ended March 31, 2021
Revenues
The following table compares revenues for the years ended March 31:
Revenues, which represent net pool revenues-related party, time charters and other revenues, net, were $274.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, a decrease of $41.7 million, or 13.2%, from $315.9 million for the year ended
March 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily attributable to a reduction of average TCE rates partially offset by an increase in fleet utilization. Average TCE rates of $34,669 for the year ended March 31, 2022 decreased $4,937 from $39,606 for the year ended March 31, 2021, primarily due to higher bunker prices along with slightly reduced spot rates. The average price of very low sulfur fuel oil (expressed as U.S. dollars per metric ton), from Singapore and Fujairah increased from $365 during the year ended March 31, 2021 to $609 during the year ended March 31, 2022. The Baltic Exchange Liquid Petroleum Gas Index, an index published daily by the Baltic Exchange for the spot market rate for the benchmark Ras Tanura-Chiba route (expressed as U.S. dollars per metric ton), averaged $52.689 during the year ended March 31, 2022 compared to an average of $55.703 for the year ended March 31, 2021. Our fleet utilization increased from 92.8% during the year ended March 31, 2021 to 94.9% during the year ended March 31, 2022.
Charter Hire Expenses
Charter hire expenses for the vessels chartered in from third parties were $16.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2022 compared to $18.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease of $1.8 million, or 10.3%, was mainly caused by a decrease in time chartered-in days from 740 for the year ended March 31, 2021 to 579 for the year ended March 31, 2022, due to the redelivery of one time chartered in vessel during the period, partially offset by a slightly higher charter rate on the vessel chartered in during October 2021.
Vessel Operating Expenses
Vessel operating expenses were $74.2 million during the year ended March 31, 2022, or $9,538 per vessel per calendar day, which is calculated by dividing vessel operating expenses by calendar days for the relevant time period for the vessels that were in our fleet. This was a decrease of $4.0 million, or 5.1%, from $78.2 million, or $9,741 per vessel per calendar day, for the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease in vessel operating expenses was primarily the result of a $2.9 million, or $359 per vessel per calendar day, decrease in non-capitalizable operating expenses related to the drydocking of vessels. Adjusting for the non-capitalizable drydocking costs, vessel operating expenses per vessel per calendar day increased $156 during the year ended March 31, 2022, mainly due to increased COVID-19 related expenses driving an increase in crew wages and related costs, particularly in crew travel and medical costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $30.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, a decrease of $3.7 million, or 10.8%, from $33.9 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease resulted from the non-recurrence of the recording of a contingent liability of $4.0 million during the year ended March 31, 2021 related to a disputed claim relating to one of our VLGCs.
Interest and Finance Costs
Interest and finance costs amounted to $27.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, a decrease of $0.5 million from $27.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease of $0.5 million during the year ended March 31, 2022 was due to (i) a decrease of $1.5 million in interest incurred on our long-term debt, primarily resulting from a decrease in average indebtedness and a reduced margin on the commercial tranche of the 2015 AR Facility due to our Security Leverage Ratio being less than 40%, partially offset by the payment of certain fees and expenses related to prepayment of amounts incurred in conjunction with the refinancings of six of our VLGCs during the period, and (ii) capitalized interest totaling $0.3 million in the year ended March 31, 2022. The decreases were partially offset by an increase of $1.2 million in amortization of deferred financing fees driven by accelerated amortization related to our refinancings completed during the year. Average indebtedness, excluding deferred financing fees, decreased from $633.7 million for the year ended March 31, 2021 to $609.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2022. As of March 31, 2022, the outstanding balance of our long-term debt, excluding deferred financing fees, was $670.0 million.
Unrealized Gain on Derivatives
Unrealized gain on derivatives amounted to $11.1 million for the year ended March 31, 2022 compared to $7.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The favorable $3.9 million difference is primarily attributable to a $6.5 million
increase in favorable fair value changes to our interest rate swaps resulting from changes in forward LIBOR yield curves and certain of our swaps maturing, partially offset by a decrease of $2.6 million in favorable changes to our FFA positions during the year ended March 31, 2021 that did not recur in the current period.
Realized Loss on Derivatives
Realized loss on derivatives was $3.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, compared to $4.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The favorable $1.1 million change is primarily attributable to (i) unfavorable settlements of $0.8 million on our FFA positions during the year ended March 31, 2021 that did not recur in the year ended March 31, 2022, and (ii) a $0.3 million reduction of realized losses on our interest rate swaps.
Gain on Disposal of Vessels
Gain on disposal of vessels amounted to $7.3 million for the year ended March 31, 2022 and was attributable to the sales of Captain Markos NL and Captain Nicholas ML. There was no gain on disposal of vessel for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Results of Operations For The Year Ended March 31, 2021 As Compared To The Year Ended March 31, 2020
For a discussion of the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Operating Statistics and Reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements presented in accordance with U.S.GAAP, we present certain operating statistics and non-GAAP financial measures to assist in the evaluation of our business performance. These non-GAAP financial measures include Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) and time charter equivalent rate. These non-GAAP financial measures may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for net income and revenues, which are the most directly comparable measures of performance prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
We use these non-GAAP financial measures in assessing the performance of our ongoing operations and in planning and forecasting future periods. These adjusted measures provide a more comparable basis to analyze operating results and earnings and are measures commonly used by shareholders to measure our performance. We believe that these adjusted measures, when considered together with the corresponding U.S. GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations to those measures, provide meaningful supplemental information to assist investors and analysts in understanding our business results and assessing our prospects for future performance.
(1) Refer to “Important Financial and Operational Terms and Concepts” above for definitions of calendar days, time chartered-in days, available days, operating days, fleet utilization, and daily vessel operating expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA is an unaudited non-U.S. GAAP financial measure and represents net income before interest and finance costs, unrealized (gain)/loss on derivatives, realized (gain)/loss on interest rate swaps, stock-based compensation expense, impairment, and depreciation and amortization and is used as a supplemental financial measure by management to assess our financial and operating performance. We believe that adjusted EBITDA assists our management and investors by increasing the comparability of our performance from period to period. This increased comparability is achieved by excluding the potentially disparate effects between periods of derivatives, interest and finance costs, stock-based compensation expense, impairment, and depreciation and amortization expense, which items are affected by various and possibly changing financing methods, capital structure and historical cost basis and which items may significantly affect net income/(loss) between periods. We believe that including adjusted EBITDA as a financial and operating measure benefits investors in selecting between investing in us and other investment alternatives.
Adjusted EBITDA has certain limitations in use and should not be considered an alternative to net income, operating income, cash flow from operating activities or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA excludes some, but not all, items that affect net income. Adjusted EBITDA as presented below may not be computed consistently with similarly titled measures of other companies and, therefore, might not be comparable with other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA (unaudited) for the periods presented:
Time charter equivalent rate
Time charter equivalent rate, or TCE rate, is a non-U.S. GAAP measure of the average daily revenue performance of a vessel. TCE rate is a shipping industry performance measure used primarily to compare period-to-period changes in a shipping company’s performance despite changes in the mix of charter types (such as time charters, voyage charters) under which the vessels may be employed between the periods. Our method of calculating TCE rate is to divide revenue net of voyage expenses by operating days for the relevant time period, which may not be calculated the same by other companies.
The following table sets forth a reconciliation of revenues to TCE rate (unaudited) for the periods presented:
* Adjusted for the effects of reallocations of pool profits in accordance with the pool participation agreements due to adjustments related to speed and consumption performance of the vessels operating in the Helios Pool.
We determine operating days for each vessel based on the underlying vessel employment, including our vessels in the Helios Pool, or the Company Methodology. If we were to calculate operating days for each vessel within the Helios Pool as a variable rate time charter, or the Alternate Methodology, our operating days and fleet utilization would be increased with a corresponding reduction to our TCE rate. Operating data using both methodologies is as follows:
We believe that Our Methodology using the underlying vessel employment provides more meaningful insight into market conditions and the performance of our vessels.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our business is capital intensive, and our future success depends on our ability to maintain a high-quality fleet. As of March 31, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $236.8 million and non-current restricted cash of $0.1 million.
Our primary sources of capital during the year ended March 31, 2022 were $118.7 million in cash generated from operations, $48.0 million from proceeds net of commission and fees of the sale of our 2008-built VLGC Captain Nicholas ML, $42.4 million from proceeds net of commission and fees of the sale of our 2006-built VLGC Captain Markos NL, $34.9 million in net proceeds from the refinancing of Commander and Constellation under the BALCAP Facility, $24.8 million in net proceeds related to the refinancing of Cratis, $24.6 million in net proceeds related to the refinancing of Copernicus, $40.8 million in net proceeds related to the refinancing of Chaparral, and $25.1 million in net proceeds related to the refinancing of Caravelle. As of March 31, 2022, the outstanding balance of our long-term debt, net of deferred financing fees of $7.3 million, was $662.8 million including $72.1 million of principal on our long-term debt scheduled to be repaid during the year ending March 31, 2023.
Operating expenses, including expenses to maintain the quality of our vessels in order to comply with international shipping standards and environmental laws and regulations, the funding of working capital requirements, long-term debt repayments, financing costs, commitments under the bareboat charter for a newbuilding dual-fuel VLGC as described in Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements (of which we made an $8.0 million payment in May 2022), and commitments for time chartered-in vessels, including three newbuilding dual-fuel Panamax LPG vessels as described in Note 19 to our consolidated financial statements represent our short-term, medium-term and long-term liquidity needs as of March 31, 2022. We anticipate satisfying our liquidity needs for at least the next twelve months with cash on hand and cash from operations. We may also seek additional liquidity through alternative sources of debt financings and/or through equity financings by way of private or public offerings. However, if these sources are insufficient to satisfy our short-term liquidity needs, or to satisfy our future medium-term or long-term liquidity needs, we may need to seek alternative sources of financing and/or modifications of our existing credit facility and financing arrangements. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain any such financing or modifications to our existing credit facility and financing arrangements on terms acceptable to us, or at all. We note that as part of our 2015 AR Facility we have a revolving credit facility with an aggregate principal amount of up to $25.0 million.
On August 5, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $50.0 million of our common shares through the period ended December 31, 2020 under the 2019 Common Share Repurchase Authority. On February 3, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized an increase to our 2019 Common Share Repurchase Authority to repurchase up to an additional $50.0 million of our common shares. On December 29, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized an extension of and an increase to the remaining authorization of $41.4 million under our 2019 Common Share Repurchase Authority, which was set to expire on December 31, 2020. Following this Board action, we were authorized to repurchase up to $50.0 million of our common shares from December 29, 2020 through December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our total purchases under this authority totaled 7.0 million of our common shares for an aggregate consideration of $81.0 million. Our 2019 Common Share Repurchase Authority expired on December 31, 2021. On February 2, 2022, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $100.0 million of our common shares under the 2022 Common Share Repurchase Authority, under which purchases may be made at our discretion in the form of open market repurchase programs, privately negotiated transactions, accelerated share repurchase programs or a combination of these methods. The actual amount and timing of share repurchases are subject to capital availability, our determination that share repurchases are in the best interest of our shareholders, and market conditions. We are not obligated to make any common share repurchases. As of the date of this Annual Report we have repurchased 0.1 million aggregate amount of our common shares under the 2022 Common Share Repurchase Authority at an average price of $15.00 per share.
On July 30, 2021, we announced that our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $1.00 per share of the Company’s common stock to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on August 9, 2021, totaling $40.4 million. We paid $40.2 million on September 8, 2021 and the remaining $0.2 million is deferred until certain shares of restricted stock vest.
On January 4, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $1.00 per share of the Company’s common stock to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on January 14, 2022, totaling $40.1 million. We paid $39.9 million on January 25, 2022 and the remaining $0.2 million is deferred until certain shares of restricted stock vest.
On May 5, 2022, we announced that our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend of $2.50 per share of the Company’s common stock to all shareholders of record as of the close of business on May 16, 2022, totaling $100.3 million. We expect to pay $99.7 million on or about June 2, 2022 and the remaining $0.6 million will be deferred until certain shares of restricted stock vest.
These were irregular dividends. All declarations of dividends are subject to the determination and discretion of the Company’s Board of Directors based on its consideration of various factors, including the Company’s results of operations, financial condition, level of indebtedness, anticipated capital requirements, contractual restrictions, restrictions in its debt agreements, restrictions under applicable law, its business prospects and other factors that the Company’s Board of Directors may deem relevant. Our dividend policy will also impact our future liquidity position. Marshall Islands law generally prohibits the payment of dividends other than from surplus or while a company is insolvent or would be rendered insolvent by the payment of such a dividend.
On August 25, 2021, we exercised our repurchase option under the CMNL/CJNP Japanese Financing Japanese Financing by providing a three-month notice to the owners of Captain John NP of our intent to repurchase the vessel for approximately $15.8 million in cash and application of the deposit amount of $25.2 million, which had been retained by the buyer in connection with the CMNL/CJNP Japanese Financing, towards the repurchase of the vessel. The repurchase transaction was completed on November 30, 2021.
On September 8, 2021, we completed the sale of our 2006-built VLGC Captain Markos NL and received proceeds net of commission and fees of $42.4 million.
On October 24, 2021, we exercised our repurchase option under the CNML Japanese Financing by providing a three-month notice to the owners of Captain Nicholas ML of our intent to repurchase the vessel for approximately $17.8 million in cash and application of the deposit amount of $27.9 million, which had been retained by the buyer in connection with the CNML Japanese Financing, towards the repurchase of the vessel. The repurchase transaction was completed on January 26, 2022.
On February 16, 2022, we completed the sale of our 2008-built VLGC Captain Nicholas ML and received proceeds net of commission and fees of $48.0 million.
On April 21, 2022, we prepaid $25.0 million of the 2015 AR Facility’s then outstanding principal using cash on hand, consisting of $11.1 million of the commercial tranche, $11.1 million of the KEXIM direct tranche, and $2.8 million of the K-sure insured tranche (defined below).
On May 19, 2022, we received $29.9 million in net proceeds related to the refinancing of our 2015-built VLGC, Cougar.
As part of our growth strategy, we will continue to consider strategic opportunities, including the acquisition or charter-in of additional vessels. We may choose to pursue such opportunities through internal growth, joint ventures, business acquisitions, or other transactions. We expect to finance the purchase price of any future acquisitions either through internally generated funds, public or private debt financings, public or private issuances of additional equity securities or a combination of these forms of financing.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash and cash equivalents provided by/(used in) operating, financing and investing activities for the periods presented:
Operating Cash Flows. Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended March 31, 2022 was $118.7 million compared with $170.6 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. The decrease is primarily related to a reduction in operating income along with changes in working capital, mainly from amounts due from the Helios Pool as distributions from the Helios Pool are impacted by the timing of the completion of voyages and spot market rates. For a discussion of the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Net cash flow from operating activities depends upon our overall profitability, market rates for vessels employed on voyage charters, charter rates agreed to for time charters, the timing and amount of payments for drydocking expenditures and unscheduled repairs and maintenance, fluctuations in working capital balances and bunker costs.
Investing Cash Flows. Net cash provided by investing activities was $68.8 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, compared with net cash provided by investing activities of $1.0 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. For the year ended March 31, 2022, net cash provided by investing activities was comprised of $90.5 million in proceeds from disposal of VLGCs Captain Markos NL and Captain Nicholas ML, and $3.7 million in proceeds from the sale of investment securities, partially offset by $23.2 million in payments for vessels under construction and vessel capital expenditures and $2.3 million in purchases of investment securities. For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was comprised of $15.0 million in proceeds from the maturity of short-term investments, partially offset by our capital expenditures of $9.5 million and $4.7 million in purchases of investment securities. For a discussion of the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Financing Cash Flows. Net cash used in financing activities was $35.2 million for the year ended March 31, 2022, compared with net cash used in financing activities of $174.5 million for the year ended March 31, 2021. For the year ended March 31, 2022, net cash used in financing activities consisted of repayments of long-term debt of
$230.3 million, dividends paid of $80.1 million, repurchase of common stock of $21.4 million, and payments of financing costs of $1.7 million, partially offset by $298.3 million of proceeds from long-term debt borrowings. For the year ended March 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities consisted of the repurchase of common stock of $126.2 million, repayments of long-term debt of $99.4 million, and payments of financing costs of $4.2 million, partially offset by $55.4 million of proceeds from long-term debt borrowings. For a discussion of the year ended March 31, 2021 compared to the year ended March 31, 2020, please refer to Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Liquidity and Capital Resources” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended March 31, 2021.
Capital Expenditures. LPG transportation is a capital-intensive business, requiring significant investment to maintain an efficient fleet and to stay in regulatory compliance.
We are generally required to complete a special survey for a vessel once every five years. Drydocking of vessels occurs every five years unless an extension is granted by the classification society to seven and one-half years and the vessel is not older than 20 years of age. Intermediate surveys are performed every two and one-half years after the first special survey. Drydocking each vessel takes approximately 10 to 20 days. We spend significant amounts for scheduled drydocking (including the cost of classification society surveys) for each of our vessels.
As our vessels age and our fleet expands, our drydocking expenses will increase. We estimate the current cash outlay for a VLGC special survey to be approximately $1.0 million per vessel (excluding any capital improvements, such as scrubbers and ballast water management systems, to the vessel that may be made during such drydockings and the cost of an intermediate survey to be between $100,000 and $200,000 per vessel. Ongoing costs for compliance with environmental regulations are primarily included as part of our drydocking and classification society survey costs. Further, in October 2016, the International Maritime Organization (the “IMO”) set January 1, 2020 as the implementation date for vessels to comply with its low sulfur fuel oil requirement, which cuts sulfur levels from 3.5% to 0.5%. We may comply with this regulation by (i) consuming compliant fuels on board (0.5% sulfur), which are readily available globally since our last quarterly filing, but at a significantly higher cost; (ii) continuing to consume high-sulfur fuel oil by installing scrubbers for cleaning of the exhaust gases to levels at or below compliance with regulations (0.5% sulfur); or (iii) by retrofitting vessels to be powered by liquefied petroleum gas or LPG, which may be a viable option subject to the relative pricing of compliant low-sulfur fuel (0.5% sulfur) and LPG. Such costs of compliance with the IMO’s low sulfur fuel oil requirement are significant and could have an adverse effect on our operations and financial results. Currently, twelve of our technically-managed VLGCs are equipped with scrubbers. We have no contractual commitments related to additional scrubbers as of March 31, 2022. Please see "Item 1A. Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Company-We may incur increasing costs for the drydocking, maintenance or replacement of our vessels as they age, and, as our vessels age, the risks associated with older vessels could adversely affect our ability to obtain profitable charters.”
On March 31, 2021, we entered into a thirteen year bareboat agreement to charter-in a newbuilding dual-fuel VLGC that is expected to be delivered from Kawasaki Heavy Industries in March 2023. The financing structure of the newbuilding is analogous to that of our Japanese financings pursuant to which a third-party will purchase the vessel and bareboat charter the vessel to us. As part of the agreement, we control the building of the vessel and its use after delivery. The vessel will be built to our specifications; we will supervise the building of the vessel to meet these specifications; and we will technically and commercially manage the vessel after its delivery. Under the agreement, we have commitments of $24 million of predelivery costs as well as the cost of additional features to meet our specifications and supervision costs for an aggregate total of approximately $25 million. As of March 31, 2022, we expect to settle the commitments under the agreement with installment payments totaling $9.0 million during the year ended March 31, 2023. Construction of the vessel commenced in December 2021.
Description of Our Debt Obligations
See Note 10 to our consolidated financial statements included herein for a description of our debt obligations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included herein.