Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10 -K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors. We discuss factors that we believe could cause or contribute to these differences below and elsewhere in this report, including those set forth under Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company developing novel therapies designed to treat patients with cancer by inhibiting fundamental tumor-promoting pathways and by harnessing the immune system to attack cancer cells. Our strategy is to identify, acquire, and develop molecules that will rapidly translate into high impact therapeutics that generate durable clinical benefit and enhanced patient outcomes.
Our lead clinical stage program is DKN-01, a monoclonal antibody that inhibits Dickkopf -related protein 1, or DKK1. DKK1 is a protein that regulates the Wnt signaling pathways and enables tumor cells to proliferate and spread, as well as suppresses the immune system from attacking the tumor. When DKN-01 binds to DKK1, an anti-tumor effect can be generated. DKN-01-based therapies have generated responses and clinical benefit in several patient populations. We are currently studying DKN-01 in multiple ongoing clinical trials in patients with esophagogastric cancer, hepatobiliary cancer, gynecologic cancers, or prostate cancer. We entered into an exclusive option and license agreement (the “BeiGene Agreement”) with BeiGene, Ltd., or BeiGene, which granted BeiGene the right to develop and commercialize DKN-01 in Asia (excluding Japan), Australia, and New Zealand.
We intend to apply our extensive experience identifying and developing transformational products to aggressively develop these antibodies and build a pipeline of programs that has the potential to change the practice of cancer medicine.
We have devoted substantially all of our resources to development efforts relating to our product candidates, including manufacturing and conducting clinical trials of our product candidates, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through proceeds from our sales of common stock and preferred stock and proceeds from the issuance of notes payable.
We have incurred net losses in each year since our inception in 2011. Our net loss was $40.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $27.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $263.6 million. Our net losses have resulted primarily from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and have operating losses for at least the next several years as we:
● continue the development of our product candidate, DKN-01;
● seek to obtain regulatory approvals for DKN-01;
● outsource the manufacturing of DKN-01 for clinical trials and any indications for which we receive regulatory approval;
● contract with third parties for the sales, marketing and distribution of DKN-01 for any indications for which we receive regulatory approval;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● continue our research and development efforts;
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development efforts; and
● operate as a public company.
We do not expect to generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain marketing approval for one or more of our product candidates, which we expect will take a number of years and is subject to significant uncertainty. Accordingly, we will need to raise additional capital prior to the commercialization of DKN-01 or any other product candidate. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial revenue from product sales, we expect to finance our operating activities through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third-party funding, commercialization, marketing and distribution arrangements and other collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements, such as the BeiGene Agreement. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to develop our product candidates.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $114.9 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Financial Overview
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development activities have included conducting nonclinical studies and clinical trials, manufacturing development efforts and activities related to regulatory filings for DKN-01 and TRX518. We recognize research and development expenses as they are incurred. Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
● salaries and related overhead expenses for personnel in research and development functions, including costs related to stock-based compensation;
● fees paid to consultants and CROs for our nonclinical and clinical trials, and other related clinical trial fees, including but not limited to laboratory work, clinical trial database management, clinical trial material management and statistical compilation and analysis;
● costs related to acquiring and manufacturing clinical trial materials; and
● costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements.
We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of DKN-01 and any other product candidates, subject to the availability of additional funding.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of internal and external costs, such as employee costs, including salaries and stock-based compensation, other internal costs, fees paid to consultants, central laboratories, contractors and CROs in connection with our clinical and preclinical trial development activities. We use internal resources to manage our clinical and preclinical trial development activities and perform data analysis for such activities.
We participate, through our subsidiary in Australia, in the Australian government’s R&D Incentive program, such that a percentage of our eligible research and development expenses are reimbursed by the Australian government as a refundable tax offset and such incentives are reflected as other income. This percentage was 43.5% for both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The table below summarizes our research and development expenses incurred by development program and the R&D incentive income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The successful development of our clinical product candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing or costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of any of our product
candidates or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows from these product candidates may commence. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
● the scope, rate of progress and expense of our ongoing, as well as any additional, clinical trials and other research and development activities;
● future clinical trial results; and
● the timing and receipt of any regulatory approvals.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of a product candidate could result in a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. For example, if the FDA or another regulatory authority were to require us to conduct clinical trials beyond those that we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development of a product candidate, or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any of our clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of clinical development.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, accounting and audit services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur increased accounting, audit, legal, regulatory, compliance, director and officer insurance costs as well as investor and public relations expenses associated with being a public company.
Interest income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalents. During the year ended December 31, 2020, interest income was $0.1 million. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we had an immaterial amount of interest income.
Research and development incentive income
Research and development incentive income includes payments under the R&D Incentive program from the government of Australia. The R&D Incentive is one of the key elements of the Australian Government’s support for Australia’s innovation system. It was developed to assist businesses in recovering some of the costs of undertaking research and development. The research and development tax incentive provides a tax offset to eligible companies that engage in research and development activities.
Companies engaged in research and development may be eligible for either:
● a 43.5% refundable tax offset for entities with an aggregated turnover of less than A$20 million per annum, or
● a 38.5% non-refundable tax offset for all other entities.
We recognize as other income the amount we expect to be reimbursed for qualified expenses.
Foreign currency translation adjustment
Foreign currency translation adjustment consists of gains (losses) due to the revaluation of foreign currency transactions attributable to changes in foreign currency exchange rates associated with our Australian subsidiary.
Income taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any U.S. federal, state or foreign income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $196.2 million and $178.0 million, respectively. The federal and state net operating losses begin to expire in 2030, while the foreign net operating losses carryforward indefinitely. Our federal net operating losses include $114.9 million which can also be carried forward indefinitely. We may be able to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards to reduce future federal and state income tax liabilities. However, these net operating losses are subject to various limitations under Internal Revenue Code (“IRC”) Section 382, which limits the use of net operating loss carryforwards to the extent there has been an ownership change of more than 50 percentage points. In addition, the net operating loss carryforwards are subject to examination by the taxing authorities and could be adjusted or disallowed due to such exams. Although we have not undergone an IRC Section 382 Analysis, it is possible that the utilization of our net operating loss carryforwards may be limited.
As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credits of $6.2 million and $1.3 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2030.
There is no provision for income taxes in the United States or Israel because we have historically incurred operating losses and maintain a full valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets in these jurisdictions. The deferred tax asset recorded in the consolidated balance sheets relates to our Australian operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with U.S. Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (“GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued research and development expenses. This process involves communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly for services performed. We make estimates of our accrued research and development expenses as of each balance sheet date in our consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with selected service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. To date, we have not adjusted our estimate at any particular balance sheet date by any material amount. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include:
● fees paid to CROs for management of our clinical trial activities;
● fees paid to investigative sites in connection with clinical trials;
● fees paid to contract manufacturers in connection with the production of clinical trial supplies; and
● professional services and fees.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If we do not accurately identify costs that we have begun to incur or if we underestimate or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of these services, our actual expenses could differ from our estimates.
Stock-Based Compensation
We have issued options to purchase our common stock. We account for stock based compensation in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. ASC 718 establishes accounting for stock-based awards exchanged for employee and non-employee services. Under the fair value recognition provisions of ASC 718, stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service or vesting period. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards require the use of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected life of the stock-based payment awards and stock price volatility.
We estimate the grant date fair value of stock options and the related compensation expense, using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. This option valuation model requires the input of subjective assumptions including: (1) expected life (estimated period of time outstanding) of the options granted, (2) volatility, (3) risk-free rate and (4) dividends. In general, the assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, but the estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
JOBS Act
We are an “emerging growth company”, or EGC, as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” such as us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We may elect to use the extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards under Section 102(b) (1) of the JOBS Act. This election would allow us to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until those standards apply to private companies. As a result of this election, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with public company effective dates.
We may take advantage of these reporting exemptions until we are no longer an emerging growth company, which in certain circumstances could be for up to five years. We will remain an “emerging growth company” until the earliest of (a) the last day of the first fiscal year in which our annual gross revenues exceed $1.07 billion, (b) the date that we become a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our shares that are held by non-affiliates exceeds $700 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, (c) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in nonconvertible debt during the preceding three-year period and (d) the last day of our 2022 fiscal year containing the fifth anniversary of the date on which shares of our common stock became publicly traded in the U.S. As of December 31, 2021, we remain an EGC.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following tables summarize our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenues
License revenues for the each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1.5 million, related to the BeiGene Agreement for the development and commercialization of DKN- 01 in Asia (excluding Japan), Australia, and New Zealand. The BeiGene Agreement became effective on January 3, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $32.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $11.7 million in research and development expenses was primarily due to an increase of $5.3 million in manufacturing costs related to clinical trial material due to timing of manufacturing campaigns, an increase of $3.3 million in clinical trial costs due to deprioritizing the continued development of TRX518 in 2019 and timing of patient enrollment, an increase of $2.9 million in payroll and other related expenses due to an increase in headcount of our research and development full time employees and an increase of $0.5 million in stock based compensation expense due to new stock options granted to employees during the year ended December 31, 2021. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.2 million in consulting fees associated with research and development activities and a $0.1 million decrease in rent expense due to the closing of our research laboratory in April 2020.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1.2 million was due to a $0.7 million increase in payroll and other related expenses due to an increase in headcount of our general and administrative full time employees as well as an increase in compensation expense and an increase of $0.4 million in stock based compensation expense due to new stock options granted to employees during the year ended December 31, 2021. There was also an increase in insurance expense and taxes of $0.3 million and $0.2 million, respectively. These increases were partially offset by a decrease of $0.4 million in professional fees during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which included $0.2 million of expense in connection with the termination of the Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement.
Interest Income
We recorded interest income of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded an immaterial amount of interest income. The decrease in interest income is primarily due to lower interest rates during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 2020.
Australian Research and Development Incentives
We recorded R&D incentive income of $1.2 million and $0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, based upon the applicable percentage of eligible research and development activities under the Australian Incentive Program, net of our Australia tax liability, which expenses included the cost of manufacturing of clinical trial material.
We perform certain supporting research and development activity outside of Australia when there are no Australian facilities that support the activity (“Overseas research and development activities”). In October 2017, the Commonwealth of Australia issued us a favorable ruling on our Overseas research and development activities, considering such activities to be eligible research and development activities under the Australian Incentive Program.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $0.1 million of research and development tax incentive payments from the Commonwealth of Australia as a result of the 2020 research and development activities. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $0.3 million of research and development tax incentive payments from the Commonwealth of Australia as a result of the 2019 research and development activities.
The remaining R&D incentive receivable has been recorded as “Research and development incentive receivable” in the consolidated balance sheets.
Foreign Currency Gains (Loss)
We recorded foreign currency gains (losses) of ($0.4) million and $0.7 million, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. The change in foreign currency gains (losses) is due to the changes in the Australian dollar exchange rate related to activities of the Australian entity.
Interest Expense
We recorded an immaterial amount of interest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have been engaged in organizational activities, including raising capital, and research and development activities. We do not yet have a product that has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (the “FDA”), and have not yet achieved profitable operations or generated positive cash flows from operations. There is no assurance that profitable operations, if achieved, could be sustained on a continuing basis. Further, our future operations are dependent on the success of efforts to raise additional capital, our research and commercialization efforts, regulatory approval, and, ultimately, the market acceptance of our products.
In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40, Going Concern, we have evaluated whether there are conditions and events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $114.9 million. Additionally, we had an accumulated deficit of $263.6 million at December 31, 2021, and during the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a net loss of $40.6 million. We expect to continue to generate operating losses in the foreseeable future. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents of $114.9 million as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses for at least the next 12 months from the issuance of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition, we will seek additional funding through public or private equity financings or government programs and will seek funding or development program cost-sharing through collaboration agreements or licenses with larger pharmaceutical or biotechnology companies. If we do not obtain additional funding or development program cost-sharing, we could be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate certain clinical trials or research and development programs, reduce or eliminate discretionary operating expenses, and delay company and pipeline expansion, which could adversely affect our business prospects. The inability to obtain funding, as and when needed, could have a negative impact on Leap’s financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategies.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating activities. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily related to our net loss from the operation of our business of $40.6 million and net changes in working capital, including a decrease in deferred revenue of $1.5 million, an increase in research and development receivable of $1.2 million, an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.6 million, a decrease in lease liabilities of $0.4 million and change in restricted stock liability of $0.2 million. These changes were partially offset by an increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $3.9 million, a decrease in other assets of $0.6 million, an increase in deferred offering costs of $0.2 million, noncash stock based compensation expense of $3.7 million, noncash lease expense of $0.4 million and amortization of contract asset of $0.1 million. There was also a non cash change of $0.4 million due to foreign currency losses.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to our net loss from the operation of our business of $27.5 million and net changes in working capital, including a decrease in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $2.6 million, a decrease in lease liabilities of $0.5 million and an increase in contract acquisition costs of $0.3 million. There was also a non cash change of $0.7 million due to foreign currency gains. These changes were partially offset by a decrease of $0.8 million in prepaid expenses and other assets, an increase of $1.5 million in deferred revenue, a decrease in research and development receivable of $0.1 million, noncash stock based compensation expense of $2.6 million, noncash lease expense of $0.5 million and amortization of contract asset of $0.1 million.
Investing Activities. Net cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was related to the sale of equipment. There were no investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities. Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $97.2 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with the public offering the Company completed in September 2021 (the “2021 Public Offering”) and $1.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and warrants. These increases were partially offset by payments of $0.2 million for offering costs.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $48.5 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock in connection with our public offering in June of 2020, $27.0 million in proceeds from the issuance of
Series A Preferred Stock and Series B Preferred Stock in connection with the January 2020 Private Placement and $0.4 million in proceeds from the issuance of common stock upon the exercise of stock options and warrants. These increases were partially offset by payments of $1.9 million for offering costs.
Capital Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials of our product candidates in development. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
Our expenses will also increase as we:
● pursue the clinical development of our most advanced product candidate, DKN-01;
● seek to identify and develop additional product candidates;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including personnel to support our clinical development, manufacturing and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company; and
● increase our product liability and clinical trial insurance coverage as we initiate our clinical trials and commercialization efforts.
Additional funding may not be available at the time needed on commercially reasonable terms, if at all.
Contractual Obligations and Contingent Liabilities
On October 1, 2021, we entered into a second amendment to the 47 Thorndike Street Lease, the (“Second Amendment”). Under the Second Amendment, we extended the term of the 47 Thorndike Street Lease through January 31, 2023. Under the Second Amendment, we will continue to pay the current monthly base rent amount of $36,000 contemplated by the 47 Thorndike Street Lease through April 30, 2022, with an increase commencing on May 1, 2022 and adjusting the monthly base rent amount to approximately $37,000 through January 31, 2023.
We remain committed to $5.0 million of non-cancellable commitments under manufacturing agreements with vendors to manufacture DKN-01 for use in clinical trials and $0.7 million related to preclinical research studies.
This description of our contractual obligations does not include potential future milestones or royalties that we may be required to make under license and collaboration agreements due to the uncertainty of events requiring payment under these agreements.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations for clinical and preclinical research studies, external manufacturers for product for use in our clinical trials, and other research supplies and other services as part of our operations. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts and not included as contractual commitments.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all recently issued standards and have determined that, other than as disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, such standards will not have a material impact on our financial statements or do not otherwise apply to our operations.