Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Larkspur Health Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a newly-organized blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. While our efforts to identify a target business may span many industries and regions worldwide, we intend to focus our search for prospects within the biotechnology sector in the United States. We have not selected any specific business combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any business combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private units, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (including pursuant to backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the IPO or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the IPO, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the IPO. Following the IPO, we will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents after the IPO. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the date of our audited financial statements. After the IPO, we expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as expenses as we conduct due diligence on prospective business combination candidates. We expect our expenses to increase substantially after the closing of the IPO.
For the period March 17, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $240,700, consisting primarily of operating and formation costs of $235,267.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $928,389 of cash and a working capital of $903,354.
On December 23, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 7,500,000 units. Each unit consists of one share of Class A common stock of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share, and three-fourths of one redeemable warrant of the Company, with each warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one share of Class A common stock for $11.50 per whole share. The units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $75,000,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, the Company consummated a private placement with the Sponsors of 317,600 units in the aggregate, each unit consisting of one Class A common stock of the Company and three-fourths of one redeemable warrant, each at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $3,176,000.
A total of $75,750,000 of the proceeds from the initial public offering and sale of the placement units was placed in the trust account maintained by maintained by Continental Stock Transfer and Trust Co., acting as trustee.
On January 6, 2022, we issued an additional 267,159 units and 2,672 placement units in connection with the exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, generating an additional $2,701,910 of gross proceeds.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest to pay taxes. We estimate our annual franchise tax obligations, based on the number of shares of our common stock authorized and outstanding after the completion of the IPO, to be $200,000, which is the maximum amount of annual franchise taxes payable by us as a Delaware corporation per annum, which we may pay from funds from the IPO held outside of the trust account or from interest earned on the funds held in our trust account and released to us for this purpose. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the interest earned on the amount in the trust account will be sufficient to pay our income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we will have available to us the approximately $1,250,000 of proceeds held outside the trust account. We will use these funds to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds on a non-interest bearing basis as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Other than as described above, the terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We expect our primary liquidity requirements during that period to include approximately $425,000 for legal, accounting, due diligence, travel and other expenses associated with structuring, negotiating and documenting successful business combinations, $600,000 for D&O insurance, $150,000 for legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements, and approximately $75,000 for working capital that will be used for miscellaneous expenses and reserves.
These amounts are estimates and may differ materially from our actual expenses. In addition, we could use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies or investors on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed initial business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the IPO in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we are targeting businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of the private units, and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our initial business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
There is no assurance that the Company’s plans to consummate a business combination will be successful within the combination period. As a result, there is substantial doubt about the entity’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the financial statements are issued or are available to be issued
For the period from March 17, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the net increase in cash was $928,389. For the period from March 17, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $428,833 primarily as a result of the net loss; cash used in investing activities was $75,750,000 and was for the cash deposited into the Trust account; and cash provided by financing activities was $77,107,222 and primarily relates to the Company’s Initial Public Offering.
Related Party Transactions
On May 7, 2021, we sold 1,494,998 founder shares to Larkspur Health LLC, 632,500 founder shares to the representative, and 28,752 founder shares to our directors, for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000 of which $22,063 was paid in cash and the balance to be paid for at a later date. On September 11, 2021, the representative forfeited 21,777 founder shares for no consideration. On November 18, 2021, Larkspur Health LLC transferred 231,423 founder shares to certain Additional Sponsor Investors and the representative transferred 110,723 founder shares to certain Additional Sponsor Investors. On November 4, 2021, we reissued 21,777 founder shares to Francis Knuettel II. In addition, the representative transferred an additional 3,427 shares to our sponsor in connection with the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. 214,460 founder shares held by our initial stockholders were forfeited pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. The founder shares (including the Class A common stock issuable upon exercise thereof) may not, subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by the holder.
Our sponsors, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsors, officers or directors or our or their affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on our behalf.
Prior to the consummation of the IPO, Larkspur Health LLC’s investors loaned us $719,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the IPO. These loans were non-interest bearing, unsecured and were due at the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the closing of the IPO. The loans were repaid upon the closing of the IPO.
A firm owned by the our Chief Financial Officer has an agreement to provide accounting and financial consulting services to us. The total cost incurred through December 31, 2021 was $15,000. There is no amount outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsors or an affiliate of our sponsors as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
Our sponsors and/or their affiliates have established a board of directors consisting of five directors, comprising our Chief Executive Officer, a director designated by our sponsors, and three independent directors. Only holders of shares of Class B common stock are entitled to vote for the election of directors until the completion of our initial business combination. Our operations will be managed by our board of directors through majority vote with each director casting a single vote, provided that any significant governance matter shall require approval from a majority of the securities issued to our initial stockholders, all voting as a single class.
Our sponsors purchased an aggregate of 320,272 private units at a price of $10.00 per unit for an aggregate purchase price of $3,202,720 (which amount includes units purchased pursuant to the partial exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option). Each whole warrant is exercisable to purchase one whole share of Class A common stock at $11.50 per share. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to the founder shares, the private units, the private shares, or the private warrants, which will expire worthless if we do not consummate a business combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or up to 18 months from the closing of the IPO at the election of the Company in two separate three month extensions subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, including the deposit of $776,716 ($0.10 per unit) for each three month extension, into the trust account, or as extended by the Company’s stockholders in accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation). The private warrants are identical to the warrants sold in the IPO except that the private warrants will not be transferable, assignable or saleable until after the consummation of our initial business combination except to permitted transferees. Further, there will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to the private shares or private warrants, which will expire worthless if we do not consummate a business combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or up to 18 months from the closing of the IPO at the election of the Company in two separate three month extensions subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, including the deposit of $776,716 ($0.10 per unit) for each three month extension, into the trust account, or as extended by the Company’s stockholders in accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation).
Our sponsors have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to their founder shares (i) in connection with the consummation of a business combination, (ii) in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our amended and restated certificate of incorporation to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to allow redemption in connection with our initial business combination or certain amendments to our charter prior thereto or to redeem 100% of our public shares if we do not complete our initial business combination within 12 months from the completion of the IPO (or up to 18 months from the closing of the IPO at the election of the Company in two separate three month extensions subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, including the deposit $776,716 ($0.10 per unit) for each three month extension, into the trust account, or as extended by the Company’s stockholders in accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation) and (iii) if we fail to consummate a business combination within 12 months from the completion of the IPO (or up to 18 months from the closing of the IPO at the election of the Company in two separate three month extensions subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, including the deposit $776,716 ($0.10 per unit) for each three month extension, into the trust account, or as extended by the Company’s stockholders in accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation) or if we liquidate prior to the expiration of the 12-month period (or up to 18-month period). However, our initial stockholders will be entitled to redemption rights with respect to any public shares held by them if we fail to consummate a business combination or liquidate within the 12-month period (or up to 18-month period). In addition, the representative has agreed (i) to waive its redemption rights (or right to participate in any tender offer) with respect to such shares in connection with the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) to waive its rights to liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to such shares if we fail to complete our initial business combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or up to 18 months from the closing of the IPO at the election of the Company in two separate three month extensions subject to satisfaction of certain conditions, including the deposit of $776,716 ($0.10 per unit) for each three month extension, into the trust account, or as extended by the Company’s stockholders in accordance with our amended and restated certificate of incorporation).
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement we entered into with our initial stockholders on December 20, 2021, we may be required to register certain securities for sale under the Securities Act. Our initial stockholders (including the representative), and holders of units issued upon conversion of working capital loans, if any, are entitled under the registration rights agreement to make up to three demands that we register certain of our securities held by them for sale under the Securities Act and to have the securities covered thereby registered for resale pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. In addition, these holders have the right to include their securities in other registration statements filed by us. We will bear the costs and expenses of filing any such registration statements. See the section of this Report entitled “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions.”
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We will qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act will be allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an independent registered public accounting firm’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the report of independent registered public accounting firm providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of the IPO or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.