ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” herein. The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company dedicated to the development and commercialization of cellular therapies designed to reverse disease and/or promote the regeneration of damaged tissue. We are developing first-in-class therapeutics based on the characteristics of naturally occurring CD34+ cells and their ability to stimulate the growth of new microvasculature. Our technology leverages these cells to enable the body's natural repair mechanisms using formulations unique to each medical indication.
Our leadership team has decades of collective biopharmaceutical development experience. Our goal is to develop and commercialize products that address important unmet medical needs based on a broad and versatile portfolio of candidates. The Company’s current product candidates include:
•XOWNA® (CLBS16), the subject of both a completed positive Phase 2a study (ESCaPE-CMD) and an ongoing follow-on Phase 2b study (FREEDOM Trial) in the United States for the treatment of coronary microvascular dysfunction (“CMD”);
•HONEDRA® (CLBS12), recipient of SAKIGAKE designation and eligible for early conditional approval in Japan for the treatment of critical limb ischemia (“CLI”) and Buerger’s disease is being sought based on the current results of a clinical trial executed in Japan. CLBS12 was the recipient of orphan drug designation in March 2021 from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) for Buerger's disease; and
•CLBS201, designed to assess the safety and efficacy of CD34+ cell therapy as a treatment for patients with chronic kidney disease related to type 2 diabetes (diabetic kidney disease or “DKD”).
In addition, we also desire to diversify our pipeline of development product candidates and are exploring a range of strategic transactions in furtherance of that goal. We have taken, and intend to continue to take, active steps to identify diligence-suitable assets and/or companies that would complement and de-risk our current development programs. Such assets could potentially include indications beyond cardiovascular as well as product categories outside of cell therapy and transactions could include an acquisition, merger, business combination, in-license or other strategic transaction, any of which could result in the issuance of securities that could significantly dilute the shares of our existing stockholders. There can be no assurance that this exploration of strategic alternatives will result in us entering into or completing any transaction or that such transaction, if completed, will add to shareholder value.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to present substantial public health and economic challenges around the world, and to date has led to the implementation of various responses, including government-imposed quarantines, stay-at-home orders, travel restrictions, mandated business closures and other public health safety measures.
We continue to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on all aspects of our business, including how it has and will continue to impact our operations and the operations of our suppliers, vendors and business partners, and may take further precautionary and preemptive actions as may be required by federal, state or local authorities. In addition, we have taken steps to minimize the current environment’s impact on our business and strategy, including devising contingency plans and securing additional resources from third party service providers. For the safety of our employees and families, we implemented a universal work from home policy as well as stringent social distancing and other hygiene policies for employees when they must be in the office. Our clinical study of HONEDRA® in Japan has experienced significant delays in enrollment due to the States of Emergency in effect in Japan for most of 2020 and reimplemented from January 7, 2021 through March 21, 2021 covering Tokyo and other regions in response to an increased number of COVID-19 infections. Due to reported increases in COVID-19 cases and a low rate of vaccination in Japan, States of Emergency were renewed on April 25, 2021 through May 11, 2021 and then reimplemented in Tokyo from July 12, 2021 through September 30, 2021. With our expectation that COVID-19 in Japan would continue to impact negatively enrollment of patients in the HONEDRA® clinical trial, we elected to suspend trial enrollment, seek a development partner and consult with the Japanese regulatory authorities regarding the submission of
Index
patient data already accrued. In addition, our phase 2b trial of XOWNA® in the United States has also experienced delays in enrolling patients as a result of COVID-19.
Beyond its impact on our development pipeline described above, the extent to which COVID-19 ultimately impacts our business, results of operations and financial condition will depend on future developments, which remain highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the duration of the outbreak, the emergence of new variants, new information that may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19 or the effectiveness of actions taken to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, including vaccination campaigns, among others. If we or any of the third parties with whom we engage, however, were to experience any additional shutdowns or other prolonged business disruptions, our ability to conduct our business in the manner and on the timelines presently planned could be materially or negatively affected, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition and results of operations. It is possible that our clinical development timelines could continue to be negatively affected by COVID-19, which could materially and adversely affect our business, financial condition and results of operations. See “Risk Factors” for additional discussion of the potential adverse impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Overall, net losses were $27.5 million and $8.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating Expenses
For the year ended December 31, 2021, operating expenses totaled $29.1 million compared to $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of $9.9 million or 52%. Operating expenses comprise the following:
•Research and development expenses were approximately $17.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of approximately $8.4 million, or 91%. This increase was primarily due to an increase in expenses associated with the enrollment of our XOWNA® Phase 2b study (the FREEDOM Trial). Research and development in both periods focused on the advancement of our ischemic repair platform and related to:
◦expenses associated with our XOWNA® Phase 2b study (the FREEDOM Trial) which commenced in the fourth quarter of 2020 with the first patient in the study treated in January 2021;
◦ongoing registration-eligible study expenses for HONEDRA® in CLI in Japan which focused on patient enrollment completion. The study's enrollment has been significantly curtailed by the COVID-19 pandemic's impact in Japan, including the States of Emergency that have persisted there for over 18 months. Due to the significant and continued operational and financial burden incurred as a result of these COVID-19 delays, coupled with the complete unpredictability of the timing of site enrollment re-initiation, we have suspended enrollment efforts and will focus on consummating a partnership with a Japanese company in order to complete the study enrollment as well as to explore the possibility of submitting the existing data to PMDA under the SAKIGAKE designation; and
Index
◦expenses associated with the preparation for filing an IND for the clinical study of CLBS201 for treatment of DKD. A Phase 1, open-label, proof-of-concept trial has been initiated recently and is expected to include six subjects in total.
•General and administrative expenses were approximately $11.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $9.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing an increase of approximately $1.5 million, or 15%. This increase was primarily due to an increase in directors and officers insurance premiums and strategic consulting expenses. Our general and administrative expenses focus on general corporate-related activities.
Historically, to minimize our use of cash, we have used a variety of equity and equity-linked instruments as compensation to employees, consultants, directors and other service providers. The use of these instruments has resulted in charges to the results of operations, which has been significant in the past.
Other Income (Expense)
Total other income (expense) is comprised primarily of investment income on cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities and a loss on sale of $0.1 million related to the sale of our New Jersey net operating losses (“NJ NOLs”).
Income Tax Benefit
In April 2020, we received approval from the New Jersey Economic Development Authority (“NJEDA”) to participate in the Technology Business Tax Certificate Transfer Program (the “Program”), whereby we qualified to sell a percentage of its New Jersey net operating losses (“NJ NOLs”). We subsequently sold a portion of our NJ NOLs to a qualifying and approved buyer pursuant to the Program for net proceeds of $10.9 million.
In April 2021, we received final approval from the NJEDA under the Program to sell a portion of our NJ NOLs, which subsequently were sold to a qualifying and approved buyer pursuant to the Program for net proceeds of $1.4 million. The $1.5 million of our NJ NOL tax benefits have been recorded as a benefit from income taxes and the loss on sale of $0.1 million recorded in other income (expense).
Analysis of Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of approximately $95.0 million, working capital of approximately $91.7 million, and stockholders’ equity of approximately $92.3 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we met our immediate cash requirements through existing cash balances. Additionally, we used equity and equity-linked instruments to pay for services and compensation.
Net cash provided by or used in operating, investing and financing activities were as follows (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Our cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $22.2 million, comprising (i) our net loss of $27.5 million, as adjusted for non-cash income and expenses totaling $4.6 million (which includes adjustments for equity-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, and amortization/accretion of marketable securities), and (ii) changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $0.6 million.
Our cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $8.8 million, which is the sum of (i) our net loss of $8.1 million, as adjusted for non-cash income and expenses totaling $1.6 million (which includes adjustments for equity-based compensation, depreciation and amortization, and amortization/accretion of marketable securities), and (ii) changes in operating assets and liabilities of approximately $2.3 million.
Index
Investing Activities
Our cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled approximately $54.9 million and was primarily due to net purchases of marketable securities (net of sales of marketable securities).
Our cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled approximately $7.3 million and was primarily due to net purchases of marketable securities (net of sales of marketable securities).
Financing Activities
Our cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily consisted of (i) net proceeds of $23.1 million through the issuance of common shares and warrants in our January 2021 private placement, (ii) net proceeds of $1.8 million in connection with warrant exercises, (iii) net proceeds of $60.6 million through the issuance of common shares and warrants in both of our February 2021 registered direct offerings which was partially offset by tax withholding-related payments on net share settlement equity awards to employees.
Our cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of (i) net proceeds of $4.5 million through the issuance of common shares and warrants in our April 2020 registered direct offering, (ii) net proceeds of $3.8 million through the issuance of common shares and warrants in our May 2020 registered direct offering, and (iii) net proceeds of $1.9 million through the issuance of common shares and warrants in our July 2020 private placement offering, and (iv) net proceeds of $8.4 million through the issuance of common shares under our common stock sales agreement with HCW, which was partially offset by tax withholding-related payments on net share settlement equity awards to employees.
Liquidity and Capital Requirements Outlook
To meet our short and long-term liquidity needs, we expect to use existing cash balances and a variety of other means. Other sources of liquidity could include additional potential issuances of debt or equity securities in public or private financings, partnerships and/or collaborations and/or sale of assets. Our history of operating losses and liquidity challenges may make it difficult for us to raise capital on acceptable terms or at all. The demand for the equity and debt of biopharmaceutical companies like ours is dependent upon many factors, including the general state of the financial markets. During times of extreme market volatility, capital may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. Our inability to obtain such additional capital could materially and adversely affect our business operations. We will also continue to seek, as appropriate, grants for scientific and clinical studies from various governmental agencies and foundations, and other sources of non-dilutive funding. We believe that our cash on hand will enable us to fund operating expenses for at least the next 12 months following the issuance of our financial statements.
On June 4, 2021, we entered into an At The Market Offering Agreement (the “ATM Agreement”) with HCW, as sales agent, in connection with an “at the market offering” under which we may, from time to time offer and sell shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $50.0 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had not issued any shares under the ATM Agreement. Pursuant to the ATM Agreement, HCW is only obligated to make sales when we are in compliance with all Nasdaq listing standards. On February 18, 2022, we received a deficiency notice from Nasdaq informing us that we are not in compliance with the Minimum Bid Price Requirement. As such, we will not be able to sell shares under the ATM Agreement until we regain compliance, if ever.
In February 2021, we received preliminary approval from the NJEDA to participate in the Program. The Program permits qualified companies to sell a percentage of their NJ NOLs to unrelated profitable corporations. On April 12, 2021, we received final approval from NJEDA to sell $1.5 million of our NJ NOLs, which were subsequently sold to a qualifying and approved buyer pursuant to the Program for net proceeds of $1.4 million.
In February 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Institutional Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional investors (the “Institutional Purchasers”). Pursuant to the terms of the Institutional Purchase Agreement, we sold to the Institutional Purchasers in a registered direct offering an aggregate of 24,906,134 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 12,453,067 shares of our common stock at a combined purchase price equal to $2.45 per share and associated warrant. Each warrant features an exercise price equal to $2.90 per share, is exercisable immediately upon issuance and will expire five years from the issuance date. Additionally, in a concurrent non-brokered registered direct offering, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “Additional Purchase Agreement”) with certain accredited investors (the “Additional Purchasers”). Pursuant to the terms of the Additional Purchase Agreement, we sold to the Additional Purchasers an aggregate of 1,632,652 shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase an aggregate of 816,326 shares of our common stock at a combined purchase price equal to $2.45 per share and associated warrant. Each warrant features an exercise price equal to $2.90 per share, is exercisable immediately upon issuance and will expire five years from the issuance date. The closing of the offerings occurred on February 17, 2021. In connection with the registered direct offerings, we received gross proceeds of approximately $65.0 million.
Index
On February 12, 2021, we suspended the use of the at-the-market transactions facility (the “ATM”) and terminated the continuous offering pursuant to the Common Stock Sales Agreement (“Sales Agreement”) entered into in February 2018 with HCW. As of termination date of February 12, 2021, we had sold an aggregate of 3,784,912 shares of our common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement for aggregate net proceeds of $9.5 million.
In January 2021, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement (the “January Purchase Agreement”) with certain institutional and accredited investors (the “January Purchasers”), pursuant to which the Company issued and sold to the January Purchasers in a private placement an aggregate of (i) 12,500,000 shares of common stock, and (ii) warrants exercisable for up to an aggregate of 6,250,000 shares of common stock at a combined offering price of $2.00 per share of common stock and associated warrant. The warrants have an exercise price of $2.90 per share. Each warrant will be immediately exercisable and will expire five and one-half years from the issuance date. The closing of the offering occurred on January 25, 2021. We received gross proceeds of $25.0 million in connection with the private placement, before deducting placement agent fees and related offering expenses.
In March 2019, we and Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”) entered into a purchase agreement (the “Purchase Agreement”) and a registration rights agreement (the “Registration Rights Agreement”), pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park shares of our common stock having an aggregate value of up to $26 million, subject to certain limitations and conditions set forth in the Purchase Agreement (the “Offering”). As consideration for entering into the Purchase Agreement, we issued to Lincoln Park an additional 181,510 shares of common stock as commitment shares. Pursuant to the Purchase Agreement, Lincoln Park purchased 250,000 shares of common stock, at a price of $4.00 per share, for a total gross purchase price of $1.0 million (the “Initial Purchase”) upon commencement. Thereafter, as often as every business day from and after one business day following the date of the Initial Purchase and over the 36-month term of the Purchase Agreement, we have the right, from time to time, at our sole discretion and subject to certain conditions, to direct Lincoln Park to purchase up to 100,000 shares of common stock, with such amount increasing as the closing sale price of the common stock increases; provided Lincoln Park’s obligation under any single such purchase will not exceed $2,500,000, unless we and Lincoln Park mutually agree to increase the maximum amount of such single purchase (each, a “Regular Purchase”). If we direct Lincoln Park to purchase the maximum number of shares of common stock we then may sell in a Regular Purchase, then in addition to such Regular Purchase, and subject to certain conditions and limitations in the Purchase Agreement, we may direct Lincoln Park in an “accelerated purchase” to purchase an additional amount of common stock that may not exceed the lesser of (i) 300% the number of shares purchased pursuant to the corresponding Regular Purchase or (ii) 30% of the total number of shares of our common stock traded during a specified period on the applicable purchase date as set forth in the Purchase Agreement. Under certain circumstances and in accordance with the Purchase Agreement, we may direct Lincoln Park to purchase shares in multiple accelerated purchases on the same trading day. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had not made any sales of common stock to Lincoln Park under the Purchase Agreement other than the Initial Purchase.
While we continue to seek capital through a number of means, there can be no assurance that additional financing will be available on acceptable terms, if at all, and our negotiating position in capital generating efforts may worsen as existing resources are used. Additional equity financing may be dilutive to our stockholders; debt financing, if available, may involve significant cash payment obligations and covenants that restrict our ability to operate as a business; our stock price may not reach levels necessary to induce option or warrant exercises; and asset sales may not be possible on terms we consider acceptable. If we are unable to access capital necessary to meet our long-term liquidity needs, we may have to delay the expansion of our business or raise funds on terms that we currently consider unfavorable.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the amounts reported in the financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and other assumptions believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates.
An accounting policy is considered to be critical if it is important to our financial condition and results of operations and if it requires management’s most difficult, subjective and complex judgments in its application. For a summary of all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Index
Share-Based Compensation
We expense all share-based payment awards to employees, directors, and consultants, including grants of stock options, warrants, and restricted stock, over the requisite service period based on the grant date fair value of the awards. Consultant awards are remeasured each reporting period through vesting. For awards with performance-based vesting criteria, we estimate the probability of achievement of the performance criteria and recognize compensation expense related to those awards expected to vest. We determine the fair value of option awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model which uses both historical and current market data to estimate fair value. This method incorporates various assumptions such as the risk-free interest rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life of the options or warrants. The fair value of our restricted stock and restricted stock units is based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant.