Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the related notes of Latch, Inc. and its subsidiaries included elsewhere in this Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this subsection to “we,” “our,” “Latch” and the “Company” refer to the business and operations of Latch Systems, Inc. (formerly known as Latch, Inc.) and its consolidated subsidiaries prior to the Business Combination and to Latch, Inc. (formerly known as TS Innovation Acquisitions Corp.) and its consolidated subsidiaries following the consummation of the Business Combination.
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Registration Statement on Form S-1 filed with the SEC on June 25, 2021.
Overview
Latch is an enterprise technology company focused on revolutionizing the way people experience spaces by making spaces better places to live, work and visit. Latch has created a full-building operating system, LatchOS, that addresses the essential needs of modern buildings by streamlining building operations, enhancing the resident experience and enabling more efficient interactions with service providers.
The Business Combination
On June 4, 2021, we consummated the previously announced Merger, pursuant to which Merger Sub merged with and into Legacy Latch, with Legacy Latch becoming our wholly owned subsidiary. On the Closing Date, and in connection with the Closing of the Transactions, we changed our name to Latch, Inc. On June 7, 2021, Latch’s common stock and warrants began trading on Nasdaq under the ticker symbols “LTCH” and “LTCHW,” respectively.
See Part I, Item 1. “Business” and Note 1, Description of Business, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements” for additional detail about the Business Combination.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future success will be dependent on many factors, including those further discussed below. While these areas represent opportunities for Latch, they also represent challenges and risks that we must successfully address in order to operate and grow our business.
Investing in Research and Development (“R&D”) and enhancing our customer experience. Our performance is significantly dependent on the investments we make in research and development, including our ability to attract and retain highly skilled research and development personnel. We must continually develop and introduce innovative new hardware products, mobile
applications and other new offerings. If we fail to innovate and enhance our brand and our products, our market position and revenue will likely be adversely affected.
Product introductions and expansion of our platform. We will need to expend additional resources to continue introducing new products, features and functionality to enhance the value of our platform. To date, product introductions have often had a positive impact on our operating results due primarily to increases in revenue associated with sales of new products in the quarters following their introduction. In the future, we intend to continue to release new products and enhance our existing products, and we expect that our operating results will be impacted by these releases.
Category adoption, expansion of our total addressable market and market growth. Our future growth depends in part on the continued consumer adoption of hardware and software products that improve resident experience and the growth of this market. In addition, our long-term growth depends in part on our ability to expand into adjacent markets and international territories in the future.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate business plans and make strategic decisions that will impact our future operational results. Increases or decreases in our key business metrics may not correspond with increases or decreases in our revenue.
The limitations our key business metrics have as an analytical tool include: (1) they might not accurately predict our future GAAP financial results; (2) we might not realize all or any part of the anticipated contract value reflected in our Total Bookings; and (3) other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate our key business metrics or similarly titled measures differently, which reduces their usefulness as comparative measures.
The key business metrics presented below represent our key business metrics for the year ended December 31, 2021. We have undertaken a strategic review of these metrics and, beginning with the three months ending March 31, 2022, we anticipate no longer reporting the following metrics as key business metrics: Hardware Bookings, Software Bookings, Total Bookings, Total Booked ARR and Booked Home Units-Cumulative. This change is intended to better align our key business metrics with our internal priorities and business plans for 2022 and beyond. Rather than focusing on bookings-related metrics that represent future target deliveries, we plan to focus on the near-term delivery of software revenue. We intend to continue reporting revenue (GAAP) and net loss (GAAP) as key business metrics during the year ending December 31, 2022, and we also intend to begin reporting software revenue (GAAP) as an additional key business metric.
We anticipate reviewing and reporting new key business metrics beginning with the three months ended March 31, 2022, including “ARR” and “Spaces.” Brief descriptions of these new key business metrics are provided below. We will provide additional detail regarding these key business metrics when we begin reporting them in subsequent periods.
ARR is the value of annual recurring revenue from software or services subscriptions at the end of the period, net of promotional and term discounts.
Spaces is the count of units that actively generate software or services revenue, in alignment with our revenue recognition policy.
Bookings
We use Bookings to measure sales volume and velocity of our hardware and software products. Bookings represent written but non-binding LOIs from our customers to purchase Latch hardware products and software services, not reflecting discounts. We sell software services with all our access hardware products. Based on historical experience, we believe there is sufficient or reasonable certainty about the customers’ ability and intent to fulfill these commitments with a target delivery date no longer than 24 months following LOI signature. Bookings (including Hardware and Software Bookings) are adjusted to account for any adjustments made to Booked Home Units-Cumulative, including adjustments for those Bookings that do not ship within a 36-month construction timeframe.
Hardware Bookings
Hardware Bookings represent the total revenue commitment to be recognized at time of shipment of the product. We calculate Hardware Bookings by multiplying the total booked units by the sales price (excluding discounts) for each respective unit. There is typically a lag between Hardware Bookings and recognition of GAAP revenue due to installation timelines with a target delivery date no longer than 24 months following LOI signature.
Software Bookings
Software Bookings represent the total revenue commitment over the life of the software agreement. We calculate Software Bookings by multiplying the total booked units by the subscription price (excluding discounts) and the contract term as outlined in the LOI. There is typically a lag between Software Bookings and recognition of GAAP revenue due to installation timelines and the recognition of Software Revenue over the course of the contract with a target delivery date no longer than 24 months following LOI signature. Our long-term software contracts typically average between five and six years in length.
Booked ARR
We use Booked Annual Recurring Revenue (“ARR”) to assess the general health and trajectory of our recurring software. Booked ARR is defined as the cumulative value of annual recurring revenue from Latch software subscriptions that are under a signed LOI. We calculate Booked ARR by multiplying the total number of units that have been booked by the annual listed subscription pricing (excluding discounts) at the time of booking. LOIs typically deliver within six to 18 months of signing, depending on construction timelines. Booked ARR is adjusted for Bookings that do not ship within a 36-month construction timeframe. It should be viewed differently from Software Bookings as it represents only the average annual software revenue, not the lifetime contract value.
Booked Home Units-Cumulative
We use Booked Home Units-Cumulative to measure the number of homes signed to operate on our platform, market penetration in the rental homes market and the size of the opportunity to grow revenue by increasing sales of additional hardware, software and service revenue into already-signed homes. Booked Home Units represent the total number of apartment units or similar dwellings installed cumulatively, as well as committed to be installed, with Latch products. Booked
Home Units are adjusted for Bookings that do not ship within a 36-month construction timeframe. LOIs typically deliver within six to 18 months of signing, depending on construction timelines.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as our net loss, excluding the impact of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization expense, interest income, interest expense, provision for income taxes, restructuring, one-time litigation expenses, loss on extinguishment of debt, change in fair value of derivative instruments, warrant liabilities and trading securities, and transaction related expenses. We believe excluding the impact of these items in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core operating performance. We monitor, and have presented in this Report, Adjusted EBITDA because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets and to develop operational goals for managing our business. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for additional information and a reconciliation of this measure to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We currently generate revenue from three sources: (1) hardware devices that are both Latch-built (“first-party”) and partner-built (“third-party”), (2) professional services related to the hardware devices and (3) software products used by property managers via Web or mobile and by residents via mobile.
Hardware and Other Related Revenue
We generate hardware revenue primarily from the sale of our portfolio of both first-party and third-party devices for our smart access and smart building solutions. We sell hardware to building developers directly or through our channel partners who act as an intermediary and installer. We recognize hardware revenue when the hardware is shipped directly to building developers or to our channel partners, which is when control is transferred to the building developer. We provide warranties that our hardware will be substantially free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of one year for electronic components and five years for mechanical components. We replace, repair or refund warrantable devices at our sole discretion. We also generate revenues related to hardware, which includes professional services related to installation and activation of hardware devices sold to building developers. These services are recognized over time on a percentage of completion basis.
We continue to see the impact of labor and building material shortages and construction delays. We continue to confront production issues due to industry-wide supply chain disruptions that created shortages of certain construction materials and other products, and our customers also experienced trade labor availability constraints and delays. These factors continue to create construction delays for our customers, which have and may continue to delay the timing of our hardware revenue. In addition, we are experiencing higher inventory costs as a result of the global supply chain shortages, which we will continue to incur where economically reasonable in order to prioritize and meet customer demand.
Software Revenue
We generate software revenue primarily through the sale of our SaaS over our cloud-based platform on a subscription-based arrangement. Subscription fees vary depending on the optional features selected by customers as well as the term length. SaaS arrangements generally have term lengths of month-to-month, two-year, five-year and ten-year and include a fixed fee paid upfront except for the month-to-month arrangements. As a result of significant discounts provided to our customers on the longer-term software contracts paid up front, we have determined that there is a significant financing component related to the time value of money and have therefore broken out the interest component. Revenue is primarily recognized on a ratable basis over the subscription period of the contractual arrangement beginning when or as control of the promised services is available or transferred to the customer. We expect software revenue to increase as a percentage of total revenue over time.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of hardware and other related revenue consists primarily of product costs, including manufacturing costs, duties and other applicable importing costs, shipping and handling costs, packaging, warranty costs, assembly costs and warehousing costs, as well as other non-inventoriable costs including personnel-related expenses associated with supply chain logistics and
direct deployment, outsourced labor costs and channel partner fees. Cost of software revenue consists primarily of outsourced hosting costs and personnel-related expenses associated with monitoring and managing the outsourced hosting service provider. Our cost of revenue excludes depreciation and amortization shown in operating expenses.
We expect some volatility in cost of hardware and other related revenue primarily due to: (i) a new generation of hardware products being released with varying production costs; (ii) recent widespread challenges within the global electronics supply chain leading to a much more tactical sourcing environment and higher production and shipping costs; and (iii) changes to import tariff amounts as a result of changes to U.S. trade policy with China.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses consist of research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative and depreciation and amortization expenses.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our employees working on our product, design and engineering teams, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, payroll taxes, travel and stock-based compensation. Also included are non-personnel costs such as amounts paid to our third-party contract manufacturers for tooling, engineering and prototype costs of our hardware products, fees paid to third-party consultants, R&D supplies and rent. We expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to make significant investments in developing new products and enhancing existing products.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our employees working on our sales, customer success, deployment and marketing teams, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, payroll taxes, travel, commissions and stock-based compensation. Also included are non-personnel costs such as marketing activities (trade shows and events, conferences and digital advertising), professional fees, rent and customer support. We expect our sales and marketing expense to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in our sales force and marketing efforts to drive increased market share through new customer acquisition and provide best in class support to our existing customer base.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of personnel and related expenses for our executive, legal, human resources, finance and IT functions, including salaries, bonuses, benefits, payroll taxes, travel and stock-based compensation. Additional expenses included in this category are non-personnel costs such as legal fees, rent, professional fees, audit fees, bad debt expense and insurance costs. During the first quarter of 2021, we incurred stock-based compensation expense from a non-recurring secondary purchase as described in Note 14, Stock-Based Compensation, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.” Excluding this impact, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars primarily due to: (i) the continued growth of our business and related infrastructure; and (ii) legal, accounting, director and officer insurance, investor relations and other costs associated with operating as a public company.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist primarily of depreciation expense related to investments in property and equipment and internally developed capitalized software.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of interest expense associated with the significant financing component of our longer-term software contracts, interest expense associated with our debt financing arrangements, interest income on highly liquid short-term investments, gain or loss on extinguishment of debt and gain or loss on change in fair value of derivatives and warrant liabilities.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes consists primarily of income taxes related to state jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a full valuation allowance on our deferred tax assets as we have concluded that it is more likely than not that the deferred assets will not be utilized.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our historical Consolidated Statements of Operations and Comprehensive Loss data. The period to period comparison of operating results is not necessarily indicative of results for future periods:
(1)Exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown in operating expenses below.
N.M.: Not meaningful
Comparison of years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue increased $23.3 million driven by an $18.9 million increase in hardware and other related revenue and a $4.4 million increase in software revenue. We experienced delays in unit deliveries in the first half of 2020 as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on the residential multi-family construction market, but as the construction market and economy began to improve, hardware unit deliveries started increasing during the third quarter of 2020. The 132% hardware and other related revenue growth is also attributable to accelerated demand, including for new 2021 product releases such as C2, Latch Intercom and third-party smart home devices as well as our new professional services offerings. The software revenue growth of 117% reflects the continued growth in the home units install base as a result of the hardware units delivered in 2020 and 2021.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased $23.8 million primarily as a result of the increase in cost of hardware and other related revenue of $23.4 million, which was mainly driven by the costs associated with the increased hardware unit deliveries and increased hardware inventory costs due to the global supply chain challenges.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased $20.5 million primarily due to: (i) $9.9 million of higher stock-based compensation due to the RSUs granted in 2021 and a stock-based compensation charge incurred in the first quarter of 2021 in connection with the sale of shares to investors by certain Company employees and non-employee service providers; and (ii) $9.6 million of higher personnel-related expenses due to increased headcount to invest in new hardware devices as well as our expanded functionality of our LatchOS platform.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses increased $21.9 million primarily due to: (i) $12.5 million in higher personnel-related expenses due to increased headcount as we invest in our sales force and demand generation team; (ii) $3.5 million of higher stock-based compensation due to the RSUs granted during 2021; (iii) $2.3 million of higher advertising expense; (iv) $1.4 million of higher software license expense due to increased investments made in technology; and (v) $1.2 million in higher travel expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased $42.0 million primarily due to: (i) $14.2 million of higher stock-based compensation due to the RSUs granted during 2021 and a stock-based compensation charge incurred in the first quarter of 2021 in connection with the sale of shares to investors by certain Company employees and non-employee service providers; (ii) $6.9 million in higher professional fees, including audit fees, and $6.2 million in higher personnel-related expenses as a result of building out our corporate infrastructure to operate as a public company; (iii) $5.9 million in higher litigation costs as a result of an estimated liability recorded in connection with a dispute with a service provider; (iv) $4.6 million in higher transaction costs and professional advisory fees in connection with the Business Combination; (v) $2.3 million in public company insurance expense; and (vi) $1.8 million of higher bad debt expense.
Depreciation and Amortization Expenses
The increase in depreciation and amortization expenses of $1.9 million was primarily due to the increase in amortization of internally developed software released in 2021.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense increased $13.5 million primarily due to: (i) an $11.7 million unfavorable change in the fair value of the derivative liabilities related to our Convertible Notes (as defined below under “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Indebtedness”) and warrants related to our term loan; (ii) $1.3 million increased loss on extinguishment of debt related to our Convertible Notes; and (iii) $4.6 million higher interest expense primarily related to our Convertible Notes, partially offset by a $4.1 million favorable change in the fair value of the private placement warrants.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses since our inception. Prior to the Closing of the Business Combination, our operations were financed primarily through net proceeds from the issuance of our redeemable convertible preferred stock and Convertible Notes, as well as borrowings under our term loan. We received approximately $448.0 million in cash proceeds, net of fees and expenses funded in connection with the Closing, which included approximately $192.6 million from the sale of approximately 19.3 million newly-issued shares of common stock in connection with the Business Combination. See Note 1, Description of Business, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.” At Closing, we also repaid the $5.0 million term loan and cancelled the associated $5.0 million revolving line of credit described below. Also in connection with the Closing of the Business Combination, $50.0 million outstanding principal amount of Convertible Notes and unpaid accrued interest converted into 6.9 million shares of our common stock. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $328.5 million, working capital of $291.8 million, $3.4 million outstanding under our $6.0 million revolving facility with a freight forwarding and customs brokerage company and $124.8 million in cash and cash equivalents. During 2021, we invested in available-for-sale securities, including commercial paper, corporate bonds, U.S. government agency debt securities and asset backed securities. As of December 31, 2021, available-for-sale securities totaled approximately $261.9 million. See Note 3, Investments, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.” The Company’s available-for-sale securities investment portfolio is primarily invested in highly rated securities, with the primary objective of minimizing the potential risk of principal loss. The Company’s investment policy generally requires securities to be investment grade and limits the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer.
We subcontract with other companies to manufacture our products. During the normal course of business, we and our manufacturers procure components based upon a forecasted production plan. If we cancel all or part of the orders, we may be liable to our suppliers and manufacturers for the cost of the unutilized component orders or components purchased by our manufacturers. Historically, we do not believe there have been any material liabilities that have resulted from cancellation of purchase orders.
Our short-term liquidity needs primarily include working capital for sales and marketing, research and development and continued innovation. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our levels of revenue, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, market acceptance of our products, the results of business initiatives, the timing of new product introductions and overall economic conditions.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities and revolving facility will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months.
Indebtedness
2020 Convertible Notes
Between August 11, 2020 and October 23, 2020, Legacy Latch issued a series of Convertible Notes with a maturity date of April 23, 2022 (subject to the holder’s option to extend the maturity date for a period of one year), for an aggregate principal amount of $50 million (the “Convertible Notes”). The Convertible Notes accrued interest at a rate of 5% per annum for the first six months, 7% per annum for the following six months and 9% per annum from month 13 until maturity, that was due and payable upon the earlier to occur of the maturity date or an event of default, unless otherwise converted prior to maturity or an event of default.
The terms of the Convertible Notes provided for the principal and accrued interest to automatically convert into the type of preferred stock issued in a sale of preferred stock at a specified conversion price. Upon certain corporate transactions or liquidity events, outstanding principal at 1.25 times par value and interest on each Convertible Note would, at the holder’s option, be due and payable in full or be converted into common stock of Legacy Latch at a specified conversion price.
As noted above, in connection with the Closing, $50.0 million outstanding principal amount of Convertible Notes and unpaid accrued interest converted into 6.9 million shares of our common stock.
Revolving Line of Credit and Term Loan
In September 2020, Legacy Latch obtained a revolving line of credit and a term loan, both of which were secured by a first-perfected security interest in substantially all of the assets of Legacy Latch.
The revolving line of credit provided a credit extension of up to $5.0 million and bore interest at the greater of the prime rate plus 2% or 5.25% per annum, as long as Legacy Latch maintained an Adjusted Quick Ratio (as defined in the credit agreement) of 1.25. If the Adjusted Quick Ratio fell below 1.25, then the revolving line of credit would bear interest at the greater of the prime rate plus 3% or 6.25% per annum. Legacy Latch could only borrow up to 80% of eligible accounts receivable. Legacy Latch did not draw any amounts on the line of credit, which was cancelled upon the repayment in full of the term loan in connection with the Closing.
The available amount under the term loan was an initial $5.0 million, with two additional tranches of $2.5 million each, which Legacy Latch could draw down on in annual increments from closing. The term loan bore interest at the greater of the prime rate plus 3% or 6.25% per annum. The term loan was set to mature on December 1, 2024. On June 4, 2021, the Company paid in full the outstanding principal and accrued interest on the term loan.
Revolving Credit Facility
On July 1, 2021, the Company executed a new revolving credit facility replacing the matured facility described in Note 9, Debt, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.” The revolving facility has a credit limit of $6.0 million with no stated maturity date. An installment plan agreement is executed for each financing request, which includes the interest rate. The revolving facility has no financial or other covenants. As of December 31, 2021, $3.4 million was outstanding under the revolving credit facility.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to December 31, 2020
Operating Activities
The increase of $52.2 million in net cash used in operating activities reflects the $56.6 million increase in the net loss, after adjusting for non-cash items, and a higher increase in accounts receivable of $18.0 million driven by the higher 2021 revenue, partially offset by:
•a $17.6 million increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses primarily associated with higher expenses to support general business growth and the related timing of payments, in addition to an increase in accrued litigation costs; and
•a $6.2 million increase in deferred revenue primarily due to the growth in long-term software contracts.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities increased $272.2 million to $277.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $5.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to purchases of available-for-sale and trading securities of $268.8 million, net of sales and maturities, and higher spend on internally developed software costs that are capitalized of $1.6 million reflecting increased headcount as well as incremental new functionality being added to our LatchOS platform for future product releases.
Financing Activities
In the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of: (i) $448.0 million of net proceeds from the Business Combination; (ii) $3.3 million from the issuance of common stock in connection with exercises
of stock options; and (iii) $3.4 million of net borrowings under our revolving facility, partially offset by the $5.0 million repayment of the term loan and a $1.8 million payment for tax withholdings on net settlement of RSUs.
In the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted of: (i) $50.0 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes; (ii) $10.3 million of net proceeds from the issuance of Series B-1 preferred stock; and (iii) $4.9 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the term loan.
Cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to December 31, 2019
Operating Activities
The increase of $6.0 million in net cash used in operating activities reflects the $15.7 million increase in the net loss, after adjusting for non-cash items, partially offset by:
•a higher increase in accounts receivable of $5.2 million in 2019 associated with increased adoption of products;
•a higher investment of $1.1 million in inventories in 2019, primarily associated with the launch of the next generation of the M series product in 2019;
•a $2.3 million increase in deferred revenue in 2020 reflecting the growth in long-term software contracts; and
•a $1.4 million net increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses reflecting the accrual of expenditures incurred related to the Business Combination and to support general business growth, and the related timing of payments.
Investing Activities
In 2020, net cash used in investing activities consisted principally of capitalized internally developed software costs of $5.0 million, primarily reflecting the continued new functionality being added to our LatchOS platform for future product releases.
In 2019, net cash used in investing activities consisted of capitalized software development costs of $2.9 million as a result of new functionality and products being built for our LatchOS platform and the purchase of property and equipment of $0.9 million.
Financing Activities
In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities consisted principally of the net proceeds from the issuance of the Convertible Notes of $50.0 million, Series B-1 preferred stock of $10.3 million and the term loan of $4.9 million, as well as proceeds and subsequent repayment of funds pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program under the CARES Act.
In 2019, net cash provided by financing activities consisted principally of the net proceeds from the issuance of Series B-1 preferred stock of $56.5 million and convertible promissory notes of $9.0 million.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements. We base these estimates and judgments on historical experience, projected future cash flows and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from our estimates under different assumptions or conditions, and to the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that of our significant accounting policies, which are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements (see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements”), the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, we believe that the following
accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We currently generate revenue primarily from three sources: hardware devices, professional services and software products. Revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised goods or services to customers at the transaction price. The Company estimates the transaction price, including variable consideration, at the commencement of the contract and recognizes revenue over the contract term.
To determine the transaction price, we analyze all of the performance obligations included in the contract. We consider the terms of the contract and our customary business practices, which typically include financing components or non-cash consideration. At times, our contracts include consideration payable to a customer in the form of fixed discounts or rebates. We record the consideration payable to a customer as a reduction to the transaction price resulting in a reduction to revenue over the service period.
If we enter into contracts that contain multiple promised services, we evaluate which of the promised services represent separate performance obligations based on whether or not the promised services are distinct and whether or not the services are separable from other promises in the contract. If these criteria are met, then we allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations using the relative stand-alone selling price method at contract inception.
Hardware and Other Related Revenue
We generate hardware revenue primarily from the sale of our portfolio of devices for our smart access and smart apartment solutions. We sell hardware to building developers directly or through our channel partners who act as the intermediary and installer. We recognize hardware revenue when the hardware is shipped directly to building developers or to our channel partners, which is when control is transferred to the building developer.
We provide warranties that our hardware will be substantially free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of one year for electronic components and five years for mechanical components. We replace, repair or refund warrantable devices at our sole discretion.
We determined these warranties are not separate performance obligations as they cannot be purchased separately and do not provide a service in addition to an assurance the hardware will function as expected. We record a reserve as a component of cost of hardware revenue based on historical costs of replacement units for returns of defective products. Due to our limited operating history, our ability to forecast future operating results, including the estimation of product returns, may differ materially from actual results. We also provide certain customers a wholesale arrangement with a right of return for non-defective products, which is treated as a reduction of hardware revenue based on our expectations and historical experience.
We also generate revenues related to hardware, which includes professional services related to installation and activation of hardware devices sold to building developers. These services are recognized over time on a percentage of completion basis.
Software Revenue
We generate software revenue primarily through the sale of our SaaS to building developers over our cloud-based platform on a subscription-based arrangement. Subscription fees vary depending on the optional features selected by customers as well as the term length. SaaS arrangements generally have term lengths of month-to-month, two-year, five-year and ten-year and include a fixed-fee paid upfront except for the month-to-month arrangements. As a result of significant discounts provided to our customers on the longer-term software contracts paid upfront, we have determined that there is a significant financing component related to the time value of money and have therefore broken out the interest component and recorded as a component of interest income (expense), net on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The interest expense related to the significant financing component is recorded using the effective interest method, which has higher interest expense at inception and declines over time to match the underlying economics of the transaction where the outstanding principal balance decreases over time.
The services provided by us for the subscription-based arrangements are considered stand-ready performance obligations where customers benefit from the services evenly throughout the service period. Revenue is primarily recognized on a ratable basis over the subscription period of the contractual arrangement beginning when or as control of the promised services is available or transferred to the customer.
Stock-Based Compensation
We compensate our executive officers, board of directors, employees and consultants with stock-based compensation under our stock incentive plans as described in Note 14, Stock-Based Compensation, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.” We record stock-based compensation expense based upon the award’s grant date fair value. We estimate the fair value of stock options granted on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model, which requires us to estimate the risk-free interest rate, expected term, expected stock price volatility and dividend yield.
The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates for constant maturity U.S. Treasury securities consistent with the expected term of our stock options.
The expected term represents the period of time the stock options are expected to be outstanding and is based on the “simplified method.” Under the “simplified method,” the expected term of an option is presumed to be the mid-point between the vesting date and the end of the contractual term. We use the “simplified method” due to the lack of sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to otherwise estimate the expected term of the stock options.
Since we have minimal trading history of our common stock, the expected volatility was derived from the average historical stock volatility of several unrelated public companies within our industry that we consider to be comparable to our business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the awards.
We do not expect any material changes in the near term to the underlying assumptions used to calculate stock-based compensation expense. However, if changes in these assumptions occur, and, should those changes be significant, they could have a material impact on our stock-based compensation expense.
Common Stock Valuations
In the absence of a public trading market at the time of granting stock options prior to the Closing, the fair value of Legacy Latch common stock was determined by the Legacy Latch board of directors, with input from management, taking into account Legacy Latch’s most recent valuations from an independent third-party valuation specialist. Legacy Latch’s board of directors intended all stock options granted to have an exercise price per share not less than the per share fair value of our common stock on the date of grant. The valuations of Legacy Latch common stock were determined in accordance with the guidelines outlined in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Aid, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. The assumptions used in the valuation models were based on future expectations combined with management judgment and considered numerous objective and subjective factors to determine the fair value of Legacy Latch common stock as of the date of each option grant, including the following factors:
•relevant precedent transactions involving Legacy Latch capital stock;
•contemporaneous valuations performed at periodic intervals by unrelated third-party specialists;
•the liquidation preferences, rights, preferences and privileges of Legacy Latch redeemable convertible preferred stock relative to its common stock;
•Legacy Latch’s actual operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions and projections;
•Legacy Latch’s stage of development;
•the likelihood and timing of achieving a liquidity event for the shares of common stock underlying the stock options, such as an initial public offering, given prevailing market conditions;
•any adjustment necessary to recognize a lack of marketability of the common stock underlying the granted options;
•recent secondary stock sales and tender offers;
•the market performance of comparable publicly traded companies; and
•U.S. and global capital market conditions.
In valuing Legacy Latch common stock at various dates, the Legacy Latch board of directors determined the equity value of the business using various valuation methods, including combinations of income and market approaches, with input from management.
Application of these approaches involved the use of estimates, judgment and assumptions that are highly complex and subjective, such as those regarding Legacy Latch’s expected future revenue, expenses and future cash flows, discount rates, market multiples, the selection of comparable companies and the probability of possible future events. Changes in any or all of these estimates and assumptions or the relationships between those assumptions impact our valuations as of each valuation date and may have a material impact on the valuation of our common stock.
Impairment of Internally Developed Software
Our fixed assets are primarily comprised of capitalized software development. We evaluate the recoverability of our long-lived assets, including capitalized software, for impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. Recoverability of long-lived assets are measured by comparison of the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. Capitalized software is reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the asset may not be recoverable. The amount of impairment loss, if any, is measured as the difference between the carrying value of the asset and its estimated fair value. Fair value is determined through various valuation techniques, including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the consolidated financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded for deferred tax assets if it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The Company recognizes the effect of income tax positions only if those positions are more likely than not of being sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely of being realized. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements” for more information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our financial statements presented in accordance with GAAP and to provide investors with additional information regarding our financial results, we have presented in this Report Adjusted EBITDA, a non-GAAP financial measure. Adjusted EBITDA is not based on any standardized methodology prescribed by GAAP and is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as our net loss, excluding the impact of stock-based compensation expense, depreciation and amortization expense, interest income, interest expense, provision for income taxes, restructuring, one-time litigation expenses, loss on extinguishment of debt, gain or loss on change in fair value of derivative instruments, warrant liabilities and trading securities, and transaction related expenses. The most directly comparable GAAP measure is net loss. We believe excluding the impact of these items in calculating Adjusted EBITDA can provide a useful measure for period-to-period comparisons of our core operating performance. We monitor, and have presented in this Report, Adjusted EBITDA because it is a key measure used by our management and board of directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance, to establish budgets and to develop operational goals for managing our business. We believe Adjusted EBITDA helps identify underlying trends in our business that could otherwise be masked by the effect of the expenses that we include in net loss. Accordingly, we believe Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors, analysts and others in understanding and evaluating our operating results, enhancing the overall understanding of our past performance.
Adjusted EBITDA is not prepared in accordance with GAAP and should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net loss, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. In addition, the expenses and other items that we exclude in our calculations of Adjusted EBITDA may differ from the expenses and other items, if any, that other companies may exclude from Adjusted EBITDA when they report their operating results.
In addition, other companies may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of Adjusted EBITDA as a tool for comparison.
The following table reconciles Adjusted EBITDA to net loss, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP.
Reconciliation of Net Loss to Adjusted EBITDA
(1)As a result of significant discounts provided to our customers on our longer-term software contracts paid upfront, the Company has determined that there is a significant financing component related to the time value of money and has therefore broken out the interest component and recorded it as a component of interest income (expense), net on the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. The interest expense is recorded using the effective interest method, which has higher interest expense at inception and declines over time to match the underlying economics of the transaction where the outstanding principal balance decreases over time. Interest expense associated with the significant financing component included in interest (income) expense, net was $3.1 million, $1.5 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
(2)The Company initiated a restructuring plan in the first quarter of 2020 as part of its efforts to reduce operating expenses and preserve liquidity due to the uncertainty and challenges stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic. The restructuring included a RIF involving an approximate 25% reduction in headcount, which resulted in severance and benefit costs for affected employees and other miscellaneous direct costs. These costs are included principally within research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss, based on the department to which the expense relates.
(3)Transaction costs related to the Business Combination. These costs are included within sales and marketing and general and administrative within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
(4)Legal and settlement fees incurred in connection with non-ordinary course litigation and other disputes, including $6.8 million related to an estimated liability recorded in connection with a dispute with a service provider during the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 11, Commitments and Contingencies, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.” These costs are included within general and administrative within the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
(5)Stock-based compensation and warrant expense associated with equity compensation plans, including $14.6 million related to RSUs granted during the year ended December 31, 2021 and $13.8 million related to the secondary purchase
transaction during the year ended December 31, 2021. See Note 14, Stock-Based Compensation, in Part II, Item 8. “Financial Statements.”
Emerging Growth Company Status
Following the consummation of the Business Combination, the Post-Combination Company was an emerging growth company (“EGC”), as defined in the JOBS Act. The JOBS Act permits companies with EGC status to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards, delaying the adoption of these accounting standards until they would apply to private companies. We elected to use this extended transition period to enable us to comply with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date we (i) were no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting standards as of public company effective dates.
In addition, we relied on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, as an EGC, we were not required to, among other things: (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002; (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act; (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis); and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation.
We were eligible to remain an EGC under the JOBS Act until the earliest of (i) the last day of our first fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of the TSIA IPO, (ii) the last date of our fiscal year in which we had total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the date on which it we were deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the rules of the SEC with at least $700.0 million of outstanding securities held by non-affiliates, or (iv) the date on which we had issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the previous three years.
The Company’s aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates, based on the closing price of our common stock of $12.27 on June 30, 2021, was approximately $1.4 billion. As a result, we were deemed to be a large accelerated filer, and ceased to be an EGC, as of December 31, 2021.