Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information included in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should review the “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and “Risk Factors” sections of this Annual Report for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Initial Public Offering
On October 12, 2021, Life Time Group Holdings, Inc. consummated its initial public offering (“IPO”) of 39.0 million shares of its common stock at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, resulting in total gross proceeds of $702.0 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and other offering expenses. The shares of its common stock began trading on the NYSE under the symbol “LTH” on October 7, 2021. A registration statement on Form S-1 relating to the offering of these securities was declared effective by the SEC on October 6, 2021. Additionally, on November 1, 2021, Life Time Group Holdings, Inc. consummated the sale of nearly 1.6 million additional shares of its common stock at the IPO price of $18.00 per share pursuant to the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, resulting in total gross proceeds of approximately $28.4 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions.
Business
Life Time, the “Healthy Way of Life Company,” is a leading lifestyle brand offering premium health, fitness and wellness experiences to a community of nearly 1.3 million individual members, who together comprise more than 724,000 memberships, as of December 31, 2021. Since our founding nearly 30 years ago, we have sought to continuously innovate ways for our members to lead healthy and happy lives by offering them the best places, programs and performers. We deliver high-quality experiences through our omni-channel physical and digital ecosystem that includes more than 150 centers-distinctive, resort-like athletic destinations-across 29 states in the United States and one province in Canada. Our track record of providing differentiated experiences to our members has fueled our strong, long-term financial performance. In 2021, a year in which we experienced an initial recovery from the impacts of COVID-19, we generated $1,318 million of revenue, a net loss of $579 million and $80 million in Adjusted EBITDA. In 2020, which was significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, we generated $948 million of revenue, a net loss of $360 million and $(63) million in Adjusted EBITDA. In 2019, prior to
the COVID-19 pandemic, we generated $1,900 million of revenue, net income of $30 million and $438 million in Adjusted EBITDA.
Our luxurious athletic centers, which are located in both affluent suburban and urban locations, total more than 15 million square feet in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021, we had 12 new centers under construction and we believe we have significant opportunities to continue expanding our portfolio of premium centers with 10 or more planned new centers annually for the foreseeable future in increasingly affluent markets. We offer expansive fitness floors with top-of-the-line equipment, spacious locker rooms, group fitness studios, indoor and outdoor pools and bistros, indoor and outdoor tennis courts, basketball courts, LifeSpa, LifeCafe and our childcare and Kids Academy learning spaces. Our premium service offering is delivered by approximately 30,000 Life Time team members, including over 7,800 certified fitness professionals, ranging from personal trainers to studio performers. As we continue to emerge from the COVID-19 pandemic and grow our business with more team members and more centers, we may be impacted by broader market conditions such as inflation and pressure on labor costs and labor availability.
Our members are highly engaged and draw inspiration from the experiences and community we have created, as demonstrated by the 69 million visits to our centers in 2021, 48 million visits to our centers in 2020 despite the COVID-19 pandemic and 92 million visits to our centers in 2019. We believe that no other company in the United States delivers the same quality and breadth of health, fitness and wellness experiences that we deliver, which has enabled us to consistently grow our recurring membership dues and in-center revenues for 20 consecutive years, prior to the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our recurring membership dues represented 68%, 67% and 63%, respectively, of our total revenue, while our in-center revenue, consisting of Life Time Training, LifeCafe, LifeSpa, Life Time Swim and Life Time Kids, among other services, represented 29%, 29% and 34%, respectively, of our total revenue. Between 2015 and 2019, we grew our average revenue per center membership from $1,883 to $2,172, a testament to the significant value that our members place on engaging with Life Time. While average revenue per center membership fell to $1,317 in 2020, we saw a strong rebound in 2021, with $2,098 in average revenue per center membership. As we have delivered and continued to enhance premium experiences for our members, we have strategically increased our membership dues across most of our new and existing centers in 2021. We believe we can continually refine our pricing as we deliver exceptional experiences and find the optimal balance among the number of memberships per center, the member experience and maximizing our return for each center. We expect average revenue per center membership to continue to increase as we acquire new members and open new centers in increasingly affluent markets, which will allow us to generate additional revenue even if total memberships are slower to return due to the continued impacts of COVID-19.
We offer a variety of convenient month-to-month memberships with no long-term contracts. We define a membership for our centers in two ways: Center memberships and Digital On-hold memberships. A Center membership is defined as one or more adults 14 years of age or older, plus any juniors under the age of 14. Our base memberships provide individuals general access (with some amenities excluded) to a selected home center and all centers with the same or a lower base monthly dues rate. Our optimized pricing for a Center membership is determined center-by-center based on a variety of factors, including geography, market presence, demographic nature, population density, initial investment in the center and available services and amenities. Digital On-hold memberships do not provide access to our centers and are for those members who want to maintain certain member benefits including our Life Time Digital membership and the right to convert to Center membership without paying enrollment fees.
We continue to evolve our premium lifestyle brand in ways that elevate our member experiences and allow our members to more easily and regularly integrate health, fitness and wellness into their lives. We are introducing new types of Center memberships and communities, including our signature membership that includes unlimited small group training and priority registrations, and our new ARORA community focused on members aged 55 years and older. We are also enhancing our digital platform to deliver a true omni-channel experience for our members. Our Life Time Digital offering delivers live streaming fitness classes, remote goal-based personal training, nutrition and weight loss support and curated award-winning health, fitness and wellness content. Through an agreement with Apple®, we also provide Apple Fitness+ to our members, which gives our members expanded content and wellness data monitoring on the go. In addition, our members are able to purchase a wide variety of equipment, wearables, apparel, beauty products and nutritional supplements via our digital health store. We are continuing to invest in our digital capabilities in order to strengthen our relationships with our members and more comprehensively address their health, fitness and wellness needs so that they can remain engaged and connected with Life Time at any time or place. Elevating our member experiences and delivering a connected and digital environment requires investment in our team members, programs, products, services and centers. These investments may impact our short-term results of operations and cash flows as our investments in our business may be made more quickly than we see the returns on our investments.
We are also expanding our ecosystem in response to our members’ desire to more holistically integrate health and wellness into every aspect of their daily lives. In 2018, we launched Life Time Work, an asset-light branded co-working model that offers premium work spaces in close proximity to our centers and integrates ergonomic furnishings and promotes a healthy working environment. Life Time Work members also receive access to all of our resort-like athletic destinations across the United States and Canada. Additionally, we opened our first Life Time Living location in 2021, another asset-light extension of our “Healthy Way of Life” ecosystem, which offers luxury wellness-oriented residences. As we expand our footprint with new centers and nearby work and living spaces, as well as strengthen our digital capabilities, we expect to continue to grow our omni-channel platform to support the “Healthy Way of Life” journey of our members.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Total revenue
Total revenue consists of center revenue and other revenue (each defined below).
Center revenue
Center revenue consists of membership dues, enrollment fees and revenue generated within a center, which we refer to as in-center revenue. In-center revenue includes fees for personal training, aquatics and kids programming and other member services, as well as sales of products at our cafés, and sales of products and services offered at our spas and tennis programs.
Other Revenue
Other revenue includes revenue generated from our businesses outside our centers, which are primarily media, athletic events and related services. Our media revenue includes our magazine, Experience Life®, our athletic events revenue includes endurance activities such as running, cycling and triathlons, and our related services revenue includes revenue from our race registration and timing businesses. Other revenue also includes revenue generated from our Life Time Work locations.
Center operations expenses
Center operations expenses consist of direct expenses related to the operation of our centers, such as salaries, commissions, payroll taxes, benefits, real estate taxes and other occupancy costs (excluding rent), utilities, repairs and maintenance, supplies and pre-opening expenses.
Rent expense
Rent expense consists of both cash and non-cash expense related to our operating leases booked on straight-line basis over the lease term in accordance with GAAP.
Non-cash rent expense
Non-cash rent expense reflects the non-cash portion of our annual GAAP operating lease expense that is greater or less than the cash operating lease payments. Non-cash rent expense for our open properties represents non-cash expense associated with properties that were operating at the end of each period presented. Non-cash rent expense for our properties under development represents non-cash expense associated with properties that are still under development at the end of each period presented.
General, administrative and marketing expenses
General, administrative and marketing expenses include:
•Costs relating to our centralized support functions, such as accounting, information systems, procurement, real estate and development and member relations, as well as share-based compensation expense.
•Marketing expenses, which primarily consist of marketing department costs and media and advertising costs to support and grow Center membership levels, in-center businesses, new center openings and our businesses outside of our centers.
•Indirect support costs related to the operation of our centers, including payroll-related expenses associated with our regional center management structure and in-center business support.
Depreciation and Amortization
Consists of depreciation and amortization for our depreciable long-live assets, including assets related to our owned centers.
Other operating expenses
Consists primarily of expenses related to our other revenue, which is generated from our businesses outside of our centers. In addition, we record other non-recurring operating expenses that we believe are not indicative of our core operating performance, as a component of other operating expenses.
Interest expense, net of interest income
Interest expense, net of interest income consists primarily of cash interest expense on borrowings and non-cash interest expense which includes the amortization of debt issuance costs, partially offset by interest earned.
Equity in (loss) earnings of affiliate
Includes investments in unconsolidated subsidiaries which we account for using the equity method of accounting.
(Benefit from) provision for income taxes
The (benefit from) provision for income taxes consists of an estimate for U.S. federal, state and foreign income taxes based on enacted rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities and changes in the tax law.
Net (loss) income
Net (loss) income consists of our total revenue, less our total operating expenses, and then adjusted for other (expense) income and (benefit from) provision for income taxes, as set forth on our consolidated statements of operations.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
This discussion and analysis includes certain financial measures that are not presented in accordance with the generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), including Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow before growth capital expenditures and ratios related thereto. These non-GAAP financial measures are not based on any comprehensive set of accounting rules or principles and should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. In addition, these non-GAAP financial measures should be read in conjunction with our financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. The reconciliations of the Company’s non-GAAP financial measures to the corresponding GAAP measures should be carefully evaluated. We use Adjusted EBITDA as an important performance metric for the Company. In addition, free cash flow before growth capital expenditures is an important liquidity metric we use to evaluate our ability to make principal payments on our indebtedness and to fund our capital expenditures and working capital requirements.
Adjusted EBITDA
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net (loss) income before interest expense, net, (benefit from) provision for income taxes and depreciation and amortization, excluding the impact of share-based compensation expense, loss (gain) on sale-leaseback transactions, capital transaction costs, legal settlements, asset impairment, severance and other items that are not indicative of our ongoing operations, including incremental costs related to COVID-19.
Management uses Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate the Company’s performance. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an important metric for management, investors and analysts as it removes the impact of items that we do not believe are indicative of our core operating performance and allows for consistent comparison of our operating results over time and relative to our peers. We use Adjusted EBITDA to supplement GAAP measures of performance in evaluating the effectiveness of our business strategies, and to establish annual budgets and forecasts. We also use Adjusted EBITDA or variations thereof to establish short-term incentive compensation for management.
Free Cash Flow Before Growth Capital Expenditures
We define free cash flow before growth capital expenditures as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less center maintenance capital expenditures and corporate capital expenditures. We believe free cash flow before growth capital expenditures assists investors and analysts in evaluating our liquidity and cash flows, including our ability to make principal payments on our indebtedness and to fund our capital expenditures and working capital requirements. Our management considers free cash flow before growth capital expenditures to be a key indicator of our liquidity and we present this metric to our board of directors. Additionally, we believe free cash flow before growth capital expenditures is frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties in the evaluation of companies in our industry. We also believe that investors, analysts and rating agencies consider free cash flow before growth capital expenditures as a useful means of measuring our ability to make principal payments on our indebtedness and evaluating our liquidity, and management uses this measurement for one or more of these purposes.
Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow before growth capital expenditures should be considered in addition to, and not as a substitute for or superior to, financial measures calculated in accordance with GAAP. These are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to net (loss) income or any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP or as an alternative to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities as a measure of our liquidity and may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other businesses. Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow before growth capital expenditures have limitations as analytical tools, and you should not consider these measures in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our operating results or cash flows as reported under GAAP. Furthermore, we compensate for the limitations described above by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA and free cash flow before growth capital expenditures only for supplemental purposes. See our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report for our GAAP results.
Non-GAAP Measurements and Key Performance Indicators
We prepare and analyze various non-GAAP performance metrics and key performance indicators to assess the performance of our business and allocate resources. We analyze these key performance indicators to assess the performance of our business and allocated resources. For more information regarding our non-GAAP performance metrics, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures” above. These are not measurements of our financial performance under GAAP and should not be considered as alternatives to any other performance measures derived in accordance with GAAP.
Set forth below are certain GAAP and non-GAAP measurements and key performance indicators for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. The following information has been presented consistently for all periods presented.
(1) We define Average Center revenue per center membership as Center revenue less Digital On-hold revenue, divided by the average number of Center memberships for the period, where the average number of Center memberships for the period is an average derived from dividing the sum of the total Center memberships outstanding at the beginning of the period and at the end of each month during the period by one plus the number of months in each period.
(2) We measure the results of our centers based on how long each center has been open as of the most recent measurement period. We include a center, for comparable center sales purposes, beginning on the first day of the 13th full calendar month of the center’s operation, in order to assess the center’s growth rate after one year of operation.
(3) Net new center openings is the number of centers that opened for the first time to members during the period, less any centers that closed during the period. Total centers (end of period) is the number of centers operational as of the last day of the period. As of December 31, 2021, all of our 151 centers were open.
(4) Total center square footage (end of period) reflects the aggregate fitness square footage, which we use as a metric for evaluating the efficiencies of a center as of the end of the period. The square footage figures exclude areas used for tennis courts, outdoor swimming pools, outdoor play areas and stand-alone Work, Sport and Swim locations. These figures are approximations.
(5) Net (loss) income margin is calculated as net (loss) income divided by total revenue.
(6) We present Adjusted EBITDA as a supplemental measure of our performance. We define Adjusted EBITDA as net (loss) income before interest expense, net, (benefit from) provision for income taxes and depreciation and amortization, excluding the impact of share-based compensation expense, loss (gain) on sale-leaseback transactions, capital transaction costs, legal settlements, asset impairment, severance and other items that are not indicative of our ongoing operations, including incremental costs related to COVID-19.
Adjusted EBITDA margin is calculated as Adjusted EBITDA divided by total revenue.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
(a)During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred a non-cash expense of $41.0 million related to the extinguishment of our related party secured loan and $28.6 million related to write-off discounts and debt issuance costs of our prior term loan facility, our previous senior unsecured notes and our related party secured loan. In June 2020, we closed on an approximate $101.5 million secured loan from an investor group comprised solely of our stockholders or their affiliates. The secured loan carried an interest rate of 12.0% and was scheduled to mature in June 2021. In January 2021, we extinguished the related party secured loan plus accrued interest with a book value of $108.6 million by converting the loan into approximately 5.4 million shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, which had a fair value of $149.6 million, as determined by an independent third-party valuation, at the time of conversion. Accordingly, we booked a $41.0 million loss upon conversion.
(b)A significant portion of the share-based compensation expense that we recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 is associated with stock options that were granted prior to 2021. As of the effective date of the IPO in October 2021, these stock options became fully vested, and they either became immediately exercisable or they will become exercisable no later than April 4, 2022, subject to continued service through such date. Accordingly, during the period from the effective date of the IPO through December 31, 2021, we recognized share-based compensation expense associated with these stock options in an amount equal to the proportion of the total service period that has passed from the respective grant dates associated with each of these stock option awards through December 31, 2021. Because the vesting and exercisability of these stock options was contingent upon the occurrence of a change of control or an initial public offering, no share-based compensation expense associated with these stock options was recognized prior to the IPO.
(c) Represents the incremental net (credits) expenses we recognized related to the COVID-19 pandemic. We adjust for these costs as they do not represent costs associated with our normal ongoing operations. We believe that adjusting for these costs provides a more accurate and consistent representation of our actual operating performance from period to period. The net credits we recognized during 2021 consist primarily of the recovery of certain qualifying expenses recovered under the CARES Act, partially offset by COVID-19 legal-related costs. For the year ended December 31, 2020, COVID-19 related expenses consisted of $27.0 million for project cost write-offs for sites no longer deemed viable as a result of the economic downturn caused by COVID-19, $12.0 million for the employee portion of health care coverage which is normally paid by employees but was paid by us during this period on behalf of our employees, and $10.2 million of emergency leave and non-working payroll, which includes subsequent recovery of certain expenses under the CARES Act, severance and charitable contributions made to support our employees who were directly impacted by COVID-19.
(d) We adjust for the impact of gains or losses on the sale-leaseback of our properties as they do not reflect costs associated with our ongoing operations.
(e) Represents one-time costs related to capital transactions, including debt and equity offerings that are non-recurring in nature but excluding direct costs related to the IPO which were netted against the proceeds.
(f) We adjust for the impact of large class action and unusual legal settlements paid or recoveries received. These are non-recurring in nature and do not reflect costs associated with our normal ongoing operations.
(g) Represents non-cash asset impairments of our long-lived and intangible assets.
(h) Includes costs associated with large corporate restructuring charges, executive level involuntary terminations and other transactions, which are unusual and non-recurring in nature. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expenses consisted of $1.6 million of incremental expenses related to a winter storm resulting in historical freezing temperatures affecting our Texas region, and $0.8 million of executive level severance.
(7) Represents non-capital expenditures associated with opening new centers which are incurred prior to the commencement of a new center opening. The number of centers under construction or development, the types of centers and our costs associated with any particular center opening can vary significantly from period to period.
(8) Free cash flow before growth capital expenditures, a non-GAAP financial measure, is calculated as net cash (used in) provided by operating activities less center maintenance capital expenditures and corporate capital expenditures.
The following table provides a reconciliation from net cash (used in) provided by operating activities to free cash flow before growth capital expenditures:
Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
Overview
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared the outbreak of a novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19 a pandemic and recommended containment and mitigation measures worldwide. On March 13, 2020, the United States declared a National Public Health Emergency with respect to COVID-19. On March 16, 2020, in compliance with orders and advisories from federal, state and local governmental authorities regarding COVID-19, we closed all of our centers. Throughout this Annual Report, including this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” when we refer to “COVID-19,” such as when we describe the “impact of COVID-19” on our operations, we mean the coronavirus-related orders issued by governmental authorities affecting our operations and/or the presence of coronavirus in our centers, including COVID-19 positive members or team members.
While our centers were closed, in consultation with an epidemiologist (MD/PhD) with a wide range of experience in clinical, occupational and environmental medicine, we developed processes and protocols for the operation of our centers in
the COVID-19 environment. These protocols, which have varied at our centers across the United States and Canada, have included physical distancing, restricting certain equipment and amenities, occupancy limits, required appointments, touchless interactions, facial coverings, cleaning, sanitation, hygiene, air circulation and filtering, screening, contact tracing and educational awareness. We may take further actions as government authorities require or recommend, including implementing vaccine mandates or negative testing, or as we determine to be in the interests of our members, guests, team members, vendors and service providers, including in response to emerging variants of the COVID-19 virus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants. We continue to refine these processes and protocols as we operate in the evolving COVID-19 environment.
With a focus on providing a healthy and clean environment for our members and team members, we began re-opening our centers in May 2020 and continued to re-open our centers as governmental authorities permitted. During the second half of 2020 and into 2021, we were able to re-open all of our centers; however, these re-openings were staggered and many of our centers were required to be closed again after re-opening for some period of time as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and related restrictions. For instance, during the three months ended June 30, 2020, September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, 149, 43 and 31 of our centers, respectively, were closed for some period of time. The performance of our centers after we were able to re-open them has varied depending on various factors, including how early we were able to re-open them in 2020, whether we were required to close them again, their geographic location and applicable governmental restrictions. The performance of our centers was also impacted in 2021 as a result of the Delta variant and then again later in 2021 and into 2022 with the Omicron variant.
We have experienced a slightly faster recovery in our membership dues revenue compared to our in-center revenue as our centers have re-opened. We expect membership dues revenue to remain a higher percentage of our total revenue in the near term and return to more historical levels over time. While we are encouraged by the trends of increased vaccination rates, reduced COVID-19 infections and hospitalizations and reduced operating restrictions in many of the regions where our centers operate, we continue to operate under governmental restrictions at many of our centers and the full extent of the impact of COVID-19, including the Delta and Omicron variants, remains uncertain and is dependent on future developments that cannot be accurately predicted at this time. Considering this uncertainty, the extent of the impact of COVID-19 on our financial position, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows is uncertain at this time.
Operations
As of December 31, 2021, all of our 151 centers were open. As of December 31, 2021, total memberships were 724,140, a decrease of 3.4% compared to 749,589 at December 31, 2020. Center memberships were 649,373, an increase of 29.6% compared to 500,948 at December 31, 2020. Digital On-hold memberships were 74,767, a decrease of 69.9% compared to 248,641 at December 31, 2020. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Center memberships and Digital On-hold memberships were 853,748 and 90,299, respectively, at December 31, 2019.
We continue to monitor governmental orders regarding the operations of our centers, as well as our center operating processes and protocols. We expect we may need to continue to adjust such processes and protocols as facts and circumstances change, including as a result of variants of the COVID-19 virus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants.
We also expect our centers and in-center businesses will continue to be impacted differently based upon considerations such as their geographic location, vaccination rates, impacts of variants, applicable government restrictions and guidance, and team member and member sentiment with respect to our center operating processes and protocols and working in and/or using our centers. For example, we have seen an increase in Center memberships and center utilization in various regions when government restrictions have been lifted.
Given increasing demand for online engagement with consumers, we have increased our focus on delivering a digitized in-center experience through our omni-channel ecosystem. We continue to expand our Digital membership offering, bringing our “Healthy Way of Life” programs, services and content to consumers virtually. This omni-channel experience is designed to deliver health, fitness and wellness where, when and how members want it by offering online reservations registrations, virtual training, live streaming and on-demand classes, virtual events and more.
Cash Flows and Liquidity
In response to the impact of COVID-19 on our business, we took swift cash management actions to reduce our operating costs and preserve liquidity. These actions included: initially furloughing over 95% of our employees; undertaking two corporate restructuring events to right size overhead relative to the current business; initially suspending virtually all construction capital spending; negotiating rent reductions and deferrals with many of our landlords; evaluating the CARES Act and receiving the employee retention credit, the deferment of the employer’s portion of social security tax payments and the various income tax-related benefits; and completing sale-leaseback transactions associated with six properties.
Although there is uncertainty related to the impact of COVID-19 on our financial position, results of operations, liquidity and cash flows, much of which is dependent on the length and severity of the pandemic and the related measures taken, we believe that the combination of our current cash position, our availability under the revolving portion of the Credit Facilities, the recent actions we have taken to refinance our debt and strengthen our balance sheet, as well as the actions we have taken to reduce our cash outflows, leave us well-positioned to manage our business through this pandemic. If our available liquidity were not sufficient to meet our operating and debt service obligations as they come due, we would need to pursue alternative arrangements through additional debt or equity financing to meet our cash requirements. There can be no assurance that any such financing would be available on commercially acceptable terms, or at all.
There may be developments outside of our control requiring us to adjust our operating plan, including additional required center closures. As such, given the dynamic nature of our current operating environment, we cannot reasonably estimate the impacts of COVID-19 on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows in the future.
Investment in Business
As we recover from the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are investing in our business to elevate our member experiences and drive additional revenue per center membership, including introducing new types of memberships, providing concierge-type member services, expanding our omni-channel offerings and improving our in-center services and products. Elevating our member experiences requires investment in our team members, programs, products, services and centers. These investments may impact our short-term results of operations and cash flows as our investments in our business may be made more quickly than we achieve additional revenue per center membership.
Impact of our Asset-light, Flexible Real Estate Strategy on Rent Expense
Our asset-light, flexible real estate strategy has allowed us to expand our business by leveraging operating leases and sale-leaseback transactions. Approximately 58% of our centers are now leased, including approximately 94% of our new centers opened within the last five years, versus a predominantly owned real estate strategy prior to 2015. Rent expense, which includes both cash and non-cash rent expense, will continue to increase as we lease more centers and will therefore impact the comparability of our results of operations. The impact of these increases is dependent upon the timing of our centers under development and the center openings and terms of the leases for the new centers or sale-leaseback transactions.
Share-Based Compensation
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized share-based compensation expense associated with stock options, restricted Series A Preferred Stock, restricted stock and restricted stock units totaling approximately $334.3 million, a significant portion of which is associated with stock options that were granted prior to 2021. As of the effective date of the IPO, these stock options became fully vested, and they either became immediately exercisable or they will become exercisable no later than April 4, 2022, subject to continued service through such date. Accordingly, during the period from the effective date of the IPO through December 31, 2021, we recognized share-based compensation expense associated with these stock options in an amount equal to the proportion of the total service period that has passed from the respective grant dates associated with each of these stock option awards through December 31, 2021. Because the vesting and exercisability of these stock options was contingent upon the occurrence of a change of control or an initial public offering, no share-based compensation expense associated with these stock options was recognized prior to the IPO. For more information on our share-based compensation arrangements, see Note 10, Stockholders’ Equity, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Ultimate results could differ from those estimates. In recording transactions and balances resulting from business operations, we use estimates based on the best information available. We revise the recorded estimates when better information is available, facts change or we can determine actual amounts. These revisions can affect operating results. We have identified below the following accounting policies and estimates that we consider to be critical.
Impairment of Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
We assess the recoverability of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, such as our Life Time trade name, on an annual basis, or more often if circumstances warrant. We assess the recoverability of goodwill by estimating the fair value of the
reporting unit to which the goodwill relates and comparing this fair value to the net book value of the reporting unit. We assess the recoverability of the Life Time trade name through the use of the relief from royalty valuation method. If the fair value of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets is less than net book value, we reduce the book value accordingly and record a corresponding impairment loss. Our policy is to test goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment on October 1 of each year. The valuation of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets requires assumptions and estimates of many critical factors, including revenue and market growth, operating margins, membership trends, strategic initiatives, royalty rates and discount rates. A significant change in the factors noted above could cause us to reduce the estimated fair value of some or all of our reporting units or indefinite-lived intangible assets and recognize a corresponding impairment of our goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets in connection with a future impairment test. Adverse changes in strategy, market conditions or assumed market capitalization may result in an impairment of goodwill. Based upon our review and analysis, no material impairments of goodwill or indefinite-lived intangible assets were deemed to have occurred during any of the periods presented.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We test long-lived asset groups for impairment when events or circumstances indicate that the net book value of the asset group may not be recoverable. A long-lived asset group may include property and equipment, finite-lived intangible assets and/or operating lease right-of-use assets. We consider a history of consistent and significant operating losses, or the inability to recover net book value over the remaining useful life, to be our primary indicators of potential impairment. Judgments regarding existence of impairment indicators are based on factors such as operational performance (including revenue and expense growth rates), market conditions and expected holding period of the primary asset associated with each asset group. We evaluate long-lived asset groups for impairment at the lowest levels for which there are identifiable cash flows, which is generally at an individual center or ancillary business level. The determination of whether impairment has occurred is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows directly related to that center or ancillary business, compared to the carrying value of the related assets. If an impairment has occurred, the amount of impairment recognized is determined by estimating the fair value of these assets and recording a loss if the carrying value is greater than the fair value. Worsening operational performance, market conditions or change in expected holding periods of each asset may cause us to re-evaluate the assumptions used in management’s analysis. Based upon our review and analysis, no material impairments of long-lived assets were deemed to have occurred during any of the periods presented.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data (amounts in thousands) and data as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Total revenue. The $369.7 million increase in Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily reflects the adverse economic impact that our center closures had on our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 and the timing of the subsequent reopening of our centers, as well as pricing initiatives we implemented at the majority of our centers during the year ended December 31, 2021, which have resulted in higher average Center membership dues being charged to new members during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
With respect to the $356.6 million increase in Center revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020:
•71.8% was from membership dues and enrollment fees, which increased $256.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase reflects the adverse economic impact that our center closures, which resulted from COVID-19, had on our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 and the timing of the subsequent reopening of our centers, as well as pricing initiatives we implemented at the majority of our centers during the year ended December 31, 2021, which have resulted in higher average Center membership dues being charged to new members during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020; and
•28.2% was from in-center revenue, which increased $100.6 million as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was recognized across all of our primary in-center businesses and reflects the adverse economic impact that our center closures, which resulted from COVID-19, had on our business during the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the timing of the subsequent reopening of our centers.
The $13.0 million increase in Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by our athletic events business, as we were able to produce several of our iconic events during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 when COVID-19 restrictions forced the cancellation of most of our events.
Center operations expenses. The $184.1 million increase in Center operations expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by increased staffing requirements resulting from the subsequent reopening of our centers and the addition of six new centers. Center operations expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 also includes $12.9 million of share-based compensation expense, a significant portion of which is associated with stock options that were granted prior to 2021. For more information regarding share-based compensation expense that we recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, see “-General, administrative and marketing expenses” below.
Rent expense. The $23.5 million increase in Rent expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the sale leaseback of two centers occurring during the year ended December 31, 2021, the sale leaseback of three centers that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2020, and our taking possession of nine properties during the year ended December 31, 2021 for future centers where we started incurring GAAP rent expense, most of which is non-cash.
General, administrative and marketing expenses. The $330.6 million increase in General, administrative and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a $316.8 million increase in share-based compensation expense, a $16.4 million increase in general and administrative costs, primarily driven by the return of corporate team members who were furloughed during the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as other costs to support revenue growth, and a $5.7 million increase in marketing expenses, partially offset by a $9.9 million decrease in corporate COVID-19-related expenses. A significant portion of the share-based compensation expense that we recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021 is associated with stock options that were granted prior to 2021. As of the effective date of the IPO, these stock options became fully vested, and they either became immediately exercisable or they will become exercisable no later than April 4, 2022, subject to continued service through such date. Accordingly, during the period from the effective date of the IPO through December 31, 2021, we recognized share-based compensation expense associated with these stock options in an amount equal to the proportion of the total implied service period that has passed from the respective grant dates associated with each of these stock option awards through December 31, 2021. Because the vesting and exercisability of these stock options was contingent upon the occurrence of a change of control or an initial public offering, no share-based compensation expense associated with these stock options was recognized prior to the IPO.
Depreciation and amortization. The $12.6 million decrease in Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 consists of $9.3 million and $3.3 million lower depreciation and amortization, respectively. The decrease in depreciation for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the timing of sale-leaseback transactions, as well as the reduction in the carrying value of certain fixed assets associated with some of our leased centers and some of our ancillary businesses that resulted from impairment charges that we recognized during the fourth quarter of 2020.
Other operating expenses. The $19.9 million decrease in Other operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to $30.3 million of project cost write-offs recognized during the year December 31, 2020 for sites that were no longer deemed viable for construction as a result of COVID-19, partially offset by approximately $6.0 million higher costs associated with our athletic events business during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as a $4.6 million increase in share-based compensation expense. The increase in costs associated with our athletic events resulted from our ability to produce several of our iconic events during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 when COVID-19 restrictions forced the cancellation of most of our events. A significant portion of the share-based compensation expense is associated with stock options that were granted prior to 2021. For more information regarding share-based compensation expense that we recognized during the year ended December 31, 2021, see “-General, administrative and marketing expenses” above.
Interest expense, net. The $96.1 million increase in Interest expense, net of interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a $41.0 million non-cash expense recognized related to the conversion of our related party secured loan into Series A Preferred Stock, write-offs of debt issuance costs and original issuance discount costs associated with extinguished debt instrument totaling $28.6 million and $5.7 million prepayment penalty related to partial pay down of our Term Loan Facility. Additionally, the increase also reflects a relatively higher effective weighted average interest rate on an increased average level of outstanding borrowings during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Benefit from income taxes. The benefit from income taxes was $140.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $127.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The effective tax rate was 19.5% and 26.1% for those same periods, respectively. The change in benefit from income taxes was primarily attributable to: (i) an increase in our loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020; (ii) a $41.0 million loss related to the extinguishment of our related party secured loan that we recognized for GAAP purposes during the year ended December 31, 2021 that is not recognized for tax purposes; and (iii) the recognition during the year ended December 31, 2021 of an increase in the valuation allowance to reduce the deferred tax asset associated with our net operating losses.
Net loss. As a result of the factors described above, net loss increased by $219.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data (amounts in thousands) and data as a percentage of total revenue for the periods indicated:
Total revenue. The $952.0 million decrease in Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects the adverse economic impact that our center closures, which resulted from COVID-19, had on our business as well as the timing of the subsequent reopening of our centers.
With respect to the $921.4 million decrease in Center revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019:
•60.5% was from membership dues and enrollment fees, which decreased $557.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to the adverse economic impact that our center closures, which resulted from COVID-19, had on our business as well as the timing of the subsequent reopening of our centers; and
•39.5% was from in-center revenue, which decreased $364.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to a decline across all of our primary in-center businesses, as a result of our center closures, which resulted from COVID-19, as well as the timing of the subsequent reopening of our centers.
The $30.6 million decrease in Other revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by athletic event cancellations caused by COVID-19, which had a negative impact on sales of media, race and timing-related technology, as well as event-related registration fees.
Center operations expenses. The $381.1 million decrease in Center operations expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily the result of $290.7 million in decreased labor costs, $38.8 million in decreased cost of goods sold, $23.2 million in reduced facility costs and $17.8 million in reduced credit card fees as a result of center closures and lower Center revenue, which resulted from COVID-19.
Rent expense. The $20.3 million increase in Rent expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by the sale-leaseback transactions that were consummated during 2020, as well as the timing of other property leases that commenced during 2020 and the prior year.
General, administrative and marketing expenses. The $77.8 million decrease in General, administrative and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by a reduction of expenses of $26.9 million, which was primarily the result of lower salaries and wages associated with our furloughed employees, as well as corporate headcount reduction actions that we took during 2020, and a reduction in our advertising and marketing spend of approximately $22.7 million as a result of our continued efforts to control expenses in light of COVID-19. In addition, in 2019, we incurred $23.0 million of additional share-based compensation as part of a voluntary stock option purchase offer, as well as $5.2 million of costs related to the sale of newly issued common stock to a minority investor group.
Depreciation and amortization. The $27.2 million increase in Depreciation and amortization for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 consists of $31.4 million higher depreciation, partially offset by $4.2 million lower amortization.
Other operating expenses. The $13.2 million decrease in Other operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily attributable to the decline in sales of race and timing-related technology, as well as the decline in media sales, which was driven by the cancellation of athletic events as a result of COVID-19.
Interest expense, net. The $0.6 million decrease in Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects the decrease in the LIBOR during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, partially offset by interest associated with new borrowings under a secured loan with related parties during 2020 and a relatively lower level of capitalized interest on lower construction spending during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019.
(Benefit from) provision for income taxes. The benefit from income taxes was $127.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the $10.1 million provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2019. The benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the loss before income taxes. The effective tax rate was 26.1% and 25.1% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The change in effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects an increase in the overall effective state rate during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net (loss) income. As a result of the factors described above, net loss was $360.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to net income of $30.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest. Net income attributable to noncontrolling interest, which represents the stated dividends associated with the underlying preferred shares of Massage Retreat & Spa, Inc. (“MR&S”), was $0.0 million and less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
Our principal liquidity needs include the development of new centers, debt service and lease requirements, investments in technology and expenditures necessary to maintain and update our centers and associated fitness equipment and member experiences. We have primarily satisfied our historical liquidity needs with cash flow from operations, drawing on the revolving portion of the Credit Facilities and through sale-leaseback transactions.
We have taken significant actions to improve our liquidity and during 2021, we refinanced a significant portion of our outstanding debt. Specifically, we: (i) refinanced in full the outstanding balances associated with our then existing senior secured credit facility as well as our then existing senior unsecured notes; (ii) converted our related party secured loan into Series A Preferred Stock, which were automatically converted into our common stock in connection with the IPO; and (iii) increased the commitments under the revolving portion of our Credit Facilities to $475 million and extended their maturity. Additionally, we completed a sale-leaseback transaction associated with two properties. For information regarding the refinancing actions we took during 2021, see Note 8, Debt, to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report. For more information regarding the sale-leaseback transaction that was consummated during 2021, see Note 9, Leases, to our consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report.
On October 12, 2021, we completed our IPO of 39.0 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $18.00 per share, resulting in total gross proceeds of $702.0 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and other offering expenses. Additionally, on November 1, 2021, we consummated the sale of nearly 1.6 million additional shares of our common stock at the IPO price of $18.00 per share pursuant to the partial exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option, resulting in total gross proceeds of approximately $28.4 million before deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions. On October 13, 2021, we paid down $575.7 million (including a $5.7 million pre-payment penalty) of our Term Loan Facility with a portion of the net proceeds we received from the IPO. We intend to use the remaining net proceeds from the IPO, along with the additional net proceeds of approximately $27.1 million from the sale of the additional nearly 1.6 million shares of common stock, for general corporate purposes.
As the opportunity arises or as our business needs require, we may seek to raise capital through additional debt financing or through equity financing. There can be no assurance that any such financing would be available on commercially acceptable terms, or at all. To date, we have not experienced difficulty accessing the credit and capital markets; however, volatility in these markets, particularly in light of the impacts of COVID-19 and the potential for rising interest rates, may increase costs associated with issuing debt instruments or affect our ability to access those markets, which could have an adverse impact on our ability to raise additional capital, to refinance existing debt and/or to react to changing economic and business conditions. In addition, it is possible that our ability to access the credit and capital markets could be limited at a time when we would like, or need, to do so.
As of December 31, 2021, there were no outstanding borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility and there were $33.5 million of outstanding letters of credit, resulting in total availability under our Revolving Credit Facility, subject to a $100.0 million minimum liquidity requirement that ended on December 31, 2021, of $341.5 million. Total cash and cash equivalents at December 31, 2021 was $31.6 million, resulting in total cash and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility of $373.1 million.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of cash flows data (amounts in thousands):
Operating Activities
The $76.0 million decrease in net cash used in operating activities for the year December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily the result of higher profitability, before the impact of non-cash share-based compensation expense, due to the recovery from the impact of COVID-19 on our business during 2020.
The $454.7 million increase in net cash used in operating activities for the year December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily due to lower center profitability as a result of center closures, which reflects the adverse economic impact that COVID-19 has had on our business.
Investing Activities
Investing activities consist primarily of purchasing real property, constructing new centers, acquisitions and purchasing new fitness equipment. In addition, we invest in capital expenditures to maintain and update our existing centers. We finance the purchase of our property and equipment through operating cash flows, proceeds from sale-leaseback transactions, construction reimbursements and draws on our Revolving Credit Facility.
The $263.8 million increase in net cash used in investing activities for the year December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by a relatively higher level of new center construction activity and lower amount of proceeds we received from landlords for sale-leaseback transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 also includes a $9.1 million payment we made in connection with the acquisition of the assets associated with an outdoor enthusiast and bicycling event.
The $471.7 million decrease in net cash used in investing activities for the year December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by a relatively lower level of new center construction activity, as well as a relatively higher amount of proceeds that we received from sale-leaseback transactions during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Additionally, we received $23.0 million of proceeds from the sale of land held for sale during the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following schedule reflects capital expenditures by type of expenditure (in thousands):
The $63.3 million increase in total capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by higher growth capital expenditures for new centers and center maintenance capital expenditures due to the reopening of our centers after the COVID-19 pandemic and our desire to deliver the best places for our members as they return.
The $358.4 million decrease in total capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 reflects actions we took during the year ended December 31, 2020 to reduce our cash outflows in light of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Financing Activities
The $201.0 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily driven by the $702 million of gross proceeds we received in connection with the IPO, offset by repayments of our Term Loan Facility and Revolving Credit Facility.
The $45.9 million decrease in net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by net repayments made on our then existing senior secured credit facility during the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by proceeds from new borrowings which we received during
the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received approximately $101.5 million of proceeds associated with a secured loan from an investor group that is comprised solely of our stockholders or their affiliates, and $15.1 million of proceeds associated with a loan secured by a mortgage on one location.
Cash Requirements
Our cash requirements within the next twelve months include accounts payable, construction accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
Our cash requirements greater than twelve months from various contractual obligations and commitments include:
Debt Obligations and Interest Payments
Refer to Note 8, Debt, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further detail of our debt and the timing of expected future principal and interest payments. We expect to pay approximately $118.5 million of interest in the next 12 months and approximately $381.5 million of interest beyond 12 months.
Operating and Finance Leases
Refer to Note 9, Leases, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further detail of our lease obligations and the timing of expected future payments.
Deferred Compensation Obligations
Refer to Note 14, Executive Nonqualified Plan, to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report for further detail of our deferred compensation plans.
Contracted Services
Contracted services include agreements with third-party service providers for software licenses and support, and marketing services. We expect to pay approximately $8.5 million for contracted services in the next 12 months and approximately $12.0 million beyond 12 months.
Capital Expenditures
Our primary capital expenditure requirements include growth capital expenditures, which include new center land and construction, growth initiatives and major remodels of acquired centers, as well as maintenance capital expenditures to keep our centers operational and meeting our standards. As of December 31, 2021, we had 12 centers under construction and $340 million of capital expenditures invested in future center development.
We expect to satisfy our short-term and long-term obligations through a combination of cash on hand, funds generated from operations, sale-leaseback transactions and the borrowing capacity available under our Revolving Credit Facility.