Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and plan of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in Item 1A titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a clinical stage biotechnology company, focused on leveraging artificial intelligence (“A.I.”), machine learning and genomic data to streamline the drug development process and to identify the patients that will benefit from our targeted oncology therapies. Our portfolio of therapies consists of small molecules that others have tried, but failed, to develop into an approved commercialized drug, as well as new compounds that we are developing with the assistance of our proprietary A.I. platform and our biomarker driven approach. Our A.I. platform, known as RADR®, currently includes more than 18 billion data points, and uses big data analytics (combining molecular data, drug efficacy data, data from historical studies, data from scientific literature, phenotypic data from trials and publications, and mechanistic pathway data) and machine learning to rapidly uncover biologically relevant genomic signatures correlated to drug response, and then identify the cancer patients that we believe may benefit most from our compounds. This data-driven, genomically-targeted and biomarker-driven approach allows us to pursue a transformational drug development strategy that identifies, rescues or develops, and advances potential small molecule drug candidates at what we believe is a fraction of the time and cost associated with traditional cancer drug development.
Our strategy is to both develop new drug candidates using our RADR® platform, and other machine learning driven methodologies, and to pursue the development of drug candidates that have undergone previous clinical trial testing or that may have been halted in development or deprioritized because of insufficient clinical trial efficacy (i.e., a meaningful treatment benefit relevant for the disease or condition under study as measured against the comparator treatment used in the relevant clinical testing) or for strategic reasons by the owner or development team responsible for the compound. Importantly, these historical drug candidates appear to have been well-tolerated in many instances, and often have considerable data from previous toxicity, tolerability and ADME (absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion) studies that have been completed. Additionally, these drug candidates may also have a body of existing data supporting the potential mechanism(s) by which they achieve their intended biologic effect, but often require more targeted trials in a stratified group of patients to demonstrate statistically meaningful results. Our dual approach to both develop de-novo, biomarker-guided drug candidates and “rescue” historical drug-candidates by leveraging A.I., recent advances in genomics, computational biology and cloud computing is emblematic of a new era in drug development that is being driven by data-intensive approaches meant to de-risk development and accelerate the clinical trial process. In this context, we intend to create a diverse portfolio of oncology drug candidates for further development towards regulatory and marketing approval with the objective of establishing a leading A.I.-driven methodology for treating the right patient with the right oncology therapy.
A key component of our strategy is to target specific cancer patient populations and treatment indications identified by leveraging our RADR® platform, a proprietary A.I. enabled engine created and owned by us. We believe the combination of our therapeutic area expertise, our A.I. expertise, and our ability to identify and develop promising drug candidates through our collaborative relationships with research institutions in selected areas of oncology gives us a significant competitive advantage. Our RADR® platform was developed and refined over the last five years and integrates billions of data points immediately relevant for oncology drug development and patient response prediction using artificial intelligence and proprietary machine learning algorithms. By identifying clinical candidates, together with relevant genomic and phenotypic data, we believe our approach will help us design more efficient pre-clinical studies, and more targeted clinical trials, thereby accelerating our drug candidates’ time to approval and eventually to market. Although we have not yet applied for or received regulatory or marketing approval for any of our drug candidates, we believe our RADR® platform has the ability to reduce the cost and time to bring drug candidates to specifically targeted patient groups. We believe we have developed a sustainable and scalable biopharma business model by combining a unique, oncology-focused big-data platform that leverages artificial intelligence along with active clinical and preclinical programs that are being advanced in targeted cancer therapeutic areas to address today’s treatment needs.
Our current portfolio consists of four compounds and an Antibody Drug Conjugate (ADC) program: two drug candidates in clinical phases, one in preclinical studies and one candidate and our recently initiated ADC program in research optimization. One of the two drug candidates in clinical development, LP-100, was previously out-licensed by us to Allarity Therapeutics A/S. In July 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Agreement to reacquire global development and commercialization rights for LP-100 from Allarity. All of these drug candidates and our ADC program are leveraging precision oncology, A.I. and genomic driven approaches to accelerate and direct development efforts. We currently have two drug candidates in clinical development, LP-100 and LP-300, where we are leveraging data from prior preclinical studies and clinical trials, along with insights generated from our A.I. platform, to target the types of tumors and patient groups we believe will be most responsive to the drug. Both LP-100 and LP-300 showed promise in important patient subgroups, but failed pivotal Phase III trials when the overall results did not meet the predefined clinical endpoints. We believe that this was due to a lack of biomarker-driven patient stratification. LP-300 has been studied in multiple randomized, controlled, multi-center non-small cell lung cancer, or NSCLC, trials that included administration of either paclitaxel and cisplatin and/or docetaxel and cisplatin, and we are currently preparing LP-300 for the launch of a targeted phase II trial, in never smoking patients with NSCLC in combination with chemotherapy, under an existing investigational new drug application. LP-100 is in a Phase II clinical trial in metastatic, castration-resistant, prostate cancer that was previously managed by Allarity Therapeutics. As a result of the Asset Purchase Agreement we entered into with Allarity in July 2021, we obtained full authority to manage and guide future clinical development and commercialization of LP-100.
Additionally, we have one new drug candidate, LP-184, in preclinical development for multiple potentially distinct indications where we are leveraging machine learning and genomic data to streamline the drug development process and to identify the patients and cancer subtypes that will best benefit from the drug, if approved. Our drug candidate, LP-284, the stereoisomer (enantiomer) of LP-184, has shown promising in-vitro anticancer activity in a range of hematological cancers, which are distinct from the indications targeted by LP-184. Our ADC program commenced in early 2021 is aimed at identifying targeted or therapeutic antibodies to conjugate with selected compounds.
Our development strategy is to pursue an increasing number of oncology focused, molecularly targeted therapies where artificial intelligence and genomic data can help us provide biological insights, reduce the risk associated with development efforts and help clarify potential patient response. We plan on strategically evaluating these on a program-by-program basis as they advance into clinical development, either to be done entirely by us, or with licensing partners, to maximize the commercial opportunity and reduce the time it takes to bring the right drug to the right patient.
To date, except for a prior research grant, we have not generated any revenue, we have incurred net losses and our operations have been financed primarily by sales of our equity securities. Our net losses were approximately $12,363,000 and $5,908,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our net losses have primarily resulted from costs incurred in licensing and developing the drug candidates in our pipeline, planning, preparing and conducting preclinical studies, early stage clinical testing and general and administrative activities associated with our operations. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and corresponding increased operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue to develop our pipeline. Our costs may further increase as we conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials and potentially seek regulatory clearance for and prepare to commercialize our drug candidates. We expect to incur significant expenses to continue to build the infrastructure necessary to support our expanded operations, preclinical studies, clinical trials, commercialization, including manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution functions. We have experienced and will continue to experience increased costs associated with operating as a public company.
As of the date of this report, we believe we have effectively managed the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operations. The timing of non-clinical research studies for our drug candidates by collaborators and service providers slowed during 2020 in connection with the pandemic. Recently, the timing of manufacturing for our LP-300 and LP-184 candidates has been impacted by supply chain delivery and COVID-related staffing issues, which has extended the time to launch our planned Phase II clinical trial for LP-300 and extended the time to commence IND enabling studies and commence Phase I clinical testing for LP-184. In addition, Allarity Therapeutics informed us that enrollment in the Phase II clinical trial for LP-100 slowed during the pandemic. While we believe we have been able to manage the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic to date, there can be no assurance that our operations, including the development of our drug candidates, will not be disrupted and materially adversely affected in the future by the COVID-19 pandemic, or an epidemic or outbreak of an infectious disease like the outbreak of COVID-19.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Revenues
We did not recognize revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the research and development of our preclinical and clinical candidates, which include:
● expenses incurred towards consultants, laboratories and investigators that conduct our preclinical or clinical research activities; and
● the cost of acquiring and developing preclinical and clinical study materials and lab supplies.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred.
Our research and development costs by project category for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
* Prior to our IPO on June 15, 2020, we did not track our research and development costs by project category, primarily because research and development salary expenses were not further allocated to each project.
We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase as we progress toward our commencement of clinical trials for LP-300 and LP-184, advance clinical development of LP-100, and advance our other programs and drug candidates. We expect this increase to include additional expenses associated with research and service provider agreements for the advancement of our drug candidates and research and development efforts.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with product development, we cannot determine with certainty the duration and completion costs of these or other current or future clinical trials of LP-300, LP-184, LP-100 or our other drug candidates. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for LP-300, LP-184, LP-100 or any of our other drug candidates. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of our drug candidates will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rates and significant and changing government regulation. In addition, the probability of success for each drug candidate will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for employees in executive, finance and administration, corporate development and administrative support functions, including stock-based compensation expenses and benefits. Other significant general and administrative expenses include accounting and legal services, the cost of various consultants, occupancy costs, investor relations and information systems costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase as we continue to operate as a public company. We expect increased administrative costs resulting from our anticipated clinical trials and the potential commercialization of our drug candidates. We believe that these increases will likely include increased costs for director and officer liability insurance, hiring additional personnel to support future market research and future product commercialization efforts and increased fees for outside consultants, attorneys and accountants. We also expect to continue to incur increased costs to comply with corporate governance, internal controls, investor relations and disclosures and similar requirements applicable to a public company.
Summary Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased approximately $1,356,000, or 37%, from approximately $3,665,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $5,021,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in business and corporate development expense of approximately $381,000, increases in corporate insurance expense of approximately $566,000, and increases in legal and patent related expenses of approximately $357,000.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses increased approximately $5,327,000, or 238%, from approximately $2,243,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $7,571,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was primarily attributable to increases in product candidate manufacturing related expenses of approximately $2,669,000, increases in research studies of approximately $823,000, increases in research and development payroll expenses of approximately $654,000, and an increase of $1,000,000 related to the upfront payment to Allarity under the Allarity Asset Purchase Agreement, which payment was a nonrecurring expense.
Interest and Other Income
Interest income increased approximately $68,000 from zero for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $68,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to investments in marketable securities entered into during the year ended December 31, 2021. Other income, net increased approximately $161,000 from zero for the year ended December 31, 2020 to approximately $161,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to increases in dividend income of approximately $98,000, a gain on loan forgiveness from the PPP loan of approximately $110,000, and increases in research and development tax incentives related to the Australia subsidiary of approximately $52,000, which was partially offset by increases in unrealized losses on investments of approximately $81,000 and increases in foreign currency losses of approximately $18,000.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We incurred net losses of approximately $12,363,000 and $5,908,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of approximately $70,390,000.
On January 20, 2021, we closed a public offering of 4,928,571 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $14.00 per share, which amount included 642,856 shares sold upon full exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option. Total gross proceeds from the offering were approximately $69,000,000, and net proceeds from the offering were approximately $64,167,000.
We have not yet generated any revenues from operations, other than revenues from a research grant, and we have not yet achieved profitability. We expect that general and administrative expenses and our research and development expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will need to generate significant product revenues to achieve profitability. We may never achieve profitability.
Since our inception, our operations have been financed primarily through the sale of equity securities, and, to a much lesser extent, funds received by us from the PPP Loan and a 2017 grant from the Massachusetts Life Sciences Center. We plan to apply for grant funding in the future to assist in supporting our capital needs. We may also explore the possibility of entering into commercial credit facilities as an additional source of liquidity.
In October 2021, we entered into a Statement of Work with Translational Drug Development, LLC (“TD2”) providing for TD2 to serve as the lead contract research organization (CRO) for our planned Phase II clinical trial for LP-300. We expect to pay approximately $6,500,000 to $8,000,000 to TD2 over the next 18 to 24 months in connection with services provided by TD2 as well as clinical trial site and other pass-through costs relating to the LP-300 Phase II clinical trial.
In November 2021, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized a share repurchase program to acquire up to $7 million of the Company’s common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company repurchased 121,490 shares of common stock pursuant to the repurchase program for a total of approximately $940,000, including purchase fees. Upon purchase, the repurchased shares ceased to be outstanding and returned to the status of authorized and unissued shares of common stock.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $51,524,000 and $19,229,000, respectively. Based on our anticipated expenditures and capital commitments as of the date of this report, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements for at least 12 months from the date of filing this Form 10-K.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flow for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was approximately $10,592,000 compared to approximately $5,652,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily the result of the increase in the net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was approximately $19,531,000 compared to approximately $16,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily due to investments in marketable securities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was approximately $63,416,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, attributable primarily to net proceeds from our equity financing in January 2021. Net cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was approximately $23,665,000, attributable primarily to net proceeds from our initial public offering.
Operating Capital and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing operating losses at least for the next several years as we commence our clinical trials of LP-300 and LP-184, advance clinical development of LP-100, pursue development of our other drug candidates, and seek potential future marketing approval for our drug candidates which could be several years in the future, if at all. We do not expect to generate revenue, other than possible license and grant revenue, unless and until we successfully complete development and obtain regulatory approval for our therapeutic candidates. Our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending on the timing of our planned clinical trials and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We have based our projections of operating capital requirements on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect and we may use all of our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical products, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our operating capital requirements. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● continue the development, including preclinical studies and clinical trials, of our drug candidates;
● initiate preclinical studies and clinical trials for any additional indications for our current drug candidates and any future drug candidates that we may pursue;
● continue to build our portfolio of drug candidates through the acquisition or in-license of additional drug candidates or technologies;
● continue to develop, maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● pursue regulatory approvals for those of our current and future drug candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
● ultimately establish a sales, marketing, distribution and other commercial infrastructure to commercialize any drug candidate for which we may obtain marketing approval;
● hire additional clinical, regulatory, scientific and accounting personnel;
● incur additional legal, accounting and other expenses in operating as a public company; and
● continue to develop, maintain, and expand our RADR® platform.
We expect that we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in order to complete our clinical trials. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of common stock, convertible securities or other equity securities, the ownership interests of our existing stockholders may be materially diluted and the terms of these securities could include liquidation or other preferences that could adversely affect the rights of our existing stockholders. In addition, debt financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include restrictive covenants that limit our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we could be forced to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development or commercialization of LP-184, LP-300, LP-100 and/or other drug candidates and programs, seek collaborators at an earlier stage than otherwise would be desirable or on terms that are less favorable than might otherwise be available, and relinquish or license, potentially on unfavorable terms, our rights to LP-184, LP-300, LP-100 and/or other drug candidates and programs that we otherwise would seek to develop or commercialize ourselves.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting standards in the United States of America. Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included as part of this report. Critical accounting policies and significant accounting estimates made in accordance with such policies are regularly discussed with the Audit Committee of the Company’s board of directors. We believe the following critical accounting policies involve the most significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development
All costs of research and development are expensed as incurred.
When preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued clinical expenses. This process involves reviewing contracts and communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. Payments under some of the contracts we have with third parties depend on factors, such as successful enrollment of certain numbers of patients, site initiation and the completion of clinical trial milestones.
When accruing clinical expenses, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If possible, we obtain information regarding unbilled services directly from our service providers. However, we may be required to estimate the cost of these services based only on information available to us. If we underestimate or overestimate the cost associated with a trial or service at a given point in time, adjustments to research and development expenses may be necessary in future periods. Historically, our estimated accrued clinical expenses have approximated actual expense incurred.
Stock-based Compensation
We have granted stock options to our employees under our equity incentive plan. Stock-based compensation expense from awards granted under our plan is allocated over the required service period over which those stock option awards vest.
The stock option awards are valued at fair value on the date of grant and that fair value is recognized over the requisite service period. The estimated fair value of these stock option awards was determined using the Black Scholes option pricing model on the date of grant. Some of these grants occurred at a time when we were not a public company. Significant judgment and estimates were used to estimate the fair value of these awards, as they occurred when our stock was not publicly traded.
Each option award is subject to specified vesting schedules and requirements. Compensation expense is charged to us over the required service period to earn the award which is expected to be up to four years, subject to the achievement of time and event-based vesting requirements. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we have incurred share-based compensation expense related to equity awards totaling approximately $962,000 and $1,192,000, respectively.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure About Market Risk
Our primary exposure to market risk is interest rate sensitivity, which is affected by changes in the general level of U.S. interest rates. Fixed rate securities may have their market value adversely affected due to a rise in interest rates. Accordingly, our future investment income may fluctuate as a result of changes in interest rates, or we may suffer losses in principal if we are forced to sell securities that decline in market value as a result of changes in interest rates.
Historically, we have raised capital through the issuance of equity securities. We had no long-term debt outstanding as of December 31, 2021, and as of December 31, 2020 we had no long-term debt outstanding, other than our PPP Loan Agreement entered into in May 2020. In April 2021 we received notice that the Small Business Administration (SBA) had authorized full forgiveness of the PPP Loan.
We do not believe that our cash and cash equivalents have significant risk of default or illiquidity. Our cash and cash equivalents consist primarily of cash and money market funds. Our exposure to market risk for changes in interest rates is limited because our cash and cash equivalents have a short-term maturity and are used primarily for working capital purposes. While we believe our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities do not contain excessive risk, we cannot provide absolute assurance that in the future our investments will not be subject to adverse changes in market value. In addition, we maintain significant amounts of cash at one or more financial institutions that are in excess of federally insured limits.
We formed a wholly owned subsidiary, Lantern Pharma Australia Pty Ltd, in Australia in September 2021 and experienced foreign currency losses of approximately $18,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 in connection with this subsidiary. We will remain subject to the risk of foreign currency losses in future periods, although we do not expect the impact of any foreign currency losses to be material. We do not participate in any foreign currency hedging activities, and we do not have any other derivative financial instruments.
Inflation generally affects us by increasing our cost of labor and clinical trial costs. We do not believe that inflation has had a material effect on our results of operations during the periods presented. Inflation has increased substantially in recent periods and could have a greater impact on our future results of operations if it remains at current levels or continues to increase.