ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are based on our management’s current beliefs and assumptions, which statements are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” included in Part I, Item 1A of this Report. Please also see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Report.
Overview
Lantronix, Inc. is a global Industrial and Enterprise internet of things (“IoT”) provider of solutions that target diversified verticals ranging from Smart Cities, Utilities and Healthcare to Enterprise, Intelligent Transportation, and Industrial Automation. Building on a long history of connectivity and video processing competence, target applications include Video Surveillance, Traffic management, Infotainment systems, Robotics, Edge Computing and Remote Environment Management (“REM”).
We conduct our business globally and manage our sales teams by three geographic regions: the Americas; Europe, Middle East, and Africa (“EMEA”); and Asia Pacific Japan (“APJ”).
References to “fiscal 2022” refer to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022 and references to “fiscal 2021” refer to the fiscal year ended June 30, 2021.
Products and Solutions
To more closely align the categorization of our product lines with how we position them in the marketplace, we have re-organized our products and solutions. We now organize our products and solutions into three product lines: Embedded IoT Solutions, IoT System Solutions, and Software & Services. Until this recent change, we had organized our products and solutions into three different product lines: IoT, REM and Other. Going forward, we do not plan to disclose our net revenue by the old categorizations. Refer to “Products and Solutions” included in Part I, Item 1 of this Report, which is incorporated herein by reference, for further discussion.
Recent Developments
Acquisition
On August 2, 2021 we acquired the Transition Networks and Net2Edge businesses (the “TN Companies”) from Communication Systems, Inc. (“CSI”) for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $30,651,000, which includes earnout payments of up to $7,000,000 depending on the achievement of certain revenue targets for the TN Companies. The TN Companies provide us with complementary IoT connectivity products and capabilities, including switching, Power over Ethernet (“PoE”) and media conversion and adapter products. In connection with the closing of the acquisition, we entered into new loan agreements with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) which included (i) a new term loan of $17,500,000 with an available revolving credit facility of up to $2,500,000 and (ii) a second term loan of $12,000,000. In January 2022, we repaid the $12,000,000 second term loan.
Refer to Notes 3 and 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report, which are incorporated herein by reference, for additional discussions regarding the August 2021 acquisition of the TN Companies and related financing arrangements, respectively.
Underwritten Offering
On November 18, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement (the “Underwriting Agreement”) with TL Investment GmbH (“TL Investment”) and Canaccord Genuity LLC, as representative of the several underwriters named therein (together, the “Underwriters”), relating to the Company’s offer and sale of 4,700,000 shares (the “Firm Shares”) of our common stock at an initial price to the public of $7.50 per share. In addition, TL Investment granted the Underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 705,000 shares (the “Option Shares”) of our common stock held by TL Investment at the public offering price, less the underwriting discounts. On November 18, 2021, the Underwriters exercised their option to purchase the Option Shares from TL Investment in full. On November 22, 2021, we issued and delivered the Firm Shares and TL Investment delivered the Option Shares.
Net proceeds to Lantronix from the offering of the Firm Shares, after deducting the underwriting discount and offering expenses, were approximately $32,600,000.
COVID-19 Update
Since the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we have taken measures to protect the health and safety of our employees and comply with applicable local directives. Most of our employees transitioned to remote working arrangements commencing in March 2020, and many continue to primarily work remotely as of the date hereof. We continue to monitor the implications of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, as well as our customers’ and suppliers’ businesses, including the emergence of new strains of the virus, current or future government-imposed shutdowns, and the impact of ongoing vaccination efforts.
Our efforts to support customer engagement through industry events, trade shows and business travel also continue to be adversely affected. Prolonged shutdowns, or additional future shutdowns and other restrictions instituted by federal, state and local governments, may lead to a reduction in revenue during the coming quarters. To mitigate potential revenue declines, we continue to adjust our go-to-market approach by adding more distributors and value-added resellers, who are closer to the customers and end-customers.
Our supply chain still faces challenges, as most of our manufacturing is performed in Thailand, Taiwan and China. We have experienced an increase in costs of components for certain products as well as increased freight and logistics costs and we expect these cost increases to continue. These and other factors have contributed to recent delays in shipments to some customers.
Overall, in light of the changing nature and continuing uncertainty around the COVID-19 pandemic, including the emergence of new, highly-contagious variants, our ability to predict the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business in future periods remains limited. The full effects of the pandemic on our business are unlikely to be fully realized, or reflected in our financial results, until future periods.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report, which is incorporated herein by reference, for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles requires us to make judgments, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of net revenue and expenses during the reporting period. We regularly evaluate our estimates and assumptions related to revenue recognition, sales returns and allowances, allowance for doubtful accounts, inventory valuation, warranty reserves, restructuring charges, valuation of deferred income taxes, valuation of goodwill and long-lived and intangible assets, share-based compensation, litigation and other contingencies. We base our estimates and assumptions on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. To the extent there are material differences between our estimates and the actual results, our future results of operations will be affected.
We believe the following critical accounting policies require us to make significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements:
Revenue Recognition
Revenue is recognized upon the transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. We apply the following five-step approach in determining the amount and timing of revenue to be recognized: (i) identifying the contract with a customer, (ii) identifying the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determining the transaction price, (iv) allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract and (v) recognizing revenue when the performance obligation is satisfied.
A significant portion of our products are sold to distributors under agreements which contain (i) limited rights to return unsold products and (ii) price adjustment provisions, both of which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. Establishing accruals for product returns and pricing adjustments requires the use of judgment and estimates that impact the amount and timing of revenue recognition. When product revenue is recognized, we establish an estimated allowance for future product returns based primarily on historical returns experience and other known or anticipated returns. We also record reductions of revenue for pricing adjustments, such as competitive pricing programs and rebates, in the same period that the related revenue is recognized, based primarily on approved pricing adjustments and our historical experience. Actual product returns or pricing adjustments that differ from our estimates could result in increases or decreases to our net revenue.
A portion of our revenues are derived from engineering and related consulting service contracts with customers. These contracts generally include performance obligations in which control is transferred over time because the customer either simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits provided or our performance on the contract creates or enhances an asset that the customer controls. These contracts typically provide services on the following basis:
· Time & Materials (“T&M”) - services consist of revenues from software modification, consulting implementation, training and integration services. These services are set forth separately in the contractual arrangements such that the total price of the customer arrangement is expected to vary depending on the actual time and materials incurred based on the customer’s needs.
· Fixed Price - arrangements to render specific consulting and software modification services which tend to be more complex.
Performance obligations for T&M contracts qualify for the "Right to Invoice" practical expedient within the revenue guidance. Under this practical expedient, we may recognize revenue, over time, in the amount to which we have a right to invoice. In addition, we are not required to estimate variable consideration upon inception of the contract and reassess the estimate each reporting period. We determined that this method best represents the transfer of services as, upon billing, we have a right to consideration from a customer in an amount that directly corresponds with the value to the customer of our performance completed to date.
We recognize revenue on fixed price contracts, over time, using an input method based on the proportion of our actual costs incurred (generally labor hours expended) to the total costs expected to complete the contract performance obligation. We determined that this method best represents the transfer of services as the proportion closely depicts the efforts or inputs completed towards the satisfaction of a fixed price contract performance obligation.
From time to time, we may enter into contracts with customers that include promises to transfer multiple performance obligations that may include sales of products, professional engineering services and other product qualification or certification services. Determining whether the promises in these arrangements are considered distinct performance obligations, that should be accounted for separately versus together, often requires judgment. We consider performance obligations to be distinct when the customer can benefit from the promised good or service on its own or by combining it with other resources readily available and when the promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promised goods or services in the contract. In these arrangements, we allocate revenue on a relative standalone selling price basis by maximizing the use of observable inputs to determine the standalone selling price for each performance obligation. Additionally, estimating standalone selling prices for separate performance obligations within a contract may require significant judgment and consideration of various factors including market conditions, items contemplated during negotiation of customer arrangements and internally-developed pricing models. Changes to performance obligations that we identify, or the estimated selling prices pertaining to a contract, could materially impact the amounts of earned and unearned revenue that we record.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses resulting from the inability of our customers to make required payments. Our evaluation of the collectability of customer accounts receivable is based on various factors. In cases where we are aware of circumstances that may impair a specific customer’s ability to meet its financial obligations subsequent to the original sale, we record an allowance against amounts due based on those particular circumstances. For all other customers, we estimate an allowance for doubtful accounts based on (i) the length of time the receivables are past due, (ii) our bad debt collection experience, and (iii) our understanding of general industry conditions. If a major customer’s credit-worthiness deteriorates, or our customers’ actual defaults exceed our estimates, our financial results could be impacted.
Inventory Valuation
We value inventories at the lower of cost (on a first-in, first-out basis) or net realizable value, whereby we make estimates regarding the market value of our inventories, including an assessment of excess and obsolete inventories. We determine excess and obsolete inventories based on an estimate of the future sales demand for our products within a specified time horizon, which is generally 12 months. In addition, specific reserve estimates are recorded to cover risks for end-of-life products, inventory located at our contract manufacturers and warranty replacement stock. The estimates we use for demand are also used for near-term capacity planning and inventory purchasing. Demand for our products can fluctuate significantly from period to period. A significant decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory on hand. In addition, our industry is characterized by rapid technological change, frequent new product development and product obsolescence that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on hand. Additionally, our estimates of future product demand and judgement to determine excess inventory may prove to be inaccurate, in which case we may have understated or overstated the reduction to the total carrying value of our inventory for excess and obsolete inventory. In the future, if our inventory is determined to be overvalued, we would be required to recognize such costs in our cost of goods sold, resulting in a reduction in our gross margins, at the time of such determination. Although we make every effort to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our results of operations.
Warranty Reserve
The standard warranty periods we provide for our products typically range from one to five years. We establish reserves for estimated product warranty costs at the time revenue is recognized based upon our historical warranty experience, and for any known or anticipated product warranty issues. Our warranty obligations are impacted by a number of factors, including historical warranty costs, actual product failure rates, service delivery costs, and the use of materials. If our actual results are different from our assumptions, increases or decreases to warranty reserves could be required, which could impact our cost of revenue and gross margins.
Restructuring Charges
We recognize costs and related liabilities for restructuring activities when they are incurred. Our restructuring charges are primarily comprised of employee separation costs, asset impairments and contract exit costs. Employee separation costs include one-time termination benefits that are recognized as a liability at estimated fair value, at the time of communication to employees, unless future service is required, in which case the costs are recognized ratably over the future service period. Ongoing termination benefits are recognized as a liability at estimated fair value when the amount of such benefits are probable and reasonably estimable. Contract exit costs include contract termination fees and right-of-use asset impairments recognized on the date that we have vacated the premises or ceased use of the leased facilities. A liability for contract termination fees is recognized in the period in which we terminate the contract. Restructuring accruals are based upon management estimates at the time they are recorded and can change depending upon changes in facts and circumstances subsequent to the date the original liability is recorded. If actuals results differ, or if management determines revised estimates are necessary, we may record additional liabilities or reverse a portion or existing liabilities.
Valuation of Deferred Income Taxes
We have recorded a valuation allowance to reduce our net deferred tax assets to zero, primarily due to historical net operating losses (“NOLs”) and uncertainty of generating future taxable income. We consider estimated future taxable income and ongoing prudent and feasible tax planning strategies in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. If we determine that it is more likely than not that we will realize a deferred tax asset that currently has a valuation allowance, we would be required to reverse the valuation allowance, which would be reflected as an income tax benefit in our consolidated statements of operations at that time.
Business Combinations
We allocate the fair value of the purchase consideration of a business acquisition to the tangible assets, liabilities, and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), if applicable, based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. IPR&D is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. When an IPR&D project is completed, the IPR&D is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and amortized over the asset’s estimated useful life. The valuation of acquired assets and assumed liabilities requires significant judgment and estimates, especially with respect to intangible assets. The valuation of intangible assets, in particular, requires that we use valuation techniques such as the income approach. The income approach includes the use of a discounted cash flow model, which includes discounted cash flow scenarios and requires significant estimates such as future expected revenue, expenses, capital expenditures and other costs, and discount rates. We estimate the fair value based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from our estimates. Estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Acquisition-related expenses and related restructuring costs are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred.
Goodwill Impairment Testing
We evaluate goodwill for impairment on an annual basis in our fourth fiscal quarter or more frequently if we believe indicators of impairment exist that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our single reporting unit below its carrying amount.
We begin our evaluation of goodwill for impairment by assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying value. Some factors that we consider important in the qualitative assessment which could trigger a goodwill impairment review include:
· significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results;
· significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business;
· significant negative industry or economic trends;
· a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period; and
· a significant change in our market capitalization relative to our book value.
Based on our qualitative assessment, if we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we conduct a quantitative goodwill impairment test, which involves comparing the estimated fair value of our single reporting unit with its carrying value, including goodwill. We estimate the fair value of our single reporting unit using a combination of the income and market approach. If the carrying value of the reporting unit exceeds its estimated fair value, we recognize an impairment loss for the difference.
Significant management judgment is required in estimating the reporting unit’s fair value and in the creation of the forecasts of future operating results that are used in the discounted cash flow method of valuation. These include (i) estimation of future cash flows, which is dependent on internal forecasts, (ii) estimation of the long-term rate of growth of our business, (iii) estimation of the period during which cash flows will be generated and (iv) the determination of our weighted-average cost of capital, which is a factor in determining the discount rate. Our estimate of the reporting unit’s fair value would also generally include the consideration of a control premium, which is the amount that a buyer is willing to pay over the current market price of a company as indicated by the traded price per share (i.e., market capitalization) to acquire a controlling interest. If our actual financial results are not consistent with our assumptions and judgments used in estimating the fair value of our reporting unit, we may be exposed to goodwill impairment losses.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we made a qualitative assessment of whether goodwill impairment existed. Since our assessment of the qualitative factors did not result in a determination that it was more likely than not that the fair value of our single reporting unit is less than its carrying value, we were not required to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. As of June 30, 2022, the carrying value of our single reporting unit was $79,900,000, while our market capitalization was $189,000,000. We concluded that no goodwill impairment existed as of June 30, 2022.
Long-Lived Assets and Intangible Assets
We assess the impairment of long-lived assets and intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to the following:
·
significant decreases in the market price of the asset;
·
significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors;
·
accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset;
·
current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; or
·
current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life.
Whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of long-lived assets and intangible assets may not be recoverable, we estimate the future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset from its use or eventual disposition. If the sum of the expected future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. Significant management judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in the discounted cash flow method of valuation. These significant judgments may include future expected revenue, expenses, capital expenditures and other costs, discount rates and whether or not alternative uses are available for impacted long-lived assets.
Share-Based Compensation
We record share-based compensation in our consolidated statements of operations as an expense, based on the estimated grant date fair value of our share-based awards, with the fair values amortized to expense over the requisite service period. Our share-based awards are currently comprised of restricted stock units, performance stock units, common stock options, and common stock purchase rights granted under our 2013 Employee Stock Purchase Plan (“ESPP”).
The fair value of our restricted stock units is based on the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant.
The fair value of our performance stock units is estimated as of the grant date based upon the expected achievement of the performance metrics specified in the grant and the closing market price of our common stock on the date of grant. To the extent a grant of performance share units contains a market condition, the grant date fair value is estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation, which incorporates estimates of the potential outcomes of the market condition on the grant date fair value of each award.
The fair value of our common stock options and ESPP common stock purchase rights is generally estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes-Merton (“BSM”) valuation model. The determination of the fair value of share-based awards utilizing the BSM model is affected by our stock price and various assumptions, including the expected term, expected volatility, risk-free interest rate and expected dividend yields. The expected term of stock options granted has historically been estimated using the simplified method, as permitted by guidance issued by the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). We have used the simplified method because we were generally unable to rely on our limited historical exercise data or alternative information as a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term of such options. For new stock options granted beginning in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, we estimated the expected term based on our recent historical exercise data. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our stock price. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based on the U.S. Treasury interest rates appropriate for the expected term of our stock options and common stock purchase rights.
If factors change and we employ different assumptions, share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what we have recorded in the past. If there are any modifications or cancellations of the underlying unvested share-based awards, we may be required to accelerate, increase or cancel any remaining unearned share-based compensation expense. If these events were to occur, it could increase or decrease our share-based compensation expense, which would impact our operating expenses and gross margins.
Results of Operations - Fiscal Years Ended June 30, 2022 and 2021
Summary
For fiscal 2022, our net revenue increased by $58,178,000, or 81.4%, compared to fiscal 2021. The increase in net revenue was driven by a 144.0% increase in net revenue in our IoT System Solutions product line, as well as an increase of 60.0% in net revenues in our Embedded IoT Solutions product line. We had a net loss of $5,362,000 for fiscal 2022 compared to a net loss of $4,044,000 for fiscal 2021. The increase in net loss was driven primarily by costs related to the TN acquisition as both SG&A and R&D expenses as a percent of net revenue were lower in fiscal 2022 than fiscal 2021, largely because of our business integration efforts and capture of significant cost synergies during fiscal 2022.
Net Revenue
The following tables present our net revenue by product lines and by geographic region:
Embedded IoT Solutions
Net revenue from our Embedded IoT Solutions product line increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to organic growth in our compute modules and embedded ethernet connectivity products. In addition, the acquisition of the TN Companies contributed approximately $7,200,000 in fiscal 2022 primarily in the Americas region.
IoT System Solutions
Net revenue from our IoT System Solutions product line increased in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to product sales of our network switches and media converter products from the TN Companies acquisition, mostly in the Americas region. We also experienced organic growth in our pre-acquisition business driven by (i) our out of band (“OOB”) products in the Americas, and to a lesser extent, EMEA and APJ, and (ii) our device server products in the Americas and APJ regions. The overall increase in net revenues was partially offset by a decrease in unit sales in our WiFi gateway products in the Americas and EMEA regions.
Software & Services
Net revenue from our Software & Services product line in fiscal 2022 was flat when compared to fiscal 2021. In fiscal 2022, we experienced an increase in engineering consulting services revenue when compared to fiscal 2021. This increase was largely offset by lower revenues from some of our software offerings compared to fiscal 2021 during which we had a large software license sale.
For comparative purposes, the following tables present our product line categorizations prior to our decision to reorganize how we present this information during the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022. As discussed at Part I, Item 1 of this Report, going forward we do not plan to disclose our net revenue by these categorizations.
Gross Profit
Gross profit represents net revenue less cost of revenue. Cost of revenue consists primarily of the cost of raw material components, subcontract labor assembly by contract manufacturers, freight costs, personnel-related expenses, manufacturing overhead, inventory reserves for excess and obsolete products or raw materials, warranty costs, royalties and share-based compensation.
The following table presents our gross profit:
Gross profit as a percent of revenue (referred to as “gross margin”) for fiscal 2022 decreased compared to fiscal 2021 due primarily to our revenue mix. We saw significant growth in unit sales of our compute modules and growth in our engineering services revenues, which typically carry lower gross margins than many of our products. Gross margin for fiscal 2022 was also negatively impacted by (i) higher supply chain and logistics costs and (ii) the amortization of unrealized profit in acquired inventory from the TN Companies in the amount of approximately $380,000. The overall decrease in our gross margins in the current year period was partially offset by growth in unit sales of our higher-margin OOB products, along with the margin contribution from the products acquired from the TN Companies.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consisted of personnel-related expenses including salaries and commissions, share-based compensation, facility expenses, information technology, advertising and marketing expenses and professional legal and accounting fees.
The following table presents our selling, general and administrative expenses:
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased in fiscal 2022 when compared to fiscal 2021 primarily (i) higher personnel-related expenses as we added headcount from the acquisition of the TN Companies and also recorded higher variable compensation expenses, (ii) increased professional fees and outside services costs for legal and other services, as well as transition services fees paid to the seller for the acquisition of the TN Companies, (iii) increased share-based compensation expense due to additional grants of performance stock units and other stock awards with higher fair values compared to the prior year and (iv) higher marketing spending, including on various events and trade shows that were largely halted in the prior year due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consisted of personnel-related expenses, share-based compensation, and expenditures to third-party vendors for research and development activities and product certification costs. Our costs from period-to-period related to outside services and product certifications vary depending on our level and timing of development activities.
The following table presents our research and development expenses:
Research and development expenses increased in fiscal 2022 when compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to (i) an increase in personnel-related costs driven by additions to headcount from both the TN Companies acquisition and internal growth, (ii) higher facility-related costs as we opened our new facility in Germany and expanded our engineering teams, (iii) increased outside services costs primarily related to the timing of product development projects requiring outsourced engineering resources, and (iv) increased share-based compensation expense due to additional grants of performance stock units and other stock awards with higher fair values compared to the prior year.
Restructuring, Severance and Related Charges
Fiscal 2022
During fiscal 2022, we incurred charges of approximately $795,000 related to headcount reductions and restructuring of non-essential operations, including certain functions determined redundant related to the acquisition of the TN Companies. We may incur additional restructuring, severance and related charges in future periods as we continue to identify cost savings and synergies resulting from our acquisitions.
Fiscal 2021
During fiscal 2021, we incurred charges of approximately $506,000 related to headcount reductions and restructuring of non-essential operations, including certain acquisition-related functions we determined were redundant.
Acquisition-Related Costs
During fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021, we incurred approximately $889,000 and $841,000 of acquisition-related costs, respectively, mostly comprised of banking and legal fees related to the acquisition of the TN Companies and our exploration of other acquisition targets.
Amortization of Purchased Intangible Assets
We acquired certain intangible assets through our recent acquisitions, which we recorded at fair-value as of the acquisition dates. These assets are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives and resulted in charges of $5,590,000 and $3,094,000 during fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Interest Income (Expense), Net
For fiscal 2022 and 2021, we incurred net interest expense from interest incurred on borrowings on our Credit Facilities. We also earn interest on our domestic cash balances.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
For fiscal 2022, we recognized a non-cash loss on the extinguishment of our mezzanine term loan facility of $764,000, representing the write-off of unamortized deferred financing costs.
Other Expense, Net
Other expense, net, is comprised primarily of foreign currency remeasurement and transaction adjustments related to our foreign subsidiaries whose functional currency is the U.S. dollar. During fiscal 2021, we also incurred a loss of approximately $197,000 on disposal of certain property and equipment.
Provision for Income Taxes
The following table presents our provision for income taxes:
The following table presents our effective tax rate based upon our provision for income taxes:
We utilize the liability method of accounting for income taxes. In fiscal 2022 the tax benefit was the result of us recording a U.S. deferred tax liability in the TN Companies acquisition purchase accounting related to non-tax-deductible intangible assets recognized in our consolidated financial statements. The acquired deferred tax liabilities are a source of income to support recognition of our existing deferred tax assets. The differences between our effective tax rate and the federal statutory rate in fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021 were also impacted by the effect of our domestic losses recorded without a tax benefit, as well as the effect of foreign earnings taxed at rates differing from the federal statutory rate.
We record net deferred tax assets to the extent we believe these assets are more likely than not to be realized. As a result of our cumulative losses and uncertainty of generating future taxable income, we provided a full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets for fiscal 2022 and fiscal 2021.
Due to the “change of ownership” provision of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, utilization of our NOL carryforwards and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to an annual limitation against taxable income in future periods. Due to the annual limitation, a portion of these carryforwards may expire before ultimately becoming available to reduce future income tax liabilities. The following table presents our NOLs:
For federal income tax purposes, our NOL carryovers generated for tax years beginning before July 1, 2018 began to expire in fiscal 2021. Of our federal NOLs as of June 30, 2022 in the table above, approximately $26,500,000 will expire by June 30, 2023. For state income tax purposes, our NOLs began to expire in the fiscal year ended June 30, 2013. Pursuant to the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act enacted by the U.S. federal government in December 2017, for federal income tax purposes, NOL carryovers generated for our tax years beginning after June 30, 2018 can be carried forward indefinitely, but will be subject to a taxable income limitation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity
The following table presents our working capital and cash and cash equivalents:
In November 2021, we sold 4,700,000 shares of our common stock in an underwritten public offering. We received net cash proceeds from the offering of approximately $32,600,000. Refer to Note 6 of Notes to Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part I, Item 1 of this Report for additional information.
In January 2022, we terminated our $12,000,000 mezzanine term loan facility that was originated in August 2021. In connection with this termination, we paid a total of $12,152,500 to pay off the facility in full.
In February 2022, we entered into an amendment to our Senior Credit Facilities (as defined in Note 5 of Notes to Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part I, Item 1 of this Report) which (i) increased the amount available under the revolving credit facility from $2,500,000 to $7,500,000, (ii) removed and replaced LIBOR benchmark provisions with Term SOFR benchmark provisions and (iii) provided that advances under the Senior Credit Facilities bear interest at Term SOFR or the Prime Rate, at the option of Lantronix, plus a margin that ranges from 3.10% to 4.10% in the case of Term SOFR and 1.50% to 2.50% in the case of the Prime Rate, depending on our total leverage with a Term SOFR floor of 0.00% and a Prime Rate floor of 3.25%. We paid a nonrefundable fee of $25,000 in connection with this amendment to our Senior Credit Facilities. As of June 30, 2022, we had $16,188,000 million in borrowings outstanding under our term loan facility.
Our principal sources of cash and liquidity include our existing cash and cash equivalents, borrowings and amounts available under our loan agreement with our bank, and cash generated from operations. We believe that these sources will be sufficient to fund our current requirements for working capital, capital expenditures and other financial commitments for at least the next 12 months and beyond. We anticipate that the primary factors affecting our cash and liquidity are net revenue, working capital requirements and capital expenditures.
Management defines cash and cash equivalents as highly liquid deposits with original maturities of 90 days or less when purchased. We maintain cash and cash equivalents balances at certain financial institutions in excess of amounts insured by federal agencies. Management does not believe this concentration subjects us to any unusual financial risk beyond the normal risk associated with commercial banking relationships. We frequently monitor the third-party depository institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents. Our emphasis is primarily on safety of principal and secondarily on maximizing yield on those funds.
Our future working capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the following: timing and amount of our net revenue; our product mix and the resulting gross margins; research and development expenses; selling, general and administrative expenses; and expenses associated with any strategic partnerships, acquisitions or infrastructure investments.
From time to time, we may seek additional capital from public or private offerings of our capital stock, borrowings under our existing or future credit lines or other sources in order to (i) develop or enhance our products, (ii) take advantage of strategic opportunities, (iii) respond to competition or (iv) continue to operate our business. We currently have a Form S-3 shelf registration statement on file with the SEC. If we issue equity securities to raise additional funds, our existing stockholders may experience dilution, and the new equity securities may have rights, preferences and privileges senior to those of our existing stockholders. If we issue debt securities to raise additional funds, we may incur debt service obligations, become subject to additional restrictions that limit or restrict our ability to operate our business, or be required to further encumber our assets. There can be no assurance that we will be able to raise any such capital on terms acceptable to us, if at all.
Bank Loan Agreements
Refer to Note 5 of Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, included in Part II, Item 8 of this Report, which is incorporated herein by reference, for a discussion of our loan agreements.
Cash Flows
The following table presents the major components of the consolidated statements of cash flows:
Operating Activities
We used cash in operating activities during fiscal 2022 compared to operations providing cash in fiscal 2021 mainly due to the increase in our net loss, which was driven by an increase in operating expenses. For fiscal 2022, our net loss included $15,380,000 of non-cash charges, and the changes in operating assets and liabilities used cash of $19,434,000.
Our net inventories increased by $22,620,000, or 150.2%, from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022. Of this increase, $7,734,000 of net inventories were acquired in the TN Companies acquisition. The remainder of the increase was a combination of increases in revenue, increased lead times required for certain customers, and supply chain constraints issues.
Accounts receivable increased by $12,747,000, or 94.3%, from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022, of which $5,277,000 was acquired in the TN Companies acquisition. The remainder of the increase is primarily due to the increase and timing of our sales and related payments from customers.
Accounts payable increased by $11,522,000, or 126.3%, from June 30, 2021 to June 30, 2022, of which $1,872,000 was acquired in the TN Companies acquisition. The remainder of the increase is primarily due to the increase and timing of our inventory purchases and related payments to our vendors.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities during fiscal 2022 was driven by the acquisition of the TN Companies, which used net cash of $23,629,000. We also used cash for the purchase of property and equipment, primarily related to various tooling, test and office equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities during fiscal 2022 resulted primarily from (i) net proceeds from our public offering of $32,600,000 and (ii) $29,500,000 in gross proceeds received from our credit facilities with SVB, partially offset by the repayment of our previous term loan in the amount of $3,750,000 and the mezzanine credit facility in the amount of $12,000,000. We also used cash of $1,811,000 for tax withholdings paid on behalf of employees for restricted shares and paid earnout consideration of $1,500,000 for the TN Companies.