Item 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and notes thereto included in this Annual Report. This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995, such statements are subject to the “safe harbor” created by those sections and involve risks and uncertainties. Forward-looking statements are based on our management’s beliefs and assumptions and on information available to our management as of the date hereof. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, accordingly, you should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. Except as required by law, we assume no obligation to update these forward-looking statements publicly, or to update the reasons actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, even if new information becomes available in the future. Such factors may be amplified by the COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impact on our business and the global economy.
Overview
Lumos Pharma, Inc. is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company. References in this Annual Report to “us,” “we,” “our,” the “Company,” or “Lumos” are to Lumos Pharma, Inc. and its wholly-owned subsidiaries. With our principal executive offices located in Austin, Texas and additional executive and administrative offices located in Ames, Iowa, we are engaged in advancing our clinical program and focused on identifying, acquiring, developing, and commercializing novel products and new therapies for people with rare diseases on a global level, for which there is currently a significant unmet need for safe and effective therapies. Our common stock is listed on the Nasdaq Select Market (“Nasdaq”) and trades under the ticker symbol “LUMO.”
We have focused our efforts on the development of our sole product candidate, growth hormone secretagogue ibutamoren (“LUM-201”), a potential oral therapy for pediatric growth hormone deficiency (“PGHD”) and other rare endocrine disorders.
PGHD is a rare endocrine disorder occurring in approximately one in 3,500 persons aged birth to 17 years. Causes of PGHD can be congenital (children are born with the condition), acquired (brain tumor, head injuries or other causes), iatrogenic (induced by medical treatment) or idiopathic (of unknown cause). Children with untreated PGHD will have significant growth failure, potential adult heights significantly less than five feet, and may have abnormal body composition with decreased bone mineralization, decreased lean body mass, and increased fat mass.
The main therapeutic goal in PGHD is to restore growth, enabling short children to achieve normal height and prevent complications that could involve metabolic abnormalities, cognitive deficiencies and reduced quality of life. The current standard of care for PGHD is limited to daily subcutaneous injections of rhGH with a treatment cycle lasting up to an average of seven years. Poor compliance with daily rhGH injections during treatment can result in an adverse impact on growth. The FDA recently approved a new treatment, Skytrofa, a once-weekly injection that would reduce the number of injections over the course of treatment for a patient, however, we believe that many providers and patients will have a preference for an orally administered treatment.
On March 18, 2020, we closed the business combination (the “Merger”) among the Company, formerly known as NewLink Genetics Corporation (“NewLink”), Cyclone Merger Sub, Inc. (“Merger Sub”), a wholly owned subsidiary of NewLink, and Lumos Pharma, Inc., ("Private Lumos") which has since been renamed “Lumos Pharma Sub, Inc.” whereby Merger Sub merged with and into Private Lumos, with Private Lumos surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Immediately prior to the closing of the Merger, the shares of NewLink common stock were adjusted with a reverse split ratio of 1-for-9. Under the terms of the Merger, Private Lumos stockholders received an aggregate of 4,146,398 shares of NewLink common stock (after giving effect to the reverse split). Immediately following the reverse stock split and the completion of the Merger, there were 8,292,803 shares of our common stock outstanding, of which approximately 50% was held by each of Private Lumos and NewLink security holders. The Merger was accounted for as a reverse asset acquisition.
LUM-201 Growth Hormone Secretagogue
Our pipeline is focused on the development of an orally administered small molecule, LUM-201, which is a growth hormone (“GH”) secretagogue, also called ibutamoren, for rare endocrine disorders where injectable recombinant human growth hormone (“rhGH”) is currently approved. LUM-201 is a tablet formulation that will be administered once daily.
Lumos acquired LUM-201 from Ammonett Pharma LLC (“Ammonett”) in July 2018. LUM-201 received an Orphan Drug Designation (“ODD”) in the United States and the European Union for Growth Hormone Deficiency (“GHD”) in 2017. The United States patent “Detecting and Treating Growth Hormone Deficiency” has been issued with an expiration in 2036. Related patents have been issued in the European Union, Australia, Israel, Japan, South Korea, and Ukraine with related patent applications pending in multiple other jurisdictions. If approved, LUM-201 has the potential to become the first approved oral GH secretagogue to treat rare endocrine disorders associated with GH deficiencies, starting with PGHD, providing an alternative to the current standard regimen of recombinant growth hormone product injections. A secretagogue is a substance that stimulates the secretion or release of another substance. LUM-201 stimulates the release of GH and is referred to as a GH secretagogue.
LUM-201 stimulates GH via the GH secretagogue receptor (GHSR1a), also known as the ghrelin receptor, thus providing a differentiated mechanism of action to treat some rare endocrine disorders (involving a deficiency of GH) by increasing the amplitude of endogenous, pulsatile GH secretion. LUM-201’s stimulatory effect is regulated by both circulating levels of GH and its down-stream mediator insulin-like growth factor, which at supraphysiological levels feedback or negatively regulate additional release of GH from the pituitary, hence protecting against hyperstimulation of GH release. LUM-201 has been observed to stimulate endogenous GH secretion in patients who have a functional but reduced hypothalamic pituitary GH axis. We believe that a subset of patients with PGHD who have a functional but reduced hypothalamic pituitary GH axis are expected to respond to LUM-201 and represent approximately 60% of PGHD patients.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we launched our OraGrowtH210 Trial (as defined below) program to study the effects of LUM-201 in PGHD and initiated our Phase 2 clinical trial (“OraGrowtH210 Trial” or the “Phase 2 Trial”) with the opening of the initial sites participating in this study. The PGHD patient population consists of patients diagnosed with organic PGHD (a more severe GH deficiency) and idiopathic PGHD (a less severe GH deficiency). The OraGrowtH210 trial is a global multi-site randomized study evaluating orally administered LUM-201 at three dose levels (0.8, 1.6 and 3.2 mg/kg/day) against a standard dose of daily injectable rhGH in approximately 80 patients diagnosed with idiopathic PGHD. The primary endpoint of the study is preliminary validation of our predictive enrichment marker (“PEM”) patient selection strategy as evidenced by the percentage of selected patients who grow in response to LUM-201. Secondary endpoints include selection of a pediatric dose of LUM-201 for future studies including Phase 3 and determination of the degree of repeatability of the PEM selection process in PEM positive patients screened for participation in OraGrowtH210.
The OraGrowtH210 Trial currently has sites enrolling in the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Poland, and Israel. We had initiated or had planned to initiate sites in Russia and Ukraine; however, due to the ongoing conflict between Ukraine and Russia and the resulting uncertainty in the region, we are unable to enroll patients in Ukraine and all of our clinical sites in Russia are suspended until further notice. No patients had been randomized to treatment in the clinical trial at any of our nine sites in Ukraine and Russia. Given the encouraging screening and enrollment trajectory at our other clinical sites, we continue to anticipate the 6-month primary outcome data on all 80 subjects in the second half of 2023. The ongoing Ukraine-Russia conflict may, however, adversely impact our business in the future, and it remains too early to evaluate all the potential effects of this crisis.
In response to the FDA's request in a letter dated July 16, 2021, we announced in July 2021 that we would extend the treatment period from six months to twelve months to gather additional efficacy data for LUM-201 in PGHD prior to starting our originally planned long-term extension trial. The extension of the treatment period will not impact the primary outcome data read out, which will be based on the annualized data from the first six months of treatment. We continue to review the timing of the start of the long-term extension study in context of the OraGrowtH210 Trial extension and gather the requested efficacy data to be reviewed by the FDA prior to initiation. We do not anticipate these protocol changes, on a stand-alone basis, will extend the time to the initiation of our Phase 3 clinical trial.
During the second quarter of 2021, we initiated a second concurrent trial of LUM-201 in PGHD, exploring the effects of the novel mechanism of action of LUM-201 in amplifying the pulsatile secretion of growth hormone (the "OraGrowtH212 Trial"). The OraGrowtH212 Trial in PGHD will run in parallel with the OraGrowtH210 Trial. The OraGrowtH212 Trial is a single site, open-label trial evaluating the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic ("PK/PD") effects of LUM-201 in up to 24 PGHD patients at two different dose levels, 1.6 and 3.2 mg/kg/day. The objective of OraGrowtH212 is to confirm prior clinical data illustrating the increased pulsatile release of endogenous growth hormone unique to LUM-201 and its potential for this mechanism of action to contribute to efficacy in PGHD. Our OraGrowtH212 trial is being conducted at a single specialized pediatric center with the capacity to conduct the more frequent sample acquisition and monitoring required for this type of clinical trial. Data from the OraGrowtH212 Trial may be supportive in future regulatory filings; however, this trial is not required for regulatory approval of LUM-201. As we announced in July 2021, this open-label trial was extended from six months to twelve months of treatment for the patients to capture additional PD and height velocity data. The PD pulsatility assessment will continue to occur at baseline and six months on therapy as planned.
We announced in March 2022 that we anticipate reporting interim analyses for two of our clinical trials by the end of 2022. Both our OraGrowtH210 and OraGrowtH212 clinical trials are approaching the enrollment milestone of 50% enrollment and 10 patients, respectively, which will allow for an adequate interim analysis. Data from the interim analysis for OraGrowtH210 will evaluate the safety and annualized height velocity at three dose levels of LUM-201 against a standard dose of rhGH in a total of 40 patients at six months on therapy. We believe this data set may be adequate to provide an initial indication of LUM-201's impact on height velocity compared to growth hormone on the PEM positive population selected for in the trial. Our OraGrowtH212 interim analysis will evaluate safety and height velocity data in 10 patients at six months on therapy.
During the first quarter of 2022, we initiated our OraGrowtH213 Trial (the “OraGrowtH213 Trial,” and together with the OraGrowtH210 Trial, the OraGrowtH211 Trial, and the OraGrowtH212 Trial, the “OraGrowtH Trials”), an open-label, multi-center, Phase 2 study evaluating the growth effects and safety of LUM-201 following 12 months of daily rhGH in up to 20 PGHD subjects who have completed the OraGrowtH210 Trial. Subjects will be administered LUM-201 at a dose level of 3.2 mg/kg/day for up to 12 months.
The coronavirus pandemic has caused pervasive interruptions to clinical trials industry-wide. Facing similar near-term impediments, we have experienced significant delays as clinical sites adapt their procedures to caring for patients during a pandemic and we may experience further delays should significant pandemic related disruptions persist or reemerge.
Oncology Candidates
We have small-molecule product candidates, which we acquired from NewLink in the merger. These product candidates, indoximod, NLG802 (a prodrug of indoximod) and NLG919 (a direct IDO1 enzymatic inhibitor) are indoleamine-2, 3-dioxygenase pathway inhibitors. We also have an additional small molecule product candidate, NLG207, which is a nanoparticle-drug conjugate consisting of a cyclodextrin-based polymer backbone linked to camptothecin, a topoisomerase 1 inhibitor, which was out-licensed to Ellipses Pharma Limited, effective December 17, 2019.
Two U.S. patents covering both the salt and prodrug formulations of indoximod were issued in the United States on August 15, 2017 and February 19, 2019, respectively, providing exclusivity until at least 2036. We are continuing to pursue international patent coverage for these formulations in some countries. We may explore the potential for further development and licensing opportunities for these product candidates; however, we currently do not have any active program for these acquired small molecule product candidates.
Ebola Vaccine
In November 2014, NewLink entered into the NewLink Merck Agreement with Merck to develop and potentially commercialize its Ebola vaccine rVSV∆G-ZEBOV that it licensed from PHAC. rVSV∆G-ZEBOV was also eligible to receive a PRV if approval was granted by the FDA, with the Company entitled to 60% of the PRV value obtained through sale, transfer or other disposition of the PRV. On December 20, 2019, Merck announced that the FDA approved its application for ERVEBO® (Ebola Zaire Vaccine, Live) for the prevention of disease caused by Zaire Ebola virus in individuals 18 years of age and older. Pursuant to the asset purchase agreement, Merck agreed, among other things, to pay us for the PRV in two installments. As required by the agreement, Merck paid us $34.0 million at the closing during the three months ended September 30, 2020 and $26.0 million on January 11, 2021.
We have received and have the potential to continue to earn royalties on sales of the vaccine in certain countries. However, we believe that the market for the vaccine will be limited primarily to areas in the developing world that are excluded from royalty payment or where the vaccine is donated or sold at low or no margin and, therefore, we do not expect to receive material royalty payments from Merck in the foreseeable future.
Financial Overview
Revenue
We have no products approved for commercial sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. In the future, we may generate revenue from product sales, royalties on product sales, or license fees, milestones, or other upfront payments if we enter into any collaborations or license agreements. We expect that our future revenue will fluctuate from quarter to quarter for many reasons, including the uncertain timing and amount of any such payments and sales.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred to advance our product candidate, LUM-201. Our research and development expenses include internal personnel expenditures along with external research and development
expenses incurred under arrangements with third parties, such as contract research and manufacturing organizations, consultants, and our scientific advisors.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are capitalized as an asset and expensed when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received. We expect our research and development expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we continue to conduct our clinical trial programs for our product candidates develop our pipeline and pursue regulatory approval of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of professional fees for legal, auditing, tax and business consulting services, personnel expenses and travel costs. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we expand our operating activities.
COVID-19
The pandemic caused by an outbreak of COVID-19 has resulted, and is likely to continue to result, in significant national and global economic disruption and may continue to adversely affect our operations. We are actively monitoring the potential impact of COVID-19, if any, on the carrying value of certain assets and our continued operations. To date, we have experienced delays related to the progress of our clinical trials as clinical sites adapt their procedures to caring for patients during a pandemic; however, we have not incurred impairment of any assets as a result of COVID-19. The extent to which these events may impact our business, clinical development, regulatory efforts, and the value of our common stock, will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted at this time. The duration and intensity of these impacts and resulting disruption to our operations is uncertain and we will continue to evaluate the impact that these events could have on our operations, financial position, and results of operations and cash flows during fiscal year 2022.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues. Licensing and collaboration revenues decreased by $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to the wind down of work we performed in relation to ERVEBO® as a subcontractor of Merck. Royalty revenues increased $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 due to royalties earned related to sales of ERVEBO®.
Research and Development Expenses. Research and development expenses increased by $7.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to increases of $5.5 million in clinical trial and contract
manufacturing expenses, $2.0 million in personnel-related expenses and $0.7 million in stock compensation expenses, offset by decreases of $0.3 million in legal and consulting expenses, $0.4 million in operating expenses for supplies, depreciation and rent, and $0.5 million in other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses. General and administrative expenses decreased by $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to decreases of $1.9 million in legal and consulting expenses, which were higher in 2020 due to merger-related expenses, $1.1 million in personnel-related expenses and $0.5 million in operating expenses for supplies, depreciation and rent, offset by increases of $1.0 million in stock compensation expense and $0.6 million in traveling, licensing, and other expenses.
Other Income, net. Other income, net decreased by $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to a gain of $6.3 million recognized upon sale of the PRV in July 2020.
Income Tax Benefit. The income tax benefit decreased by $13.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 primarily due to $0.6 million of current tax benefit resulting from the release of the uncertain tax liability in 2021 compared to 2020, which included recording of $4.5 million of current tax benefit related to carry back of NOL under the CARES Act, and $9.5 million for the tax benefit of 2020 tax losses and certain historical tax attributes realized as of the date of the Merger, both benefited from the deferred tax liability recorded for the step up in book basis over tax basis for the net value of the PRV and its subsequent sale and taxable gain.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have historically devoted substantially all our efforts toward research and development and have never earned revenue from commercial sales of our products. We expect to continue to incur additional substantial losses in the foreseeable future as a result of our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations. However, we believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents of approximately $94.8 million as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to allow us to fund our operations through the primary read out of the OraGrowtH210 and OraGrowtH212 Trials for a subset of patients with PGHD and for at least 12 months from the filing date of this Annual Report.
We may seek to sell additional equity or debt securities or obtain a credit facility from time to time if our available cash and cash equivalents are insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements or if we develop additional opportunities to do so. The sale of additional equity and debt securities may result in additional ownership dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of debt securities or preferred stock, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that would restrict our operations. We may require additional capital beyond our currently forecasted amounts. Any such required additional capital may not be available on reasonable terms, if at all. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to reduce the scope of, delay or eliminate some or all of our planned research and development activities, which could harm our business.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the research and development of our product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amounts of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including, but not limited to:
•the scope, progress, results, and costs of clinical trials for our product candidates, and discovery and development activities related to new product candidates;
•the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
•the cost of commercialization activities if any of our product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales, facilities, and distribution costs;
•the cost of manufacturing our product candidates and any products we commercialize;
•our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
•whether, and to what extent, we are required to repay our outstanding government provided loans;
•the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation;
•the impact of public health crises such as the current COVID-19 pandemic or similar outbreaks, and
•the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, our future products, if any.
On December 30, 2020, we entered into a Controlled Equity OfferingSM Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., as agent (the “Agent”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell from time to time through the Agent up to $50.0 million of shares of our common stock (the “Shares”). The offering and sale of the Shares has been registered under the Securities Act. Under the Sales Agreement, the Agent may sell the Shares by any method permitted by law and deemed to be an “at-the-market” offering as defined in Rule 415(a)(4) promulgated under the Securities Act, including sales made directly on or through the Nasdaq, on any other existing trading market for the Shares, in negotiated transactions at market prices prevailing at the time of sale or at prices related to such prevailing market prices and/or any other method permitted by law. We will notify the Agent of the number of Shares to be issued, the time period during which sales are requested to be made, any limitation on the number of Shares that may be sold in any one day and any minimum price below which sales may not be made. We intend to use the net proceeds from this offering for working capital and general corporate purposes, which include, but are not limited to, expanding clinical development opportunities for our product candidate into potential additional indications, and general and administrative expenses. We may also use a portion of the net proceeds to invest in future strategic transactions to expand and diversify our product pipeline through the acquisition or licensing of product candidates or technologies that are complementary to our own. We will pay the Agent a commission of up to 3.0% of the gross sales price of the Shares sold through it under the Sales Agreement. In addition, we have agreed to reimburse certain expenses incurred by the Agent in connection with the offering. The Sales Agreement may be terminated by the Agent or by us at any time upon notice to the other party, as set forth in the Sales Agreement, or by the Agent at any time in certain circumstances, including the occurrence of a material and adverse change in our business or financial condition that makes it impractical or inadvisable to market the shares or to enforce contracts for the sale of the Shares. As of December 31, 2021, no shares had been issued under the Sales Agreement.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth the primary sources and uses of cash for each of the periods set forth below (in thousands):
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our operating activities used cash of $29.6 million and $23.0 million, respectively. The increase was primarily due to an increase in losses from operations during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net loss was offset by a gain on sale of the PRV of $6.3 million and recognition of a deferred tax benefit of $9.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as a decrease in the change in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in working capital is primarily due to obligations paid out related to the Merger during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our investing activities provided cash of $26.0 million and $116.7 million, respectively. The decrease resulted from $26.0 million in cash received towards the final installment from sale of the PRV during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $32.5 million in cash received towards the first installment from sale of the PRV and $84.2 million in cash acquired in connection with the Merger during the year ended December 31, 2020.
For the year ended December 31, 2021 our financing activities used net cash of $192,000. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our financing activities provided cash of $75,000. The increase in cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 is primarily due to $148,000 in expenses related to the common stock offering under our Controlled Equity OfferingSM.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based on our consolidated financial statements which have prepared our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate these estimates and judgments. We based our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the
recording of expenses that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could, therefore, differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, which include salaries, bonuses, benefits and share-based compensation; manufacturing-related costs; clinical trial expenses which include expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations, investigative sites and consultants that conduct our clinical trials; facilities, depreciation of fixed assets and other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of research facilities and equipment; license fees for and milestone payments related to in-licensed products and technology; and costs associated with non-clinical activities and regulatory approvals. Advance payments for goods or services to be rendered in the future for use in research and development activities are deferred and recorded as a prepaid asset. The deferred amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Expenses Accrued Under Contractual Arrangements with Third Parties; Accrued Clinical Expenses
We estimate our accrued expenses through a process of reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with personnel to identify services that have been performed and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service that may not be invoiced from the provider. The estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date are based on facts and circumstances known at that time. Such estimates are periodically confirmed with the service providers to verify accuracy.
We base our expenses related to clinical trials on estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to contracts with multiple research institutions and contract research organizations that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. Invoicing from third-party contractors for services performed can lag several months. We accrue the costs of services rendered in connection with third-party contractor activities based on our estimate of management fees, site management and monitoring costs and data management costs as contracted. Differences between actual clinical trial costs and estimated clinical trial costs are adjusted in the period in which they become known through operations.
Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and their impact, if any, on our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.