ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes to those statements included elsewhere in this report. In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this report.
Business Overview
We are a leader in advanced optical technology, providing high performance fiber optic test, measurement and control products for the telecommunications and photonics industries; and distributed fiber optic sensing solutions that measure, or “sense,” the structures for industries ranging from aerospace, automotive, energy, oil and gas, security and infrastructure.
Our communications test and control products help customers test their fiber optic networks and assemblies with speed and precision in both lab and production environments, accelerating the development of fiber optic products and assuring accurate testing of optical components like photonic integrated circuits ("PICs") and coherent receivers, which are both critical elements of meeting the world’s exponentially growing demand for bandwidth. Our distributed fiber optic sensing products help designers and manufacturers more efficiently develop new and innovative products by measuring stress, strain, and temperature at a high resolution for new designs or manufacturing processes. In addition, our distributed fiber optic sensing products ensure the safety and structural integrity or operational health of critical assets in the field, by monitoring stress, strain, and vibration in large civil and industrial infrastructure such as bridges, roads, pipelines and borders. We also provide applied research services, typically under research programs funded by the U.S. government, in areas of sensing and instrumentation, advanced materials, optical technologies and health sciences.
Prior to September 30, 2021, we were organized into two main reporting segments, our Lightwave segment and our Luna Labs segment. Our Lightwave segment consists of our fiber optics testing, measurement and sensing solutions. Our Luna Labs segment performed applied research principally in the areas of sensing and instrumentation, advanced materials and health sciences. Most of the government funding for our Luna Labs segment was derived from the Small Business Innovation Research ("SBIR"), program coordinated by the U.S. Small Business Administration. We now have one reportable segment, Lightwave, following the determination that our Luna Labs segment met held-for-sale and discontinued operations accounting criteria at the end of the third quarter of 2021 and the sale of substantially all of our equity interests in Luna Labs on March 8, 2022.
Our Lightwave segment develops, manufactures and markets distributed fiber optic sensing products and fiber optic communications test and control products. We develop and commercialize our fiber optic technology for sensing applications for aerospace, automotive, energy and infrastructure as well as for test and measurement applications in the telecommunications
and data communications industries. Our Lightwave segment also performs applied research principally in the areas of optical and THz technologies. Revenues from product sales are mostly derived from the sales of our sensing and communications test, measurement and control products that make use of light-transmitting optical fibers, or fiber optics.
As we develop and commercialize new products, our revenues will reflect a broader and more diversified mix of products. Our key initiative for long term growth is to become a leading provider of fiber optic communications test, measurement, control and sensing equipment. The acquisition of OptaSense in December 2020 added distributed acoustic sensing technology to our existing suite of sensing products and provided for expansion into high-growth markets such as security and perimeter detection, smart infrastructure monitoring and oil and gas. Our products have historically been strong in long-range, discrete sensing and short range, fully distributed sensing which are best when specific, known locations need to be monitored. OptaSense's product offering has helped us fill a gap for long range, fully distributed measurement, which is best for applications where signals can occur anywhere along the length of the sensor.
We may incur increasing expenses as we seek to expand our business, including expenses for research and development, sales and marketing and manufacturing capabilities. We may continue to grow our business in part through acquisitions of additional companies and complementary technologies, which could cause us to incur transaction expenses, amortization or write-offs of intangible assets and goodwill and other acquisition-related expenses. As a result, we may incur net losses in future periods, and these losses could be substantial.
Discontinued Operations
We began actively marketing our Luna Labs segment to prospective buyers during 2021 as part of our growth strategy for our Lightwave segment. After advancing those marketing efforts during the third quarter of 2021, we determined that our Luna Labs segment met held-for-sale and discontinued operations accounting criteria at the end of the third quarter. Accordingly, we began to separately report the results of our Luna Labs segment as discontinued operations in our consolidated statement of operations and the related assets and liabilities as held for sale in the consolidated balance sheets in our third quarter Form 10-Q. These changes have been applied to all periods presented in this Form 10-K. We completed the sale of substantially all of our equity interests in Luna Labs in March 2022, as described below.
Dispositions and Acquisitions
Luna Labs
On March 8, 2022, we completed the sale of substantially all of our equity interests in our Luna Labs business to certain members of Luna Labs’ senior management team and a group of outside investors for an initial purchase price of $20.4 million before working capital and escrow adjustments and transaction fees. Total consideration included $13.0 million of cash received at closing, $2.5 million in the form of a convertible note and $1.7 million in the form of 60-day promissory notes. We can earn up to $1.0 million in future payments from Luna Labs upon the achievement by Luna Labs of certain financial goals. The estimated gain on the transaction is $14.0 million before tax.
LIOS Sensing
On March 10, 2022, we acquired NKT Photonics GmbH and LIOS Technology Inc. (collectively, “LIOS Sensing”) for €20.0 million, or $22.1 million. LIOS Sensing, based in Cologne, Germany and formerly owned by NKT Photonics A/S, provides temperature and strain sensing products which are highly complementary to our existing portfolio of fiber optic offerings.
OptaSense
On December 3, 2020, we acquired OptaSense Holdings Limited ("OptaSense") for $38.9 million, or £29.0 million, in cash. OptaSense, based in Farnborough, United Kingdom ("UK") and formerly owned by QinetiQ Holdings Limited, is a market leader in fiber optic distributed monitoring solutions for pipelines, oilfield services, security, highways and railways, and in power and utilities monitoring systems. The acquisition of OptaSense provided us with important distributed acoustic sensing ("DAS") intellectual property and products. OptaSense's technology and products and geographic footprint are highly complementary to our Lightwave segment which we believe will accelerate our technology roadmap and overall growth.
Description of Our Revenues, Costs and Expenses
Impact of COVID-19 Pandemic
The ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic has impacted, and will likely continue to impact, the way we conduct our business, including the way in which we interface with customers, suppliers and our employees. The COVID-19 pandemic has affected how we interact with our customers by reducing face-to-face meetings and increasing our on-line and virtual presence. While increasing our on-line and virtual presence has proven effective, we are unsure of the impact if these conditions continue for an extended period. During 2021, we have experienced an increased level of disruption in our supply chain and from certain customers, all of which have resulted in delayed revenue. While we believe these disruptions are temporary and will diminish in 2022, there is no guarantee we will be able to manage through these disruptions. See “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the potential adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Revenues
We generate revenues from product sales, commercial product development and licensing and technology development activities. Our Lightwave segment revenues reflect amounts that we receive from sales of our products or development of products for third parties and, to a lesser extent, fees paid to us in connection with licenses or sub-licenses of certain patents and other intellectual property.
We derived Luna Labs segment revenues, which are presented as discontinued operations, from providing research and development services to third parties, including government entities, academic institutions and corporations, and from achieving milestones established by some of these contracts. In general, we completed contracted research over periods ranging from six months to three years and recognize these revenues over the life of the contract as costs are incurred. Following our sale of Luna Labs in March 2022, we will no longer derive revenues from Luna Labs.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues associated with Lightwave segment revenues consists of license fees for use of certain technologies, product manufacturing costs including all direct material and direct labor costs, amounts paid to our contract manufacturers, manufacturing, shipping and handling, provisions for product warranties and inventory obsolescence, as well as overhead allocated to each of these activities.
Cost of revenues associated with Luna Labs segment revenues, which are presented as discontinued operations, consisted of costs associated with performing the related research activities including direct labor, amounts paid to subcontractors and overhead allocated to Luna Labs segment activities.
Operating Expense
Operating expense consists of selling, general and administrative expense, as well as expenses related to research, development and engineering, depreciation of fixed assets, amortization of intangible assets and costs related to merger and acquisitions activities. These expenses also include compensation for employees in executive and operational functions including certain non-cash charges related to expenses from equity awards, facilities costs, professional fees, salaries, commissions, travel expense and related benefits of personnel engaged in sales, marketing, and administrative activities; costs of marketing programs and promotional materials; salaries, bonuses and related benefits of personnel engaged in our own research and development beyond the scope and activities of our historical Luna Labs segment; product development activities not provided under contracts with third parties; and overhead costs related to these activities. The operating expense of our Luna Labs segment is presented in discontinued operations.
Investment Income
Investment income consists of amounts earned on our cash equivalents. We sweep on a daily basis a portion of our cash on hand into a fund invested in U.S. government obligations.
Interest Expense
Interest expense is composed of interest paid under our term and revolving loans as well as interest accrued on our finance lease obligations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Revenue Recognition
Products and Services
To determine the proper revenue recognition method for our product and services contracts, we evaluate whether two or more contracts should be combined and accounted for as one single contract and whether the combined or single contract should be accounted for as more than one performance obligation. For tangible products that contain software that is essential to the tangible product’s functionality, we consider the product and software to be a single performance obligation and recognize revenue accordingly. For contracts with multiple performance obligations, we allocate the contract’s transaction price to each performance obligation based on their relative stand-alone selling prices. In such circumstances, we use the observable price of goods or services which are sold separately in similar circumstances to similar customers. If these prices are not observable, then we will estimate the stand-alone selling price using information that is reasonably available. For the majority of our standard products and services, price list and discount structures related to customer type are available. For products and services that do not have price list and discount structures, we use the residual approach. The residual approach decreases the total transaction price by the sum of the observable standalone selling prices if either the company sells the same good or services to different customers for a broad range of amounts or the company has not established a price for the good or service and that good or service has not been sold on a standalone basis. Shipping and handling activities primarily occur after a customer obtains control and are considered fulfillment costs rather than separate performance obligations.
For standard products, we recognize revenue at a point in time when control passes to the customer. Absent substantial product acceptance clauses, this is based on the shipping terms. In instances where acceptance of the product and installation services are specified by the customer, revenue is deferred until such required acceptance criteria have been met. For custom products that require engineering and development based on customer requirements, we will recognize revenue over time using the output method for any items shipped and any finished goods or work in process that is produced for balances of open sales orders. For extended warranties and product rentals, revenue is recognized over time using the output method based on the time elapsed for the warranty or service period. In the case of warranties, we record a contract liability for amounts billed but that are not recognized until subsequent periods. A separate contract liability is recorded for the cost associated with warranty repairs based on our estimate of future expenses. For testing services where we are performing testing on an asset the customer controls, revenue is recognized over time by the output method using the performance to date. For training where the customer is receiving the benefit of training as it is occurring and for repairs to a customer-controlled asset, revenue is recognized over time by the output method using the performance to date.
In some product rental contracts, a customer may be offered a discount on the purchase of an item that would provide for a material right. When a material right has been provided to a customer, a separate performance obligation is established, and a portion of the rental revenue will be deferred until the future product is purchased or the option expires. This deferred revenue is recognized as a contract liability on the balance sheet.
Research and Development Contracts
Our contracts with agencies of the U.S. government are subject to periodic funding by the respective contracting agency. Funding for a contract may be provided in full at inception of the contract or ratably throughout the contract as the services are provided. In evaluating the probability of funding for purposes of assessing collectability of the contract price, we consider our previous experience with our customers, communication with our customers regarding funding status and our knowledge of available funding for the contract or program. If funding is not assessed as probable, revenue recognition is deferred until realization is reasonably assured.
Because of control transfers over time, revenue is recognized over time based on the extent of progress towards completion of the performance obligation. The selection of the method to measure progress towards completion requires judgment and is based on the nature of the services to be provided. We generally use the input method, more specifically the cost-to-cost measure of progress for our contracts because it best depicts the transfer of control to the customer which occurs as we incur costs on our contracts. Under the cost-to-cost measure of progress, the extent of progress towards completion is measured based on the ratio of costs incurred to date to the total estimated costs at completion of the performance obligation. The underlying bases for estimating our contract research revenues are measurable expenses, such as labor, subcontractor costs and materials, and data that are updated on a regular basis for purposes of preparing our cost estimates. Our research contracts generally have a period of performance of six months to three years, and our estimates of contract costs have historically been consistent with actual results. Revisions in these estimates between accounting periods to reflect changing facts and circumstances have not had a material impact on our operating results, and we do not expect future changes in these estimates
to be material. The cumulative impact of any revisions to estimates and the full impact of anticipated losses on any type of contract are recognized in the period in which they become known.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes primarily in the United States and United Kingdom. We estimate our tax liability through calculating our current tax liability, together with assessing temporary and permanent differences resulting from the different treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. The temporary differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which we record on our balance sheet. Management then assesses the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be recovered in future periods. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance against the net deferred tax asset, management considers factors such as future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, taxable income in prior carry back years, whether carry back is permitted under the tax law, tax planning strategies and estimated future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards. To the extent that we cannot conclude that it is more likely than not that the benefit of such assets will be realized, we establish a valuation allowance to reduce their net carrying value. As of December 31, 2021, our valuation allowance was $3.8 million.
The tax rates used to determine deferred tax assets or liabilities are the enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Based on the evaluation of all available information, we recognize future tax benefits, such as net operating loss ("NOL") carryforwards, to the extent that realizing these benefits is considered more likely than not. Because we have NOLs carried over from a previously acquired company that are limited under Section 382, the deferred tax assets of $1.0 million as of December 31, 2021 are expected to be realized over an extended period of time (with continued earnings realized ratably through 2033). In 2021, we generated an additional NOL carryforward of $1.5 million for which will have an indefinite carryforward period.
We recognize tax benefits from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by taxing authorities. While it is often difficult to predict the final outcome of timing of the resolution of any particular tax matter, we establish a liability at the time we determine it is probable we will be required to pay additional taxes related to certain matters. These liabilities are recorded in accrued liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets. We adjust this provision, including any impact on the related interest and penalties, in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of a tax audit. A number of years may elapse before a particular matter for which we have established a liability is audited and finally resolved. The number of years with open tax audits varies depending on the tax jurisdiction. Settlement of any particular issue would usually require the use of cash. We recognize favorable resolutions of tax matters for which we have previously established liabilities as a reduction to our income tax expense when the amounts involved become known.
Our future effective tax rates could be adversely affected if actual earnings are different than our estimates, by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets or liabilities, outcomes resulting from income tax examinations, or by changes or interpretations in tax laws, regulations or accounting principles.
Intangible Assets
Definite-lived intangible assets are amortized over their respective estimated useful lives and are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset might not be recoverable. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset to future un-discounted net cash flows expected to be generated by the asset. If such assets are considered to be impaired, the impairment to be recognized is measured by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the fair value of the asset. If the estimates of the useful lives should change, we will amortize the remaining book value over the remaining useful lives. As of December 31, 2021, our intangible assets, which were primarily acquired from previous acquisitions, consisted of developed technology, trade names / trademarks, backlog and customer relationships with a total carrying value of $17.2 million.
Goodwill
Goodwill is tested annually for impairment as of the first day of our fourth quarter (October 1st) and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. As of December 31, 2021, we had two reporting units, Luna and OptaSense, both of which contained goodwill. Our goodwill impairment evaluation consisted of a qualitative assessment. A qualitative assessment can be performed to determine whether it is more likely than not the fair value of the reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If the reporting unit does not pass the qualitative assessment, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value using a quantitative assessment. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying value, goodwill is considered not impaired. If the fair value of the reporting unit is less than the carrying value, the difference is recorded as an impairment loss.
For the quantitative assessment, we estimate the fair value of each reporting unit using a combination of an income approach using a discounted cash flow ("DCF") analysis and a market-based valuation approach based on comparable public company trading values. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit requires the exercise of significant management judgments, including the amount and timing of projected future revenues, earnings and cash flows after considering factors such as recent operating performance, general market and industry conditions, existing and expected future contracts, changes in working capital and long-term business plans and growth initiatives. The carrying value of each reporting unit includes the assets and liabilities employed in its operations and goodwill.
As of December 31, 2021, the carrying value of our goodwill was $19.0 million. We completed our annual goodwill impairment test in the fourth quarter of 2021 and determined that no impairment existed.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations under the acquisition method of accounting, in accordance with ASC 805 - Business Combinations. Under ASC 805, the total estimated purchase consideration is allocated to the acquired tangible and intangible assets and assumed liabilities based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. Any excess of the fair value of acquisition consideration over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded as goodwill. Determining the fair value of acquired intangible assets is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including the discount rate, revenue growth rates, projected gross margins, and estimated research and development expenses.
Results of Operations
The following table shows information derived from our consolidated statements of operations expressed as a percentage of total revenues for the periods presented.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $28.4 million, or 48%, to $87.5 million compared to $59.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The vast majority of the increase in revenues was due to the revenues from OptaSense which was acquired in December 2020.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues increased $12.7 million or 55% to $36.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $23.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase in cost of revenues primarily resulted from the OptaSense revenues and higher sales volume in communications testing products.
Our overall gross margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 59% compared to 61% for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily driven by product mix and increased commodity costs.
Operating Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense increased $15.6 million to $44.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $28.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Selling, general and administrative expense increased primarily due to the acquired OptaSense operations, integration costs, amortization of intangible assets and variable costs supporting our sales growth.
Research, development and engineering expenses increased $3.5 million to $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the acquired OptaSense operations.
Acquisition related expense consisted primarily of investment banking, legal and consulting fees incurred in connection with our acquisition of OptaSense for the year ended December 31, 2020. There was no acquisition related expense for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The loss on sale of property and equipment in 2020 was primarily due to the sale of one of our buildings and related fixed assets in order to consolidate operations.
(Loss)/Income from Continuing Operations Before Income Taxes
During the year end December 31, 2021, we recognized a loss from continuing operations before income taxes of $3.1 million compared to income of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Income Tax Benefit
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we recorded an income tax benefit of $2.0 million and $0.5 million, respectively. The income tax benefit for 2021 was primarily related to the pre-tax loss and deductions on vested RSUs and stock option exercises during the year. The income tax benefit for 2020 was primarily related to R&D tax credits.
Net Income from Discontinued Operations
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we recognized income from discontinued operations, net of income taxes, of $2.5 million and $1.9 million, respectively. The results of our discontinued operations for both years include the operations of our Luna Lab segment that is classified as held for sale. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net income from discontinued operations included a $1.4 million after-tax loss on the sale of our High Speed Optical Receiver business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
At December 31, 2021, our total cash and cash equivalents were $17.1 million. We require cash to: (i) fund our operating expenses, working capital requirements, and outlays for strategic acquisitions and investments, (ii) service our debt, including principal and interest; (iii) conduct research and development; (iv) incur capital expenditures; and (v) repurchase our common stock. As part of our business strategy, we review acquisition and divestiture opportunities on a regular basis. In March 2022, we completed the disposition of Luna Labs and the acquisition of LIOS Sensing, which are discussed elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The LIOS Sensing acquisition price of $22.1 million was funded from $13.0 million of initial proceeds from the disposition of Luna Labs with the remainder of funding coming from availability under our revolver and operating cash.
We believe that the key factors that could affect our internal and external sources of cash include:
•Changes in demand for our products, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, competitive pricing pressures, supply chain constraints, effective management of our manufacturing capacity, our ability to achieve further reductions in operating expenses, our ability to make progress on the achievement of our business strategy goals, and our ability to make the research and development expenditures required to remain competitive in our business.
•Our access to bank financing and the debt and equity capital markets that could impair our ability to obtain needed financing on acceptable terms or to respond to business opportunities and developments as they arise, including interest rate fluctuations, macroeconomic conditions, sudden reductions in the general availability of lending from banks or the related increase in cost to obtain bank financing and our ability to maintain compliance with covenants under our debt agreements in effect from time to time.
On December 1, 2020 (the “Effective Date”), we entered into a Loan Agreement (the “Loan Agreement”) with PNC Bank, National Association, as lender (the “Lender”) and our domestic subsidiaries as guarantors. The Loan Agreement provides a $12.5 million term loan facility (the “Term Loan”) and a $15.0 million revolving credit facility (the “Revolving Line”), which include a $3.0 million letter of credit sublimit. On the Effective Date, we borrowed the full amount of the Term Loan from the Lender pursuant to a term note (the “Term Note”) and a $7.6 million revolving loan (the “Revolving Loan”) pursuant to a revolving line of credit note (the “Revolving Line of Credit Note”). We may repay and reborrow advances under the Revolving Line from time to time pursuant to the Revolving Line of Credit Note. We used the proceeds from the Term Loan and the Revolving Loan to pay, in part, the consideration for the acquisition of OptaSense in December 2020.
The Term Loan matures on December 1, 2023. The Term Loan is due and payable in 12 equal quarterly payments of principal and interest. The Term Loan bears interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the sum of (a) LIBOR plus (b) a
margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.25% depending on the Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Loan Agreement). We may prepay the Term Loan without penalty or premium.
The Revolving Line expires on December 1, 2023. Borrowings under the Revolving Line will bear interest at a floating per annum rate equal to the sum of (a) LIBOR plus (b) a margin ranging from 1.75% to 2.25% depending on the Net Leverage Ratio. Accrued interest will be due and payable on the first day of each month and the outstanding principal balance and any accrued but unpaid interest will be due and payable on December 1, 2023. The unused portion of the Revolving Line will accrue a fee equal to 0.20% per annum multiplied by the quarterly average unused amount.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding borrowings under our Term Loan and Revolving Loan of $8.3 million and $7.6 million, respectively. Additional details of our Loan Agreement can be found in Note 10, "Debt" in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
We believe that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 in addition to amounts available to us under our Revolving Line will provide adequate liquidity for us to meet our working capital needs over the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, we believe that should we have the need for increased capital spending to support our planned growth, we will be able to fund such growth through either third-party financing on competitive market terms or through our available cash. However, these estimates are based on assumptions that may prove to be incorrect, including as a result of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its potential impacts on our business. If we require additional capital beyond our current balances of cash and cash equivalents and borrowing capacity under the Revolving Line described above, this additional capital may not be available when needed, on reasonable terms, or at all. Moreover, our ability to raise additional capital may be adversely impacted by potential worsening global economic conditions and the recent disruptions to and volatility in the credit and financial markets in the United States and worldwide resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Discussion of Cash Flows
During 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $4.5 million which increased by $1.6 million from 2020. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities was primarily due to modest growth in working capital in 2021 compared to a more significant growth in working capital in the prior year, partially offset by lower net income in 2021.
During 2021, cash used in investing activities was significantly less than the prior year due to the acquisition of OptaSense and another smaller company totaling $34.1 million in 2020. Excluding acquisitions, cash used in investing increased by $1.7 million primarily due to increased capital expenditures for normal business needs and the absence of proceeds from the sale of property and equipment and facility classified as discontinued operations in 2020.
During 2021, cash used in financing activities was $1.3 million, compared to cash provided by financing activities of $21.6 million in 2020, due to proceeds of $20.0 million from new borrowings used to fund the acquisition of OptaSense in 2020. Excluding the prior year debt borrowings, cash used in financing activities increased by $2.9 million in 2021 due to scheduled repayments of bank debt of $4.1 million partially offset by a $1.2 million increase in proceeds from exercises of stock options and purchases under our employee stock purchase plan.
Summary of Cash Requirements
The following table sets forth information concerning our current and long-term material cash requirements as of December 31, 2021 that are fixed and determinable.
(1)In December 2020, we entered into a Loan Agreement with the Lender which provided us with a $12.5 million Term Loan and a $15.0 million Revolving Line. We borrowed the full amount of the Term Loan, subject to quarterly repayments, and $7.6 million against the Revolving Line. The Term Loan matures in December 2023 and the Revolving Line expires in December 2023.
(2)We lease our facilities for all of our locations under operating leases that as of December 31, 2021, are scheduled to expire between March 2022 and August 2026. Upon expiration of our office leases, we may exercise certain renewal options as specified in the leases. Rental payments associated with these option periods are not included in the table above.
(3)Our office equipment leases expire in 2022 and 2025, respectively.
(4)Purchase order obligations included outstanding orders for inventory purchases. In 2021, we executed non-cancelable purchase orders for a total amount of $2.3 million for multiple shipments of tunable lasers and component parts to be delivered over periods up to 12 months beginning in August 2021 and November 2021.