ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis or Plan of Operation
The following information should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
The Company is considered a start-up company with no assets and/or capital and no material operations or income. Ongoing expenses, including the costs associated with the preparation and filing of annual and quarterly reports, have been paid for by the Company’s sole officer and director, Reed Petersen, which are evidenced on the Company’s financial statements as accounts payable-related parties. It is anticipated that the Company will require only nominal capital to maintain its corporate viability. Additional necessary funds will most likely be provided by Mr. Petersen, although there is no agreement related to future funds and there is no assurance such funds will be available. However, unless the Company is able to facilitate an acquisition of or merger with an operating business or is able to obtain significant outside financing, there is substantial doubt about its ability to continue as a going concern.
PLAN OF OPERATION
Our plan of operations is to raise debt and/or equity to meet our ongoing operating expenses and attempt to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders. There can be no assurance that we will successfully complete this series of transactions. In particular, there is no assurance that any such business will be located or that any stockholder will realize any return on their shares after such a transaction. Any merger or acquisition completed by us can be expected to have a significant dilutive effect on the percentage of shares held by our current stockholders.
Our intended budget for the next twelve months is as follows:
At this time, we have no cash on hand, and we are dependent on advances from our shareholders or our sole officer/director. There can be no guarantee that we will be able to obtain sufficient funding these sources.
As of the date of this Report we intend to engage in what we believe to be synergistic acquisitions or joint ventures with a company or companies that we believe will enhance our business plan. The Company will not restrict its search to any specific business, industry, or geographical location and it may participate in a business venture of virtually any kind or nature. One of the benefits to our being a reporting and publicly traded company is to allow us to utilize our securities as consideration for some or all of the purchase price of these potential acquisitions. There are no assurances we will be able to consummate any acquisitions using our securities as consideration, or at all.
There are numerous things that will need to occur in order to allow us to implement this aspect of our business plan and there are no assurances that any of these developments will occur, or if they do occur, that we will be successful in fully implementing our plan.
Management will seek out and evaluate businesses for acquisition. The integrity and reputation of any potential acquisition candidate will first be thoroughly reviewed to ensure it meets with management’s standards. Once targeted as a potential acquisition candidate, we will enter into negotiations with the potential candidate and commence due diligence evaluation, including its financial statements, cash flow, debt, location and other material aspects of the candidate’s business. If we are successful in our attempts to acquire a company or companies utilizing our securities as part or all of the consideration to be paid, our current shareholders will incur dilution.
In implementing a structure for a particular acquisition, we may become a party to a merger, consolidation, reorganization, joint venture, asset purchase, or licensing agreement with another corporation or entity. We may also acquire stock or assets of an existing business. Upon the consummation of a transaction, it is likely that our present management and shareholders will no longer be in control of our Company.
As part of our investigation, our officers and directors will meet personally with management and key personnel, may visit and inspect material facilities, obtain independent analysis of verification of certain information provided, check references of management and key personnel, and take other reasonable investigative measures, to the extent of our limited financial resources and management expertise. The manner in which we participate in an acquisition will depend on the nature of the opportunity, the respective needs and desires of us and other parties, the management of the acquisition candidate and our relative negotiation strength.
We will participate in an acquisition only after the negotiation and execution of appropriate written agreements. Although the terms of such agreements cannot be predicted, generally such agreements will require some specific representations and warranties by all of the parties thereto, will specify certain events of default, will detail the terms of closing and the conditions which must be satisfied by each of the parties prior to and after such closing, will outline the manner of bearing costs, including costs associated with our attorneys and accountants, will set forth remedies on default and will include miscellaneous other terms.
Depending upon the nature of the acquisition, including the financial condition of the acquisition company, as a reporting company under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“34 Act “), it will be necessary for such acquisition candidate to provide independent audited financial statements. We will not acquire any entity which cannot provide independent audited financial statements within a reasonable period of time after closing of the proposed transaction. If such audited financial statements are not available at closing, or within time parameters necessary to ensure our compliance with the requirements of the 34 Act, or if the audited financial statements provided do not conform to the representations made by the candidate to be acquired in the closing documents, the closing documents will provide that the proposed transaction will be voidable, at the discretion of our present management. If such transaction is voided, the agreement will also contain a provision providing for the acquisition entity to reimburse us for all costs associated with the proposed transaction.
As of the date of this Report we are not engaged in discussions with any concerning any potential merger or acquisition. We will not engage in any discussions concerning any merger or acquisition until a minimum of sixty (60) days has elapsed since the filing of our annual report. There are no assurances that any material acquisition will occur in the future.
We believe there are certain perceived benefits to being a public company whose securities are publicly traded, including the following:
·
increased visibility in the financial community;
·
increased valuation;
·
greater ease in raising capital;
·
compensation of key employees through stock options for which there may be a market valuation; and
·
enhanced corporate image.
There are also certain perceived disadvantages to being a trading company including the following:
·
required publication of corporate information;
·
required filings of periodic and episodic reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Business entities, if any, which may be interested in a combination with us may include the following:
·
a company for which a primary purpose of becoming public is the use of its securities for the acquisition of assets or businesses;
·
a company which is unable to find an underwriter of its securities or is unable to find an underwriter of securities on terms acceptable to it;
·
a company which wishes to become public with less dilution of its securities than would occur upon an underwriting;
·
a company which believes that it will be able to obtain investment capital on more favorable terms after it has become public;
·
a foreign company which may wish an initial entry into the United States securities market;
·
a special situation company, such as a company seeking a public market to satisfy redemption requirements under a qualified Employee Stock Option Plan;
·
a company seeking one or more of the other perceived benefits of becoming a public company.
A business combination with a private company will normally involve the transfer to the private company of the majority of the issued and outstanding common stock of the Company, and the substitution by the private company of its own management and board of directors.
The proposed business activities described herein classify us as a “shell company.” The Securities and Exchange Commission and certain states have enacted statutes, rules and regulations regarding the sales of securities of shell companies, as well as limitations on a shareholder’s ability to sell their “restricted” securities. Rule 144 is not available to a shareholder of a shell company unless and until the Company files a registration statement with the SEC that includes certain specific information about existing business operations of a registrant and thereafter must wait an additional one year to take advantage of that exemption from registration.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS FOR THE PERIOD BEGINNING AT MAY 7, 2021 (INCEPTION), THROUGH MAY 31, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED MAY 31, 2022.
Revenue
We recognized no revenue during the year ended May 31, 2022 or from May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021. We had no business from which to generate revenues in the fiscal years 2021 and 2020.
Cost of Revenue
We recognized no cost of revenue during the year ended May 31, 2022 or from May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
During the year ended May 31, 2022, we incurred administrative expenses of $13,410 as compared to the year ended May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021 of $1,445.
Professional Fees
During the year ended May 31, 2022, we incurred professional fees of $2,264 as compared to the year ended May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021 of $625.
Operating Loss
During the year ended May 31, 2022, we incurred an operating loss of $15,674, an increase of $13,604 due to an increase in general, selling and administrative expenses as stated above, as compared to May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021 of $2,070.
Interest and Other Income (Expenses)
During the year ended May 31, 2022 and from May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021, we recognized no interest expense or other income (expenses).
Net Loss
During the year ended May 31, 2022, we incurred a net loss of $15,674, an increase of $13,604, due to the factors discussed above as compared to May 7, 2021 (inception) through May 31, 2021 of $2,070.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
At May 31, 2022, we had cash of $0, no assets, no operating business or other source of income, liabilities of $17,744, and a stockholders’ deficit of $17,744, as compared to at May 31, 2021, we did not have any assets, no operating business or other source of income, liabilities of $2,070, and a stockholders’ deficit of $2,070.
We are now focused raising debt and/or equity financing to meet ongoing operating expenses and attempting to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders. There is no assurance that this series of events will be satisfactorily completed.
Consequently, we are now dependent on raising additional equity and/or debt to meet our ongoing operating expenses. There is no assurance that we will be able to raise the necessary equity and/or debt that we will need to fund our ongoing operating expenses.
It is our current intention to seek to raise debt and/or equity financing to meet ongoing operating expenses and attempt to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our
common stock to create value for our shareholders. There is no assurance that this series of events will be satisfactorily completed.
Future losses are likely to occur as, until we are able to merge with another entity with experienced management and opportunities for growth in return for shares of our common stock to create value for our shareholders as we have no sources of income to meet our operating expenses. As a result of these, among other factors, we received from our registered independent public accountants in their report for the financial statements for the period ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, an explanatory paragraph stating that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Operating Activities
From inception on May 7, 2021 through May 31, 2021, and during the year ended May 31, 2022, we used $0 and $0 in operating activities, respectively.
Investing Activities
From inception on May 7, 2021 through May 31, 2021, and during the year ended May 31, 2022, we used $0 and $0 in investing activities, respectively.
Financing Activities
From inception on May 7, 2021 through May 31, 2021, and during the year ended May 31, 2022, we used $0 and $0 in financing activities, respectively.
We are dependent upon the receipt of capital investment or other financing to fund our ongoing operations and to execute our business plan of seeking a combination with a private operating company. In addition, we are dependent upon our controlling shareholder to provide continued funding and capital resources. If continued funding and capital resources are unavailable at reasonable terms, we may not be able to implement our plan of operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
All companies are required to include a discussion of critical accounting policies and estimates used in the preparation of their financial statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our critical accounting policies and estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Inflation
In the opinion of management, inflation has not and will not have a material effect on our operations in the immediate future.
Management will continue to monitor inflation and evaluate the possible future effects of inflation on our business and operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
Per SEC regulations, we are required to disclose our off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, such as changes in financial condition, revenues, expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources that are material to investors. As of May 31, 2022, we have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Management has evaluated other recently issued accounting pronouncements and does not believe that any of these pronouncements will have a significant impact on our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures.