Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and other factors set forth in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
Lulus is a customer-driven, digitally-native fashion brand primarily serving Millennial and Gen Z women. We focus relentlessly on giving our customers what they want. We do this by using data coupled with human insight to deliver a curated and continuously evolving assortment of on-trend affordable luxury fashion. Our customer obsession sets the tone for everything we do, from our personalized online shopping experience to our exceptional customer service.
Initial Public Offering
On November 10, 2021, our registration statement on Form S-1 relating to its IPO was declared effective by the SEC and the shares of its common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Market on November 11, 2021. The IPO closed on November 15, 2021, pursuant to which we issued and sold 5,750,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $16.00 per share. On November 15, 2021, we received net proceeds of approximately $82.0 million from the IPO, after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.1 million and other issuance costs of approximately $3.9 million. Immediately prior to the completion of the IPO, we filed an amended and restated certificate of incorporation, which authorized a total of 250,000,000 shares of common stock at $0.001 par value per share, and 10,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $0.001 par value per share. Immediately prior to the completion of the IPO, all shares of the Series A Preferred Stock then outstanding were converted into 15,000,000 shares of common stock. Additionally, 215,702 shares of common stock were issued to the LP immediately prior to the completion of the IPO. All shares of the Series B Preferred Stock and the Series B-1 Preferred Stock were redeemed and extinguished for a total payment of approximately $17.9 million on November 15, 2021.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had a material impact on the global fashion apparel, accessories and footwear industry as a significant portion of in-person social, professional, and formal events over the last 18 months were postponed or cancelled.
Historically, our business model has resulted in strong historical growth. Between fiscal years 2016 and 2019, we grew our net revenue by 179% to $370 million, or an annual compounded growth rate of 41%. In fiscal year 2020, our net revenue declined by 33% to $249 million as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. Our business rebounded from the initial impact of the pandemic on consumer behavior and, for the three and 12-month periods ended January 2, 2022, we grew our net revenue by 77.5% and 51.1%, respectively, compared to the same periods of the prior year.
We expect ongoing volatility in these trends as the continued impact from COVID-19 remains uncertain. We may take further actions that impact our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine to be in the best interests of our employees and our customers. For additional discussion of risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our Company, see “Risk Factors-Risks Related to our Business-The COVID-19 pandemic has had and may in the future have an adverse effect on our labor workforce availability, supply chain, business, financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations in ways that remain unpredictable.”
Key Operating and Financial Metrics
We collect and analyze operating and financial data to assess the performance of our business and optimize resource allocation. The following table sets forth our key performance indicators for the periods presented (in thousands, except for percentages and Average Order Value).
(1) For a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure and why we consider them useful, see “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
(2) Active Customers count is based on de-duplication logic using customer account and guest checkout name, address, and email information. Active Customer count is as of the last day of the relevant period.
Active Customers
We define Active Customers as the number of customers who have made at least one purchase across our platform in the prior 12-month period. We consider the number of Active Customers to be a key performance metric on the basis that it is directly related to consumer awareness of our brand, our ability to attract visitors to our digital platform, and our ability to convert visitors to paying customers. Active Customers counts are based on de-duplication logic using customer account and guest checkout name, address, and email information.
Average Order Value
We define Average Order Value (“AOV”) as the sum of the total gross sales before returns across our platform in a given period, plus shipping revenue, less discounts and markdowns, divided by the Total Orders Placed in that period. AOV reflects average basket size of our customers. AOV may fluctuate as we continue investing in the development and introduction of new Lulus merchandise and as a result of our promotional discount activity.
Total Orders Placed
We define Total Orders Placed as the number of customer orders placed across our platform during a particular period. An order is counted on the day the customer places the order. We do not adjust the number of Total Orders Placed for any cancellation or return that may have occurred subsequent to a customer placing an order. We consider Total Orders Placed as a key performance metric on the basis that it is directly related to our ability to attract and retain customers as well as drive purchase frequency. Total Orders Placed, together with Average Order Value, is an indicator of the net revenue we expect to generate in a particular period.
Gross Margin
We define Gross Margin as gross profit as a percentage of our net revenue. Gross profit is equal to our net revenue less cost of revenue. Certain of our competitors and other retailers report cost of revenue differently than we do. As a result, the reporting of our gross profit and Gross Margin may not be comparable to other companies.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We report our financial results in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”). However, management believes that certain non-GAAP financial measures provide investors of our financial information with additional useful information in evaluating our performance and that excluding certain items that may vary substantially in frequency and magnitude period-to-period from net income (loss) provides useful supplemental measures that assist in evaluating our ability to generate earnings and to more readily compare these metrics between past and future periods. These non-GAAP financial measures may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies.
To supplement our audited consolidated financial statements which are prepared in accordance with GAAP, we use “Adjusted EBITDA” and “Adjusted EBITDA Margin” which are non-GAAP financial measures (collectively referred to as “Adjusted EBITDA”). Our non-GAAP financial measures should not be considered in isolation from, or as substitutes for, financial information prepared in accordance with GAAP. There are several limitations related to the use of our non-GAAP financial measures as compared to the closest comparable GAAP measures. Some of these limitations include:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our tax expense or the cash requirements to pay our taxes;
● although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future and such measures do not reflect any cash requirements for such replacements; and
● other companies in our industry may calculate such measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Due to these limitations, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin should not be considered as measures of discretionary cash available to us to invest in the growth of our business. We compensate for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using these non-GAAP measures only supplementally. As noted in the table below, Adjusted EBITDA includes adjustments to exclude the impact of depreciation and amortization, interest expense, income taxes, management fees, transaction fees, which represent the write-off of offering costs deferred during 2019 upon abandonment of a prior offering in 2020, and equity-based compensation. It is reasonable to expect that some of these items will occur in future periods. However, we believe these adjustments are appropriate because the amounts recognized can vary significantly from period to period, do not directly relate to the ongoing operations of our business and may complicate comparisons of our internal results of operations and results of operations of other companies over time. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA includes adjustments for other items that we do not expect to regularly record. Each of the normal recurring adjustments and other adjustments described in this paragraph and in the following reconciliation table help management with a measure of our core operating performance over time by removing items that are not related to day-to-day operations. Adjusted EBITDA Margin is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as Adjusted EBITDA (as defined above) as a percentage of our net revenue.
The following table provides a reconciliation for Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin:
(1) Represents management fees and expenses paid pursuant to the professional services agreement with H.I.G. and IVP for consulting and other services. All outstanding management fees were settled and the management agreement was terminated at the time of the Company’s IPO.
(2) Represents the write-off of offering costs deferred during 2019 upon abandonment of a prior offering in 2020.
(3) Represents costs related primarily to marketing and presentations for the investment community, as well as travel and other miscellaneous costs incurred as a result of the Company’s IPO.
(4) Represents equity-based compensation expense related to modifications and vesting of Class P unit awards. The year ended January 2, 2022 also includes equity-based compensation expense for stock options and special compensation awards granted during the year.
(5) Represents the excess of fair value over the consideration paid for Series B Preferred Stock that was issued to an employee, H.I.G., and IVP in June 2020. In addition, represents the excess of fair value over the consideration paid for Series B-1 Preferred Stock that was issued to certain employees in March 2021.
Adjusted Diluted Earnings (Net Loss) per Share
Adjusted Diluted Earnings (Net Loss) per Share is a non-GAAP financial measure that we calculate as diluted net loss per share attributable to common stockholders adjusted to exclude the per share impact of the deemed dividend due to triggering a down round feature as part of our IPO. This common feature provided protection to our convertible preferred stockholders by limiting the amount of dilution when the IPO was priced lower than previous rounds. We also excluded the impact of the acceleration of stock-based compensation expenses at the time of the IPO and a one-time stock dividend at the time of the IPO. We believe Adjusted Diluted Earnings (Net Loss) per Share is a measure that is useful to investors and management in understanding our ongoing operations and in analysis of ongoing operating trends. See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies-Net Loss Per Share Attributable to Common Stockholders, of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information regarding our calculation of net loss per share attributable to common stockholders.
A reconciliation of non-GAAP Adjusted Diluted Earnings (Net Loss) per Share from diluted net loss per share attributable to common stockholders for the years ended 2021, 2020 and 2019 is as follows (in dollars):
(1) Removes the impact of a one-time $123.0 million deemed dividend that was recorded at the time of our IPO related to the conversion of convertible preferred stock in 2021 and a $0.5 million deemed dividend in 2020. The dilution associated with this transaction only impacted stockholders and management who held units in the LP prior to the IPO.
(2) Removes the impact of a $3.5 million one-time stock dividend issued to the LP at the time of our IPO in 2021.
(3) Removes the impact of $8.0 million of non-recurring stock compensation expenses triggered by our IPO in 2021.
(4) Removes the impact of a $1.4 million deemed contribution resulting from the redemption of our redeemable preferred stock at the time of our IPO in 2021.
(5) Removes the impact of $8.4 million of equity-based compensation expense related to modifications of Class P unit awards in 2020.
(6) Removes the per share impact in 2020 of the excess of fair value over the consideration paid for Series B Preferred Stock that was issued to an employee, H.I.G., and IVP in June 2020. Removes the per share impact in 2021 of the excess of fair value over the consideration paid for Series B-1 Preferred Stock that was issued to certain employees in March 2021.
(7) These adjustments did not impact the weighted-average shares used to compute Adjusted Diluted Earnings (Net Loss) per Share as the impact from potentially dilutive securities would have been anti-dilutive.
Net Debt
We define Net Debt as total debt, which includes short-term borrowings and long-term obligations, less cash and cash equivalents. We consider net debt to be an important supplemental measure of our financial position, which allows us to analyze our leverage.
A reconciliation of non-GAAP Net Debt as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021 is as follows:
Factors Affecting Our Performance
Our financial condition and results of operations have been, and will continue to be, affected by a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including what is discussed below. See “Risk Factors.”
Customer Acquisition
Our business performance depends in part on our continued ability to cost-effectively acquire new customers. We define customer acquisition cost (“CAC”) as our brand and performance marketing expenses attributable to acquiring new customers, including, but not limited to, agency costs and marketing team costs but excluding any applicable equity-based compensation, divided by the number of customers who placed their first order with us in a given period. As a digital brand, our marketing strategy is primarily focused on brand awareness marketing and digital advertising in channels like search, social, and programmatic - platforms that enable us to engage our customer where she spends her time, and in many cases also quickly track the success of our marketing, which allows us to adjust and optimize our marketing spend.
Customer Retention
Our continued success depends in part on our ability to retain and drive repeat purchases from our existing customers. We monitor retention across our entire customer base. Our goal is to attract and convert visitors into active customers and foster relationships that drive repeat purchases. During the year ended January 2, 2022, we served 2.8 million Active Customers compared to 2.0 million for the year ended January 3, 2021.
Inventory Management
We utilize a data-driven strategy that leverages our proprietary reorder algorithm to manage inventory as efficiently as possible. Our “test, learn, and reorder” approach consists of limited inventory purchases followed by the analysis of proprietary data including real-time transaction data and customer feedback, which then informs our selection and customization of popular merchandise prior to reordering in larger quantities. While our initial orders are limited in size and financial risk and our supplier partners are highly responsive, we nonetheless purchase inventory in anticipation of future demand and therefore are exposed to potential shifts in customer preferences and price sensitivity over time. As we continue to grow, we will adjust our inventory purchases to align with the current needs of the business.
Investment in Our Operations and Infrastructure
We will continue to invest in our operations and infrastructure to facilitate further growth of our business. While we expect our expenses to increase accordingly, we will harness the strength of our existing platform and our on-trend fashion expertise to make informed investment decisions. We intend to invest in headcount, inventory, fulfillment, logistics, and our software and data capabilities in order to improve our platform, expand into international markets, and drive operational efficiencies. We cannot guarantee that increased spending on these investments will be cost effective or result in future growth in our customer base. However, we set a high bar for approval of any capital spending initiative. We believe that our disciplined approach to capital spending will enable us to generate positive returns on our investments over the long term.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenue
Net revenue consists primarily of gross sales, net of merchandise returns and promotional discounts and markdowns, generated from the sale of apparel, footwear, and accessories. Net revenue excludes sales taxes assessed by governmental authorities. We recognize net revenue at the point in time when control of the ordered product is transferred to the customer, which we determine to have occurred upon shipment.
Net revenue is impacted by our number of customers and their spending habits, Average Order Value, product assortment and availability, and marketing and promotional activities. During any given period, we may seek to increase sales by increasing promotional discounts, and in other periods we may instead seek to increase sales by increasing our selling and marketing expenses. We consider
both actions together, so increased promotional discounts in a period, which would reduce net revenue accordingly in such period, might also result in lower selling and marketing expenses in such period. Similarly, if we increase selling and marketing expenses in a given period, promotional discounts may be correspondingly reduced, thereby improving net revenue. We expect our net revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we grow our business, although our net revenue growth rate may slow in future periods.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue consists of the product costs of merchandise sold to customers; shipping and handling costs, including all inbound, outbound, and return shipping expenses; rent, insurance, business property tax, utilities, depreciation and amortization, and repairs and maintenance related to our distribution facilities; and charges related to inventory shrinkage, damages, and our allowance for excess or obsolete inventory. Cost of revenue is primarily driven by growth in orders placed by customers, the mix of the product available for sale on our site, and transportation costs related to inventory receipts from our suppliers. We expect our cost of revenue to fluctuate as a percentage of net revenue primarily due to how we manage our inventory and merchandise mix.
Gross profit is equal to our net revenue less cost of revenue. We calculate Gross Margin as gross profit as a percentage of our net revenue. Our Gross Margin varies across Lulus, exclusive to Lulus, and third-party branded products. Exclusive to Lulus consists of products that we develop with design partners and have exclusive rights to sell across our platform, but that do not bear the Lulus brand. Gross Margin on sales of Lulus and exclusive to Lulus merchandise is generally higher than Gross Margin on sales of third-party branded products, which we offer for customers to “round out” the shopping basket. We expect our Gross Margin to increase modestly over the long term, as we continue to optimize our distribution capabilities and gain more negotiation leverage with suppliers as we scale, although our Gross Margin may fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these factors.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Our selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of payment processing fees, advertising, targeted online performance marketing and customer order courtesy adjustments. Selling and marketing expenses also include our spend on brand marketing channels, including compensation and free clothing to social media influencers, events, and other forms of online and offline marketing related to growing and retaining the customer base. As discussed in “Net Revenue” above, in any given period, the amount of our selling and marketing expense can be affected by the use of promotional discounts in such period. We expect our selling and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in increasing brand awareness.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and benefits costs, including equity-based compensation for our employees involved in general corporate functions including finance, merchandising, marketing, and technology, as well as costs associated with the use by these functions of facilities and equipment, including depreciation, rent, and other occupancy expenses. General and administrative expenses are primarily driven by increases in headcount required to support business growth and meeting our obligations as a public company.
In the near term, we also expect to incur significant legal, accounting, and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company. We expect that compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, as well as rules and regulations subsequently implemented by the SEC, will increase our legal and financial compliance costs and will make some activities more time consuming and costly. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to grow our business.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists primarily of interest expense and other miscellaneous income.
Provision for Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes represents federal, state, and local income taxes. The effective rate differs from the statutory rate primarily due to non-deductible equity-based compensation expenses and state taxes. Our effective tax rate will change from quarter to quarter based on recurring and nonrecurring factors including, but not limited to, the geographical mix of earnings, enacted tax
legislation, state and local income taxes, the impact of permanent tax adjustments, tax audit settlements, and the interaction of various tax strategies.
Our Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our consolidated results of operations for the years presented and as a percentage of net revenue:
Comparisons for the Fiscal Years Ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased in 2021 by $127.0 million, or 51.1%, compared to 2020. The increase in revenue was primarily due to increases in Active Customers and customer spend coupled with fewer markdowns and promotional discounts compared to the same period of the prior year. The higher revenue was partially offset by higher sales returns in 2021. The 2020 return rate was suppressed due to a shift in our sales mix toward product categories with lower return rates as a result of the pandemic.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased in 2021 by $60.5 million, or 43.7%, compared to 2020, consistent with the increase in our net revenue. Additionally, there was a shift in sales mix to higher gross margin products combined with lower markdowns and discounts, driving the cost of revenue as a percentage of net revenue down in 2021 compared to 2020.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses increased in 2021 by $18.9 million, or 39.5% compared to 2020. Discretionary marketing spend was suppressed in 2020 in response to lower customer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We ramped our marketing spend up in 2021 resulting in a $14.4 million increase in online marketing expenses to acquire new customers and retain existing customers compared to 2020. In addition, merchant processing fees increased by $3.7 million in 2021 compared to the same period of the prior year largely due to the increase in net revenue.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $20.6 million in 2021, or 30.6%, compared to 2020. The increase was due to a $7.8 million increase in variable labor costs, which increased by 52.9% from 2020 to 2021, and was in line with our increase in net revenue. Fixed labor costs were $12.1 million higher driven by $5.9 million higher bonus costs due to improved business performance and $6.2 million higher fixed headcount costs compared to the previous year where costs were suppressed due to furloughs related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Interest Expense
Interest expense decreased in 2021 by $3.3 million, or 20.3%, compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a reduced amount of borrowings outstanding for 2021 compared to 2020 and the higher average interest rate through our previous Credit Facility that was comprised of a Term Loan and a Revolving Facility.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt in 2021 was $1.4 million, compared to $0 loss on extinguishment of debt in 2020. The loss on extinguishment of debt was incurred with the repayment and termination of our Credit Facility, at which time we recognized a write-off of $2.3 million in unamortized debt issuance costs and debt discounts and forgiveness of accrued debt modification costs of $0.9 million in accordance with the Fifth Amendment.
Income Tax (Provision) Benefit
Our income tax provision in 2021 increased by $7.5 million, or 589% to $6.2 million, compared to an income tax benefit of $1.3 million in 2020. The increase in the income tax provision was primarily due to an increase in our income before taxes coupled with an increase in non-deductible equity-based compensation expenses.
Comparisons for the Fiscal Years Ended January 3, 2021 and December 29, 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue decreased in 2020 by $121.0 million, or 33%, compared to 2019. The decrease in net revenue was primarily driven by a decrease of 36% in the number of Total Orders Placed by customers caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. Consumer spending declined in 2020 due to the economic uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic and lockdown restrictions, which resulted in a 31% decrease in Active Customers compared to 2019. While we saw improvements in units per transaction (“UPT”) and Average Order Value net of returns, our 2020 sales were heavier in markdowns and promotional discounts compared to 2019 in order to reduce event related inventory on hand. UPT represents the average number of items that a customer purchases per transaction. It is calculated by dividing the total number of items sold for a given period by the total number of orders placed during that same time period. A higher UPT indicates that customers are purchasing more items per transaction, while a lower UPT indicates that customers are purchasing fewer items per transaction.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue decreased in 2020 by $70.1 million, or 34%, compared to 2019, consistent with the decrease in our net revenue.
Selling and Marketing Expenses
Selling and marketing expenses decreased in 2020 by $25.1 million, or 34%, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by our efforts to reduce discretionary marketing expenses and cash outlays in response to lower customer demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic. We reduced our online marketing investment to acquire new customers and retain existing customers by $21.3 million in 2020 compared to 2019. Other marketing expenses also decreased by $0.8 million. In addition, merchant processing fees decreased by $3.0 million in 2020 compared to 2019 due to the decline in net revenue.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased in 2020 by $6.2 million, or 9%, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $15.9 million decrease in payroll and benefits expense as a result of lower direct labor costs in line with lower sales volumes, as well as a shift of approximately 60% of our employees to furlough in response to the COVID-19 pandemic who gradually returned to work throughout the year, a $3.0 million decrease in professional services, legal and accounting fees, and a $4.3 million decrease in hardware, software and fulfillment and office supplies. These decreases were partially offset by a $13.1 million increase in equity-based compensation due to award modifications and grants in 2020, which included a $6.1 million charge for the excess of fair value over
consideration paid for the Series B Preferred Stock issued to an employee in June 2020. There was also a $2.3 million increase in management fees driven by recognition of the excess of fair value over consideration paid for Series B Preferred Stock issued to H.I.G. and IVP in June 2020.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased in 2020 by $0.8 million, or 5%, compared to 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to increased borrowings under our Credit Facility and higher variable interest rates in 2020 compared to 2019.
Income Tax (Provision) Benefit
Our income tax provision in 2019 decreased by $1.7 million to an income tax benefit of $1.3 million in 2020. The change in the income tax provision for 2020 as compared to 2019 was primarily due to an increase in our loss before taxes and a one-time benefit in 2020 for the release of certain interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions as a result of settlements with taxing authorities, partially offset by an increase in non-deductible equity-based compensation expenses.
Seasonality
Our results of operations for any interim period are not necessarily indicative of those for the entire year because our business is subject to seasonal fluctuations. We generally expect demand to be greater in our second and third fiscal quarters compared to the rest of the year. We believe that this seasonality has affected and will continue to affect our results of operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity and capital resources are cash generated from operating activities, proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock and borrowings under our Credit Facility. Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are inventory purchases, payroll and general operating expenses, capital expenditures associated with distribution, network expansion and capitalized software and debt service requirements.
Initial Public Offering
On November 15, 2021, we completed our IPO, in which we issued and sold 5,750,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $16.00 per share and raised net proceeds of approximately $82.0 million, after deducting the underwriting discounts and commissions of approximately $6.1 million and other issuance costs of approximately $3.9 million.
Credit Facilities
During November 2021, we entered into a Credit Agreement with Bank of America to provide a revolving facility that provides for borrowings up to $50.0 million. During the term of the Credit Agreement, we may increase the aggregate amount of the New Revolving Facility up to an additional $25.0 million (for maximum aggregate lender commitments of up to $75.0 million), subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions under the Credit Agreement, including obtaining the consent of the administrative agent and an increased commitment from existing or new lenders. In addition, the Credit Agreement may be used to issue letters of credit up to $7.5 million. As of January 2, 2022, we had drawn $25.0 million under the New Revolving Facility and utilized $0.25 million under the letter of credit. As of January 2, 2022, we had $25.0 million available for borrowing under the New Revolving Facility and $7.25 million available to issue letters of credit.
The New Revolving Facility matures three years after November 15, 2021, and borrowings thereunder will accrue interest at a rate equal to, at our option, either (x) the term SOFR rate, plus the applicable SOFR adjustment plus a margin of 1.75% per annum or (y) the base rate plus a margin of 0.75% (with the base rate being the highest of the federal funds rate plus 0.50%, the prime rate and term SOFR for a period of one month plus 1.00%). The New Revolving Facility contains a financial maintenance covenant requiring a maximum total leverage ratio of no more than 2.50:1.00, stepping down to 2.00:1.00 after 18 months. A commitment fee of 37.5 basis points will be assessed on unused commitments under the New Revolving Facility.
With the net proceeds from the IPO and borrowings from the New Revolving Facility, we repaid our Term Loan of $107.2 million on November 15, 2021, which comprised of $105.8 million in principal and $1.4 million of interest. The Credit Facility was terminated on November 15, 2021 and no prepayment penalties were incurred.
Availability and Use of Cash
As of January 2, 2022, we had cash and cash equivalents of $11.4 million and restricted cash of $0.5 million. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents, cash flows from operating activities and the available borrowings under our New Revolving Facility, will be sufficient to meet our capital expenditures, working capital needs and debt repayments for at least the next 12 months from the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. However, we cannot ensure that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operating activities or that future borrowings will be available under our borrowing agreements in amounts sufficient to pay indebtedness or fund other working capital needs. Actual results of operations will depend on numerous factors, many of which are beyond our control as further discussed in Part I, “Item 1A. Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flow Analysis
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Cash from operating activities consists primarily of net income (loss) adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization, amortization of debt discount and debt issuance costs, interest expense capitalized to principal of debt, equity-based compensation, and the effect of changes in working capital and other activities.
In 2021, net cash provided by operating activities increased $22.0 million from $4.9 million in 2020 to $26.9 million in 2021. The changes in cash provided was primarily driven by an increase of $21.3 million due to the change from a net loss of $19.3 million in 2020 to net income of $2.0 million in 2021 and an increase of $9.5 million related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities from a net decrease of $2.9 million in 2020 to a net increase of $6.6 million in 2021, which was primarily driven by higher accrued expenses, including higher accrued compensation, bonuses and benefits, as well as an increase in the returns reserve as a result of higher sales coupled with a higher returns rate offset by increases in inventories, assets for recovery and prepaids and other current assets due to the overall increase in sales as the Company recovered from the impacts of COVID-19 during 2021. This was offset by a decrease of $8.8 million in non-cash items primarily due to the payment of interest capitalized to principal of long-term debt and revolving line of credit of $3.8 million in 2021 due to the repayment of the Term Loan upon the IPO, a decrease in equity-based compensation expense related to redeemable preferred stock of $7.1 million due to issuance of less redeemable preferred stock in 2021 and a decrease in write-off of deferred offering costs of $2.0 million as there were no such write-offs in 2021, offset by an increase in equity-based compensation expense related to the new CEO special compensation awards of $3.3 million in 2021 and loss on debt extinguishment of $1.4 million in 2021 due to the repayment of the Term Loan upon the IPO.
In 2020, net cash provided by operating activities decreased $7.0 million from $11.9 million in 2019 to $4.9 million in 2020. The changes in cash provided was primarily driven by a decrease due to the increase in net loss of $18.8 million, a decrease of $9.7 million related to changes in our operating assets and liabilities from a net increase of $6.8 million in 2019 to a net decrease of $2.9 million, which was primarily related to the overall decline in business due to the impacts of COVID-19. This was offset by an increase of $21.5 million in non-cash items due to an increase in equity-based compensation expense of $15.6 million due to the modification of Class P
unit awards and the expense related to the issuance of redeemable preferred stock in 2020, an increase of $1.7 million due to interest capitalized to principal of long-term debt and revolving line of credit in 2020, and an increase of $2.0 million in write-off of deferred offering costs as there were no such write-offs in 2019.
Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of purchases of equipment to support our overall business growth and internally developed software for the continued development of our proprietary technology infrastructure. Purchases of property and equipment may vary from period-to-period due to timing of the expansion of our operations. We have no material commitments for capital expenditures.
In 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $3.4 million, which was a $1.5 million increase from $1.9 million in 2020. This was attributable to capital expenditures relating to equipment for our general operations, software and hardware purchases, and internally developed software increasing due to initial investments in our new distribution facility in Ontario, California in 2021.
In 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $1.9 million, which was a $2.1 million decrease from $4.0 million in 2019. This was attributable to capital expenditures relating to equipment for our general operations, software and hardware purchases, and internally developed software decreasing due to general lower capital expenditures during a slower business period in 2020 due to COVID-19. In addition, 2019 included higher costs due to initial investments in our new distribution facility in Pennsylvania in 2019.
Financing Activities
Financing activities consist primarily of borrowings and repayments related to our Credit Facility and New Revolving Facility and issuance of common and preferred stock.
In 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $27.7 million, which was a decrease of $34.5 million from $6.8 million of net cash provided by financing activities in 2020. The decrease was due to an increase in repayments of our Term Loan of $107.1 million, redemption of our redeemable preferred stock of $17.9 million in 2021, and a decrease in proceeds from issuance of redeemable preferred stock of $5.9 million. Such decrease was offset by the $82.5 million of net proceeds from our IPO in 2021, an increase in net borrowings on revolving lines of credit of $11.9 million, and a decrease in repayment of advance from LP of $2.0 million.
In 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $6.8 million, which was an increase of $16.5 million from net cash used in financing activities of $9.7 million in 2019. The increase was due to proceeds from issuance of our redeemable preferred stock of $7.3 million in 2020, an increase in net proceeds from borrowings under our Revolving Facility of $0.5 million, a decrease in repayments on our Term Loan of $10.1 million, a decrease in payment of debt issuance costs of $0.4 million, and a decrease in payment of deferred offering costs of $2.2 million, offset by a decrease in advance from LP of $2.0 million and the repayment on advance from LP of $2.0 million in 2020.
Contractual Obligations and Other Commitments
Our most significant contractual obligations relate to our New Revolving Facility and operating lease obligations on our distribution facilities and corporate offices. For information on our New Revolving Facility, see Note 5, Debt, and for information on our contractual obligations for operating leases, see Note 6, Commitments and Contingencies, of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from our estimates. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows will be affected.
We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with revenue recognition, equity-based compensation, and income taxes have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, please see Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies, of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
While our revenue recognition does not involve significant judgment, it represents an important accounting policy. We generate revenue from the sale of merchandise products sold directly to end customers. We recognize revenue when the product is transferred to the customer, which is generally upon shipment. We estimate a reserve of future returns based on historical return rates. There is judgment in utilizing historical trends for estimating future returns. Our refund liability for sales returns is included in returns reserve on the consolidated balance sheets and represents the expected value of the refund that will be due to our customers.
Equity-Based Compensation
Stock Options
We granted stock option awards to our CEO in April 2021 in accordance with terms of an Employment Agreement. We account for the related equity-based compensation expense by calculating the estimated fair value of each award at the grant date or modification date by applying the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The model utilizes the estimated per share fair value of our underlying common stock at the measurement date, the expected or contractual term of the option, the expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of the common stock. Equity-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the period the executive is required to provide service in exchange for the award, which is generally the vesting period.
We base estimates of expected volatility on the historical volatility of comparable companies from a representative peer group selected based on industry, financial, and market capitalization data and recognizes forfeitures as they occur.
Determining the grant date fair value of options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make assumptions and judgments. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and, if different assumptions had been used, stock-based compensation expense could have been materially different from the amounts recorded.
Series B and Series B-1 Redeemable Preferred Stock
During June 2020, we issued and sold 7,500,001 shares of Series B Redeemable Preferred Stock (“Series B Preferred Stock”) at $1.00 per share to the general partner and a limited partner of LP and the holders of Series A Preferred Stock and during March 2021, we issued and sold 1,450,000 shares of Series B-1 Preferred Stock at $1.00 per share to current executives of the Company.
We elected to record our Series B Preferred Stock and Series B-1 Preferred Stock at the greater of its redemption value or the issuance date fair value, net of issuance costs, as it is probable of becoming redeemable due to the passage of time. For accounting
purposes, we determined the fair value of the Series B Preferred Stock and Series B-1 Preferred Stock to be $2.21 per share and $2.02 per share, respectively at issuance. The excess of fair value over the consideration paid was recorded as equity-based compensation for shares purchased by entities related to current employees, board members, and service providers and as a deemed dividend for shares purchased by existing holders of Series A Preferred Stock.
The fair value of the Series B Preferred Stock and Series B-1 Preferred Stock was estimated using a two-step process. First, our enterprise value was established using generally accepted valuation methodologies, including discounted cash flow analysis and comparable public company analysis. These methods consider operating and financial performance including estimating future cash flows and discounting those cash flows at an appropriate rate, the lack of liquidity of capital stock and general and industry specific economic outlook, among other factors. Second, our enterprise value was allocated among the various classes of outstanding securities using the Black-Scholes option-pricing method. The option-pricing method treats all levels of the capital structure as call options on the enterprise’s value, with the exercise price based on the “breakpoints” between each of the different claims on the securities. The inputs necessary for the Series B Preferred Stock and Series B-1 Preferred Stock option-pricing model include our then-current enterprise value, breakpoints (the various characteristics for each class of equity, including liquidation preferences and priority distributions), time to liquidity (depending on the scenario), risk-free rate, and volatility. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, equity-based compensation could be materially different. We redeemed all of our Series B and B-1 Preferred Stock upon our IPO on November 15, 2021.
Class P Units
Prior to the dissolution of the LP and our IPO on November 15, 2021, we recorded equity-based compensation related to equity awards (consisting of Class P units) granted through our majority owner, LP. The LP’s Class P units were available to be issued as incentive compensation to employees, officers, directors, and other nonemployee service providers or consultants of the Company.
Through June 2020, we concluded that LP’s Class P units were not a substantive class of equity and any associated pre-vesting distributions allocated to LP’s Class P units were recorded as equity-based compensation once the contingent payment becomes probable of payment, which is upon vesting of the Class P units.
During June and July 2020, certain Class P units were modified to update forfeiture terms related to employment requirements and vesting conditions were added to some of the Class P units. Due to the modifications to the employment requirements, we concluded that the Class P units are a substantive class of equity to be accounted for under FASB ASC Topic No. 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation (“ASC 718”).
Equity-based compensation is measured at the grant date or modification date for all equity-based awards made to employees and nonemployees based on the fair value of the awards. Awards with only service conditions are recognized as expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally four years.
Certain of the outstanding Class P units which were modified in fiscal year 2020 vest upon the satisfaction of both a service condition and a performance condition. The service-based vesting condition for these Class P units is satisfied by the end of 2022. When the performance-based vesting condition becomes probable, which is upon the completion of a qualifying distribution event, the Company will immediately record cumulative stock-based compensation expense using the accelerated attribution method for the awards that have met the service-based vesting condition. Upon our IPO on November 15, 2022, we recognized stock-based compensation expense for the performance-based Class P units as a qualifying distribution event.
The fair value of the Class P units at the modification dates during fiscal year 2020 was estimated using a two-step process. First, our enterprise value was established using generally accepted valuation methodologies, including discounted cash flow analysis and comparable public company analysis. These methods consider operating and financial performance including estimating future cash flows and discounting those cash flows at an appropriate rate, the lack of liquidity of capital stock and general and industry specific economic outlook, among other factors. The fair value of LP is determined based on the fair value of our common stock. Second, LP’s enterprise value was allocated among the various classes of units that comprise the capital structure of LP using the Black-Scholes option-pricing method. The option-pricing method treats all levels of the capital structure as call options on the enterprise’s value, with the exercise price based on the “breakpoints” between each of the different claims on the securities. The inputs necessary for the option-pricing model include LP’s current enterprise value, breakpoints (the various characteristics for each class of equity, including liquidation preferences and priority distributions, in accordance with the limited partnership agreement and the Class P units), term, risk-free rate, and volatility.
See Note 9, Equity-Based Compensation, of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions and methodologies we used to determine the estimated fair value of our stock options and Class P units and see Note 7, Preferred Stock, of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information concerning certain of the specific assumptions and methodologies we used to determine the estimated fair value of our Series B Preferred Stock and Series B-1 Preferred Stock. Certain of such assumptions involve inherent uncertainties and the application of significant judgment. As a result, if factors or expected outcomes change and we use significantly different assumptions or estimates, equity-based compensation could be materially different.
Income Taxes
We compute our provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which they are expected to be realized or settled.
Deferred tax assets are evaluated for future realization and reduced by a valuation allowance to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized. We consider many factors when assessing the likelihood of future realization, including our recent cumulative loss, earnings expectations in earlier future years, and other relevant factors. We believe that it is more likely than not that forecasted income, together with future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences and results of recent operations, will be sufficient to fully recover the deferred tax assets. In the event that the Company determines all or part of the net deferred tax assets are not realizable in the future, the Company would record a valuation allowance.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, Significant Accounting Policies-Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements, of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information about recent accounting pronouncements, the timing of their adoption, and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial position and our results of operations.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period until we are no longer an emerging growth company or until we affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period. Accordingly, our consolidated financial statements and our unaudited interim consolidated financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.