ITEM 7. - MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with, and is qualified in its entirety by, the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto, and other financial information included in this Form 10-K. Certain statements in this "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" are forward-looking statements. See "Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements."
Overview
We view each of our Integrated Resorts as an operating segment. Our operating segments in Macao consist of The Venetian Macao; The Londoner Macao; The Parisian Macao; The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao; and the Sands Macao. Our operating segment in Singapore is Marina Bay Sands. Our operating segments in the U.S. consist of the Las Vegas Operating Properties, which includes The Venetian Resort Las Vegas and the Sands Expo Center.
During 2021, we achieved milestones in advancing several of our strategic objectives. We continued progress on our key development projects in Macao for the conversion of Sands Cotai Central into The Londoner Macao, we opened The Londoner Macao Hotel in January 2021, featuring 594 London-themed suites, and we opened Londoner Court in September 2021, featuring approximately 370 luxury suites. In Singapore, we initiated development activities associated with the MBS Expansion Project. We continued to strengthen our balance sheet with the issuance of SCL 2027, 2029 and 2031 Senior Notes with an aggregate principal amount of $1.95 billion. We used the net proceeds from the issuance and cash on hand to redeem in full the outstanding principal amount of the $1.80 billion 4.600% Senior Notes due 2023, and are prepared to complete the sale of the Las Vegas property.
On March 2, 2021, we entered into definitive agreements to sell our Las Vegas real property and operations, including The Venetian Resort Las Vegas and the Sands Expo and Convention Center, for a total enterprise value of $6.25 billion to Pioneer OpCo, LLC, an affiliate of certain funds managed by affiliates of Apollo Global Management, Inc., and VICI Properties L.P, a subsidiary of VICI Properties Inc. The closing of the transaction is subject to regulatory review and other closing conditions and we anticipate the closing of the transaction in the first quarter of 2022.
COVID-19 Pandemic Update
In early January 2020, an outbreak of a respiratory illness caused by a novel coronavirus (“COVID-19”) was identified and the disease spread rapidly across the world causing the World Health Organization to declare the outbreak of a pandemic on March 12, 2020 (the “COVID-19 Pandemic”). Governments around the world mandated actions to contain the spread of the virus that included stay-at-home orders, quarantines, capacity limits, closures of non-essential businesses, including entertainment activities, and significant restrictions on travel. The government actions varied based upon a number of factors, including the extent and severity of the COVID-19 Pandemic within their respective countries and jurisdictions.
Visitation to the Macao Special Administrative Region (“Macao”) of the People’s Republic of China (“China”) has remained substantially below pre-COVID-19 levels as a result of various government policies limiting or discouraging travel. As of the date of this report, other than people from mainland China who in general may enter Macao without quarantine subject to them holding the appropriate travel documents, a negative COVID-19 test result issued within a specified time period and a green health-code, there remains in place a complete ban on entry or a need to undergo various quarantine requirements depending on the person’s residency and recent travel history. Our operations in Macao will continue to be impacted and subject to changes in the government policies of Macao, China, Hong Kong and other jurisdictions in Asia addressing travel and public health measures associated with COVID-19.
On March 3, 2021, the negative COVID-19 test requirement to enter casinos was removed; however, various other health safeguards implemented by the Macao government remain in place, including mandatory mask protection, limitation on the number of seats per table game, slot machine spacing and temperature checks. Management is currently unable to determine when the remaining measures will be eased or cease to be necessary.
As of the date of this report, most businesses are allowed to remain open, subject to social distancing and health code checking requirements as designated by the Macao government. In January 2022, the Macao government commenced the roll out and trial of a non-mandatory contact tracing QR code function at a range of businesses including government buildings, restaurants, hotels and other public venues.
In support of the Macao government’s initiatives to fight the COVID-19 Pandemic, we provided one tower (approximately 2,100 hotel rooms) at the Sheraton Grand Macao to the Macao government to house individuals who returned to Macao for quarantine purposes. This tower has been utilized for quarantine purposes on several occasions during 2020 and 2021. From October 4, 2021 to October 30, 2021, an additional tower (approximately 1,800 hotel rooms) at the Sheraton Grand Macao was provided.
Our Macao gaming operations remained open during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the same period in 2020 when our Macao gaming operations were suspended from February 5, 2020 to February 19, 2020 due to a government mandate, except for gaming operations at The Londoner Macao, which resumed on February 27, 2020. Some of our Macao hotel facilities were also closed during the casino suspension in response to the decrease in visitation and were gradually reopened from February 20, 2020, with the exception of the Conrad Macao at The Londoner Macao (the “Conrad hotel”), which reopened on June 13, 2020.
Operating hours at restaurants and other venues across our Macao properties are continuously being adjusted in line with fluctuations in guest visitation. The majority of retail outlets in our various shopping malls are open with reduced operating hours. The timing and manner in which these areas will return to full operation are currently unknown.
Our ferry operations between Macao and Hong Kong remain suspended. The timing and manner in which our ferry operations will be able to resume are currently unknown.
Our operations in Macao have been significantly impacted by the reduced visitation to Macao. The Macao government announced total visitation from mainland China to Macao increased 48.2% and decreased 74.8% for 2021, as compared to 2020 and 2019, respectively. The Macao government also announced gross gaming revenue increased by 43.7% and decreased by 70.3% for 2021, as compared to 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As of the date of this report, entry into Singapore is largely limited to Singapore citizens and permanent residents, with certain visitors allowed from specified countries on a quarantine-free basis, subject to certain requirements and health control measures. Additionally, there are no stay-at-home orders or curfews except for certain individuals arriving into Singapore who are subject to quarantine and individuals who may be assessed to have been exposed to COVID-19 as a result of the government’s contact tracing efforts. All operations are currently subject to limited capacities and other social distancing measures. As of the date of this report, Marina Bays Sands has implemented vaccination-differentiated safe management measures ("VDS"), allowing only fully vaccinated individuals; individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 within the past 180 days; or individuals medically ineligible for COVID-19 vaccination to enter the casino and other attractions.
Vaccinated Travel Lanes (VTLs) (travel corridors for vaccinated visitors in receipt of a negative COVID-19 test) were introduced for a number of key source markets in November and December of 2021, however, due to the emergence of the Omicron variant, new ticket sales for the VTLs were suspended on December 23, 2021 through January 20, 2022.
Our operations at Marina Bay Sands will continue to be impacted and subject to changes in the government policies of Singapore and other jurisdictions in Asia addressing travel and public health measures associated with COVID-19. These government policies will continue to impact (i) the number of people allowed at business-to-business events, sporting events and live performances; (ii) closure or limited seating at food and beverage or entertainment establishments; and (iii) casino capacity limits, among other restrictions. During the year ended December 31, 2021, gaming operations at Marina Bay Sands were closed from May 17 until May 18, and from July 22 until August 4 due to pandemic-related measures in consultation with the Singapore government authorities.
As a result of the border closures, visitation to Marina Bay Sands continues to be impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic. The Singapore Tourism Board (“STB”) announced for the 12 months ended December 31, 2021, total visitation to Singapore decreased approximately 88.0% and 98.3%, as compared to the same period in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Effective June 1, 2021, pursuant to State of Nevada and Nevada Gaming Control Board decisions, all capacity limits, restrictions on large gatherings and other restrictions, which had been implemented in response to the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic, were lifted and our Las Vegas Operating Properties are operating under pre-pandemic guidelines.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, our Las Vegas Operating Properties were open subject to various capacity limits in place at various times throughout the year. This compares to the same period in 2020 when our Las Vegas Operating Properties operations were suspended on March 18, 2020, due to a government mandate, and on June 4, 2020, The Venetian Tower, The Palazzo Tower and select food and beverage outlets reopened, with certain operations subject to reduced capacity. Convention, meeting and certain entertainment related operations remained closed for a portion of the year ended December 31, 2020.
Visitation to our Las Vegas Operating Properties continues to be impacted by the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic; however, visitation has increased since restrictions have been lifted. The Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Authority ("LVCVA") announced for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, total visitation to Las Vegas increased 69.4% and decreased 24.2%, respectively, as compared to the same period in 2020 and 2019. The LVCVA also announced for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, gross gaming revenue for the Las Vegas Strip increased 89.9%, and 7.6%, as compared to the same period in 2020 and 2019, respectively.
At our Macao properties and Marina Bay Sands, we are adhering to social distancing requirements, which include reduced seating at table games and a decreased number of active slot machines on the casino floor. Additionally, there is uncertainty of the impact the COVID-19 Pandemic will continue to have on operations in future periods. If our Integrated Resorts are not permitted to resume normal operations, travel restrictions such as those related to inbound travel from other countries are not modified or eliminated, there is a resumption of the suspension of the China Individual Visit Scheme, or the global response to contain the COVID-19 Pandemic escalates or is unsuccessful, our operations, cash flows and financial condition will be further materially impacted.
While our Macao and Singapore properties were open and operating at reduced levels due to lower visitation and the implementation of required safety measures as described above during the year ended December 31, 2021, the current economic and regulatory environment on a global basis and in each of our jurisdictions continues to evolve. We cannot predict the manner in which governments will react as the global and regional impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic changes over time, which could significantly alter our current operations.
We have a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity in place, including total cash and cash equivalents balance, excluding restricted cash and cash equivalents, of $1.85 billion and access to $1.50 billion, $1.75 billion and $438 million of available borrowing capacity from our LVSC Revolving Facility, 2018 SCL Revolving Facility and the 2012 Singapore Revolving Facility, respectively, and SGD 3.69 billion (approximately $2.73 billion at exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021) under our Singapore Delayed Draw Term Facility, exclusively for capital expenditures for the MBS Expansion Project (subject to restrictions as described further in Part I - Item 1 - Business - Development Projects), as of December 31, 2021. We believe we are able to support continuing operations, complete the major construction projects that are underway and respond to the current COVID-19 Pandemic challenges. We have taken various mitigating measures to manage through the current environment, including a cost and capital expenditure reduction program to minimize cash outflow of non-essential items.
Macao Subconcession
Gaming in Macao is administered by the government through concession agreements awarded to three different concessionaires and three subconcessionaires, of which Venetian Macau Limited (“VML,” a subsidiary of Sands China Ltd.) is one. These concession agreements expire on June 26, 2022. If VML’s subconcession is not extended or renewed, VML may be prohibited from conducting gaming operations in Macao, and VML could cease to generate revenues from the gaming operations when the subconcession agreement expires on June 26, 2022. In addition, all of VML’s casino premises and gaming-related equipment could be automatically transferred to the Macao government without any compensation to VML.
On January 18, 2022, the Macao Legislative Assembly published a draft bill entitled Amendment to Law No. 16/2001 to amend Macao’s gaming Law 16/2002 (the “Gaming Law”).
Certain changes to the Gaming Law set out in the draft bill include a reduction in the term of future gaming concessions to ten (10) years; authorization of up to six (6) gaming concession contracts; an increase in the minimum capital contribution of concessionaires to 5 billion patacas (approximately $622 million at exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021); and a prohibition of revenue sharing arrangements between gaming promoters and concessionaires.
We are actively monitoring developments with respect to the Macao government’s Gaming Law amendment and concession renewal process and we continue to believe we will be successful in extending the term of our subconcession and/or obtaining a new gaming concession when our current subconcession expires; however, it is possible the Macao government could further change or interpret the associated gaming laws in a manner that could negatively impact us.
Under our SCL senior notes indentures, upon the occurrence of any event resulting from any change in Gaming Law (as defined in the indentures) after which none of Sands China Ltd. (“SCL”) or any of its subsidiaries own or manage casino or gaming areas or operate casino games of fortune and chance in Macao in substantially the same manner as they are owning or managing casino or gaming areas or operating casino games as of the issue date of the SCL senior notes, for a period of 30 consecutive days or more, and such event has a material adverse effect on the financial condition, business, properties or results of operations of SCL and its subsidiaries, taken as a whole, each holder of the SCL senior notes would have the right to require us to repurchase all or any part of such holder's SCL senior notes at par, plus any accrued and unpaid interest (the “Investor Put Option”).
Additionally, under the 2018 SCL Credit Facility, the events that trigger an Investor Put Option under the SCL senior notes (as described above) would be an event of default, which may result in commitments being immediately cancelled, in whole or in part, and the related outstanding balances and accrued interest, if any, becoming immediately due and payable.
The subconcession not being extended or renewed and the potential impact if holders of the notes and the agent have the ability to, and make the election to, accelerate the repayment of our debt would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. We intend to follow the process for a concession renewal once the process and requirements are announced by the Macao government.
Key Operating Revenue Measurements
Operating revenues at The Venetian Macao, The Londoner Macao, The Parisian Macao, The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao, Marina Bay Sands and our Las Vegas Operating Properties are dependent upon the volume of customers who stay at the hotel, which affects the price charged for hotel rooms and our gaming volume. Operating revenues at Sands Macao are principally driven by casino customers who visit the property on a daily basis.
Management utilizes the following volume and pricing measures in order to evaluate past performance and assist in forecasting future revenues. The various volume measurements indicate our ability to attract customers to our Integrated Resorts. In casino operations, win and hold percentages indicate the amount of revenue to be expected based on volume. In hotel operations, average daily rate and revenue per available room indicate the demand for rooms and our ability to capture that demand. In mall operations, base rent per square foot indicates our ability to attract and maintain profitable tenants for our leasable space.
The following are the key measurements we use to evaluate operating revenues:
Casino revenue measurements for Macao and Singapore: Macao and Singapore table games are segregated into two groups: Rolling Chip play (composed of VIP players) and Non-Rolling Chip play (mostly non-VIP players). The volume measurement for Rolling Chip play is non-negotiable gaming chips wagered and lost. The volume measurement for Non-Rolling Chip play is table games drop ("drop"), which is net markers issued (credit instruments), cash deposited in the table drop boxes and gaming chips purchased and exchanged at the cage. Rolling Chip and Non-Rolling Chip volume measurements are not comparable as they are two distinct measures of volume. The amounts wagered and lost for Rolling Chip play are substantially higher than the amounts dropped for Non-Rolling Chip play. Slot handle, also a volume measurement, is the gross amount wagered for the period cited.
We view Rolling Chip win as a percentage of Rolling Chip volume, Non-Rolling Chip win as a percentage of drop and slot hold (amount won by the casino) as a percentage of slot handle. Win or hold percentage represents the percentage of Rolling Chip volume, Non-Rolling Chip drop or slot handle that is won by the casino and recorded as
casino revenue. Our win and hold percentages are calculated before discounts, commissions, deferring revenue associated with our loyalty programs and allocating casino revenues related to goods and services provided to patrons on a complimentary basis. Our Rolling Chip win percentage is expected to be 3.15% to 3.45% in Macao and Singapore. Actual win percentage may vary from our expected win percentage and historical win and hold percentages. Generally, slot machine play is conducted on a cash basis. In Macao and Singapore, 14.5% and 7.9%, respectively, of our table games play was conducted on a credit basis for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Casino revenue measurements for the U.S.: The volume measurements in the U.S. are slot handle, as previously described, and table games drop, which is the total amount of cash and net markers issued deposited in the table drop box. We view table games win as a percentage of drop and slot hold as a percentage of slot handle. Our win and hold percentages are calculated before discounts, commissions, deferring revenue associated with our loyalty programs and allocating casino revenues related to goods and services provided to patrons on a complimentary basis. Based upon our mix of table games, our table games are expected to produce a win percentage of 18% to 26% for Baccarat and 16% to 24% for non-Baccarat. Actual win percentage may vary from our expected win percentage and historical win and hold percentages. Similar to Macao and Singapore, slot machine play is generally conducted on a cash basis. Approximately 53.9% of our table games play at our Las Vegas Operating Properties was conducted on a credit basis for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Hotel revenue measurements: Performance indicators used are occupancy rate (a volume indicator), which is the average percentage of available hotel rooms occupied during a period, and average daily room rate ("ADR," a price indicator), which is the average price of occupied rooms per day. Available rooms exclude those rooms unavailable for occupancy during the period due to renovation, development or other requirements (such as government mandated closure, lodging for team members and usage by the Macao and Singapore governments for quarantine measures). The calculations of the occupancy rate and ADR include the impact of rooms provided on a complimentary basis. Revenue per available room ("RevPAR") represents a summary of hotel ADR and occupancy. Because not all available rooms are occupied, ADR is normally higher than RevPAR. Reserved rooms where the guests do not show up for their stay and lose their deposit, or where guests check out early, may be re-sold to walk-in guests.
Mall revenue measurements: Occupancy, base rent per square foot and tenant sales per square foot are used as performance indicators. Occupancy represents gross leasable occupied area ("GLOA") divided by gross leasable area ("GLA") at the end of the reporting period. GLOA is the sum of: (1) tenant occupied space under lease and (2) tenants no longer occupying space, but paying rent. GLA does not include space currently under development or not on the market for lease. Base rent per square foot is the weighted average base or minimum rent charge, excluding rent concessions, in effect at the end of the reporting period for all tenants that would qualify to be included in occupancy. Tenant sales per square foot is the sum of reported comparable sales for the trailing 12 months divided by the comparable square footage for the same period. Only tenants that have been open for a minimum of 12 months are included in the tenant sales per square foot calculation.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Summary Financial Results
Our financial results continued to be adversely impacted by continued decreased visitation at each of our operating properties in Asia due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. See “COVID-19 Pandemic” for further information. Net revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $4.23 billion, compared to $2.94 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. Operating loss was $689 million, compared to operating loss of $1.39 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net loss from continuing operations was $1.47 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss from continuing operations of $1.90 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Revenues
Our net revenues consisted of the following:
Consolidated net revenues were $4.23 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $1.29 billion compared to $2.94 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase consists of increases of $1.19 billion and $107 million at our Macao operations and Marina Bay Sands, respectively, due to increased casino and rooms revenue from increased visitation related to fewer days in which our gaming operations were closed in 2021 compared to 2020.
Net casino revenues increased $851 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Revenues at our Macao properties and Marina Bay Sands increased $818 million and $33 million, respectively, driven by increases in Non-Rolling Chip drop and slot handle. The following table summarizes the results of our casino activity:
__________________________
(1) The Las Vegas Operating Properties are classified as a discontinued operation held for sale.
In our experience, average win percentages remain fairly consistent when measured over extended periods of time with a significant volume of wagers, but can vary considerably within shorter time periods as a result of the statistical variances associated with games of chance in which large amounts are wagered.
Room revenues increased $135 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased occupancy rates driven by higher visitation across our properties, as well as our properties being closed for longer periods and select number of rooms being utilized for government quarantine purposes during the year ended December 31, 2020. The following table summarizes the results of our room activity:
_________________________
(1) During the year ended December 31, 2021, 7% of rooms were under construction for renovation purposes.
(2) The Las Vegas Operating Properties are classified as a discontinued operation held for sale.
Food and beverage revenues increased $43 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was $34 million and $9 million at our Macao properties and Marina Bay Sands, respectively. The increase was due to increased visitation during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Mall revenues increased $268 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $207 million decrease in rent concessions granted to our mall tenants in Macao and Singapore compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, as well as a $76 million increase in turnover rents. These items were partially offset by a decrease in occupancy rates for our Macao mall operations.
For further information related to the financial performance of our malls, see "Additional Information Regarding our Retail Mall Operations." The following table summarizes the results of our malls on the Cotai Strip in Macao and in Singapore:
_________________________
Note: This table excludes the results of mall operations at Sands Macao. As a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic, tenants were provided rent concessions during the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Base rent per square foot presented above excludes the impact of these rent concessions.
(1)Tenant sales per square foot is the sum of reported comparable sales for the trailing 12 months divided by the comparable square footage for the same period.
(2)The Shoppes at Londoner will feature more than 600,000 square feet of gross leasable area upon completion of all phases of the renovation and expansion to The Londoner Macao.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consisted of the following:
Operating expenses were $4.92 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $590 million compared to $4.33 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by increased visitation due to fewer days in which our properties were closed during 2021 compared to 2020, and an increase in payroll-related costs due to an increase of $121 million in bonuses and incentives and a decrease in payments from the Job Support Scheme in Singapore received in 2021. The increase was partially offset by certain cost reduction programs implemented by management beginning in 2020 due to the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic. Operating margins in each business segment remain negatively impacted as we have maintained our staffing levels across our jurisdictions through significantly reduced visitation. We have also continued our payroll cost saving initiatives across each of our properties, implemented in 2020, which included utilization of paid time off and voluntary unpaid leave.
Casino expenses increased $483 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase of $412 million in gaming taxes due to increased casino revenues, as previously described.
Room expenses increased $28 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase consisted of increases of $17 million and $11 million at our Macao properties and Marina Bay Sands, respectively, consistent with the increase in room revenue.
Convention, retail and other expenses decreased $18 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by a $13 million decrease in ferry expenses resulting from decreases in contract labor costs due to a reduction in headcount, lower repair and maintenance costs, and lower fuel costs as ferries were under dry dock. Additionally, convention, retail and other expenses at our Macao properties decreased $5 million as a result of the cancellation of MICE and entertainment events.
The provision for credit losses was $3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $86 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to an increased level of provision recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the aging of patron receivables in connection with the impact of the
COVID-19 Pandemic. The amount of this provision can vary over short periods of time because of factors specific to the patrons who owe us money from gaming activities. We believe the amount of our provision for credit losses in the future will depend upon the state of the economy, our credit standards, our risk assessments and the judgment of our employees responsible for granting credit.
General and administrative expenses increased $33 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, consisted of increases of $18 million and $15 million at our Macao properties and Marina Bay Sands, respectively. The increases were primarily driven by increases in marketing, payroll and property operation costs.
Corporate expenses increased $43 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by $36 million related to payroll and related costs, driven by no bonus expense recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, travel and related expenses increased by $8 million due to increases in corporate aircraft usage and the related fuel costs, as well as higher fuel prices.
Pre-opening expenses represent personnel and other costs incurred prior to the opening of new ventures, which are expensed as incurred. The majority of pre-opening expenses incurred related to The Londoner Macao.
Development expenses were $109 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, and include the costs associated with our evaluation and pursuit of new business opportunities, primarily in Florida and Texas, as well as our digital gaming efforts. Development costs are also expensed as incurred.
Loss on disposal or impairment of assets was $27 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $73 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to fewer asset disposals and related demolition costs incurred during the construction of The Londoner Macao compared to 2020.
Segment Adjusted Property EBITDA
The following table summarizes information related to our segments (see "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 18 - Segment Information" for discussion of our operating segments and a reconciliation of consolidated adjusted property EBITDA to net income/loss):
_________________________
(1)Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure, is used by management as the primary measure of the operating performance of our segments. Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA is net income/loss before stock-based compensation expense, corporate expense, pre-opening expense, development expense, depreciation and amortization, amortization of leasehold interests in land, gain or loss on disposal or impairment of assets, interest, other income or expense, gain or loss on modification or early retirement of debt and income taxes. Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure used by management, as well as industry analysts, to evaluate operations and operating
performance. In particular, management utilizes consolidated adjusted property EBITDA to compare the operating profitability of our operations with those of our competitors, as well as a basis for determining certain incentive compensation. Integrated Resort companies have historically reported adjusted property EBITDA as a supplemental performance measure to GAAP financial measures. In order to view the operations of their properties on a more stand-alone basis, Integrated Resort companies, including Las Vegas Sands Corp., have historically excluded certain expenses that do not relate to the management of specific properties, such as pre-opening expense, development expense and corporate expense, from their adjusted property EBITDA calculations. Consolidated adjusted property EBITDA should not be interpreted as an alternative to income from operations (as an indicator of operating performance) or to cash flows from operations (as a measure of liquidity), in each case, as determined in accordance with GAAP. We have significant uses of cash flow, including capital expenditures, dividend payments, interest payments, debt principal repayments and income taxes, which are not reflected in consolidated adjusted property EBITDA. Not all companies calculate adjusted property EBITDA in the same manner. As a result, our presentation of consolidated adjusted property EBITDA may not be directly comparable to similarly titled measures presented by other companies.
(2)The Las Vegas Operating Properties are classified as a discontinued operation held for sale.
Adjusted property EBITDA at our Macao operations increased $769 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to an increase in casino, mall, and rooms revenues due to fewer property closures as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic. The increases were due to increases in table drop and slot handle, reduced rent concessions and increases in occupancy and number of rooms available for sale, respectfully.
Adjusted property EBITDA at Marina Bay Sands increased $65 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.The increase was primarily due to an increase in casino revenue and mall operations due to fewer property closures as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic. The increases were due to increased slot handle and reduced rent concessions, respectfully.
Adjusted property EBITDA at our Las Vegas Operating Properties increased $414 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased casino and room revenue due to no property closures in 2021 as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic. The increases were due to increases in table drop and slot handle and increased occupancy, respectfully.
Interest Expense
The following table summarizes information related to interest expense:
Interest cost increased $92 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting primarily from increases in our weighted average interest rate and weighted average total debt balance. The weighted average debt balance increased in connection with the issuance of the SCL 2026 and 2030 Senior Notes in June 2020 and draws on the SCL revolver during the year ended December 31, 2021. Additionally, the weighted average interest rate increased from 4.0% to 4.4% during the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of the expiration of interest rate swaps in August 2020 related to the SCL senior notes (see "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 10 - Long-Term Debt").
Other Factors Affecting Earnings
Other expense was $31 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to other income of $19 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The change is primarily attributable to $51 million of foreign currency transaction losses, mostly driven by the U.S. dollar-denominated debt held by SCL.
Our income tax benefit was $5 million on a loss from continuing operations before income taxes of $1.47 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021, resulting in a (0.3%) effective income tax rate. This compares to a 1.3% effective income tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2020. The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflects a 17% statutory tax rate on our Singapore operations, a 21% corporate income tax rate on our U.S. operations, and a zero percent tax rate on our Macao gaming operations due to our income tax exemption in Macao. Our U.S. operations recorded a tax benefit associated with the pre-tax book losses incurred for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our U.S. tax benefit was partially offset by a valuation allowance recorded on certain U.S. foreign tax credits, which we no longer expect to utilize due to lower royalty income resulting from a decrease in revenues from our Macao and Singapore operations compared to prior estimates.
The net loss attributable to our noncontrolling interests from continuing operations was $315 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to net loss attributable to our noncontrolling interest from continuing operations of $458 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. These amounts were related to the noncontrolling interest of SCL.
Additional Information Regarding our Retail Mall Operations
The following tables summarize the results of our mall operations on the Cotai Strip and at Marina Bay Sands for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
____________________
Note: This table excludes the results of our mall operations at Sands Macao.
(1) Minimum rents include base rents and straight-line adjustments of base rents.
(2) Rent concessions were provided to tenants as a result of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the related impact on mall operations.
(3) The amount for Marina Bay Sands of $6 million related to a grant provided by the Singapore government to lessors to support small and medium enterprises impacted by the COVID-19 Pandemic in connection with their rent obligations.
(4) Commercial property that generates rental income is exempt from property tax for the first six years for newly constructed buildings in Cotai. Each property is also eligible to obtain an additional six-year exemption, provided certain qualifications are met. To date, The Venetian Macao, The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao, The Londoner Macao and The Parisian Macao have obtained a second exemption. The exemption for The Venetian Macao and The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao expired in August 2019 and August 2020, respectively, and the exemption for The Londoner Macao and The Parisian Macao will be expiring in December 2027 and September 2028, respectively.
(5) Mall-related expenses consist of CAM, marketing fees and other direct operating expenses, property taxes and provision for credit losses, but excludes depreciation and amortization and general and administrative costs.
It is common in the mall operating industry for companies to disclose mall net operating income ("NOI") as a useful supplemental measure of a mall's operating performance. Because NOI excludes general and administrative expenses, interest expense, impairment losses, depreciation and amortization, gains and losses from property dispositions, allocations to noncontrolling interests and provision for income taxes, it provides a performance measure that, when compared year over year, reflects the revenues and expenses directly associated with owning and operating commercial real estate properties and the impact on operations from trends in occupancy rates, rental rates and operating costs.
In the table above, we believe taking total mall revenues less mall-related expenses provides an operating performance measure for our malls. Other mall operating companies may use different methodologies for deriving mall-related expenses. As such, this calculation may not be comparable to the NOI of other mall operating companies.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019
A discussion of changes in our results of operations between 2020 and 2019 has been omitted from this Form 10-K and can be found in "Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2019" of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flows - Summary
Our cash flows consisted of the following:
A discussion of changes in cash flows between 2020 and 2019 has been omitted from this Form 10-K and can be found in "Item 7 - Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources" of the Company's Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows - Operating Activities
Table games play at our properties is conducted on a cash and credit basis, while slot machine play is primarily conducted on a cash basis. Our rooms, food and beverage and other non-gaming revenues are conducted primarily on a cash basis or as a trade receivable, resulting in operating cash flows being generally affected by changes in operating income and accounts receivable. For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operations was $243 million, a decrease of $948 million compared to $1.19 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily resulting from a decrease in net loss as our properties remained opened during the year ended December 31, 2021, with the exception of the closure of the casino at Marina Bay Sands on two different occasions (approximately 15 days total), compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, in which our properties were closed at various times
and for an extended period. Additionally, our net working capital requirements decreased during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash Flows - Investing Activities
Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2021, totaled $828 million, including $653 million in Macao, which consisted of $551 million for The Londoner Macao, $71 million for The Venetian Macao and $19 million for The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao; $148 million at Marina Bay Sands in Singapore; and $27 million for corporate and other.
Capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2020, totaled $1.23 billion, including $1.06 billion in Macao, which consisted of $739 million for The Londoner Macao, $157 million for The Plaza Macao and Four Seasons Macao primarily for The Grand Suites at Four Seasons, and $140 million for The Venetian Macao; $164 million in Singapore; and $5 million for corporate and other.
Cash Flows - Financing Activities
Net cash flows generated from financing activities were $863 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, which was primarily attributable to net proceeds of $756 million, received from the drawdown of our SCL revolving facility, and transactions with discontinued operations. These items were partially offset by a $131 million make-whole premium for the early redemption of the SCL senior note due 2023 and $38 million in financing costs related to the issuance of the new unsecured notes at SCL and the covenant waivers obtained on the LVSC Revolving Facility, 2018 SCL Credit Facility and 2012 Singapore Credit Facility.
Net cash flows generated from financing activities were $355 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily attributable to the issuance of $1.50 billion of unsecured notes at SCL, partially offset by $911 million in dividend payments, and transactions with discontinued operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $3.68 billion available for borrowing under our U.S., Macao and Singapore revolving facilities, net of letters of credit. Additionally, we had $2.73 billion available for borrowing under the 2012 Singapore Delayed Draw Term Facility to finance construction costs incurred in connection with the MBS Expansion Project.
Capital Financing Overview
We fund our development projects primarily through borrowings from our debt instruments (see "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 10 - Long-Term Debt") and operating cash flows.
In September 2021, SCL issued, in a private offering, three series of unsecured notes in an aggregate principal amount of $1.95 billion. The net proceeds from the offering, along with cash on hand, was used to redeem in full the outstanding principal amount of the $1.80 billion 4.600% senior notes due 2023, any accrued interest and the associated make-whole premium as determined under the related senior notes indenture dated as of August 9, 2018. (See "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 10 - Long-Term Debt - Corporate and U.S. Related Debt - SCL Senior Notes").
Our U.S., SCL and Singapore credit facilities, as amended, contain various financial covenants, which include maintaining a maximum leverage ratio or net debt, as defined, to trailing twelve-month adjusted earnings before interest, income taxes, depreciation and amortization, as defined. In September 2021, LVSC extended the amendment, pursuant to which lenders, among other things, removed LVSC’s requirement to maintain a maximum leverage ratio as of the last day of the fiscal quarter, through and including December 31, 2022. In July 2021, SCL extended the waiver and amendment request letter, pursuant to which lenders, among other things, waived SCL’s requirement to ensure the leverage ratio does not exceed 4.0x and the interest coverage ratio is greater than 2.50x, through January 1, 2023. In September 2021, MBS extended the amendment letter, pursuant to which MBS will not have to comply with the leverage or interest coverage covenants as of the last day of the fiscal quarter, through and including December 31, 2022. Our compliance with our financial covenants for periods beyond December 31, 2022 could be affected by certain factors beyond our control, such as the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic, including current travel and border restrictions continuing in the future. We will pursue additional waivers to meet the required financial covenant ratios, which include a maximum leverage ratio of 4.0x, 4.0x and 4.5x under our U.S., Macao and
Singapore credit facilities, respectively, for periods beyond December 31, 2022 for LVSC and MBS and January 1, 2023 for SCL, if deemed necessary. We believe we will be successful in obtaining the additional waivers, although no assurance can be provided that such waivers will be granted, which could negatively impact our ability to be in compliance with our debt covenants for periods beyond December 31, 2022 for LVSC and MBS and January 1, 2023 for SCL.
In addition, pursuant to the Second Amendment and subject to the satisfaction of certain conditions specified therein, the requisite lenders under the existing LVSC Revolving Credit Agreement consented to, and waived any applicable restrictions prohibiting, the consummation of the announced sale of the Las Vegas Operations.
Any defaults under our debt agreements would allow the lenders, in each case, to exercise their rights and remedies as defined under their respective agreements. If the lenders were to exercise their rights to accelerate the due dates of the indebtedness outstanding, there can be no assurance we would be able to repay or refinance any amounts that may become due and payable under such agreements, which could force us to restructure or alter our operations or debt obligations.
We held unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $1.85 billion and restricted cash and cash equivalents of $16 million as of December 31, 2021, of which approximately $1.06 billion of the unrestricted amount is held by non-U.S. subsidiaries. Of the $1.06 billion, approximately $706 million is available to be repatriated to the U.S., and we do not expect withholding taxes or other foreign income taxes to apply should these earnings be distributed in the form of dividends or otherwise. The remaining unrestricted amounts held by non-U.S. subsidiaries are not available for repatriation primarily due to dividend requirements to third-party public stockholders in the case of funds being repatriated from SCL.
We believe the cash on hand and cash flow generated from operations, as well as the $3.68 billion available for borrowing under our U.S., Macao and Singapore credit facilities, net of outstanding letters of credit, and SGD 3.69 billion (approximately $2.73 billion at exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021) under the 2012 Singapore Delayed Draw Term Facility, as of December 31, 2021, will be sufficient to maintain compliance with the financial covenants of our credit facilities and fund our working capital needs, committed and planned capital expenditures, development opportunities and debt obligations. If the construction cost estimate and construction schedule to the MBS Expansion Project are not delivered by the extended deadline, we will not be permitted to make further draws on the Singapore Delayed Draw Term Facility after March 31, 2022 until these items are delivered to lenders. In the normal course of our activities, we will continue to evaluate global capital markets to consider future opportunities for enhancements of our capital structure. During 2020, we entered into an amendment request letter on the 2018 SCL Credit Facility, which provides us with the option to increase the total borrowing capacity by an aggregate amount of up to $1.0 billion. Subsequently, on January 25, 2021, we increased the amount available under the SCL revolving credit facility by HKD 3.83 billion (approximately $491 million in exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021) to further enhance our liquidity. During the year ended December 31, 2021, SCL drew down $71 million and HKD 5.31 billion (approximately $681 million at exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021) under this facility for general corporate purposes.
We have suspended our quarterly dividend program beginning in April 2020, and SCL suspended its dividend payments after paying its interim dividend for 2019 on February 21, 2020.
In June 2018, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of $2.50 billion of our outstanding common stock, which was to expire in November 2020. In October 2020, our Board of Directors authorized the extension of the expiration date of the remaining repurchase amount of $916 million to November 2022. During the year ended December 31, 2021, no shares of our common stock were repurchased under this program. All share repurchases of our common stock have been recorded as treasury stock. Repurchases of our common stock are made at our discretion in accordance with applicable federal securities laws in the open market or otherwise. The timing and actual number of shares to be repurchased in the future will depend on a variety of factors, including our financial position, earnings, cash flows, legal requirements, other investment opportunities and market conditions.
We believe we have a strong balance sheet and sufficient liquidity in place, including access to available borrowing capacity under our credit facilities. We also believe we are well positioned to support our continuing operations, complete the major construction projects in Macao and Singapore that are underway and respond to the current COVID-19 Pandemic challenges. We have taken various mitigating measures to manage through the current
environment, including a cost and capital expenditure reduction program to minimize cash outflow for non-essential items.
Aggregate Indebtedness and Other Contractual Obligations
Our total long-term indebtedness and other contractual obligations are summarized below as of December 31, 2021:
_______________________
(1)As of December 31, 2021, we had a $79 million liability related to uncertain tax positions; we do not expect this liability to result in a payment of cash within the next 12 months. We are unable to reasonably estimate the timing of the liability in individual years beyond 12 months due to uncertainties in the timing of the effective settlement of tax positions; therefore, such amounts are not included in the table.
(2)See "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 10 - Long-Term Debt" for further details on these financing transactions and "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 14 - Leases" for further details on finance leases.
(3)Based on the 1-month rate as of December 31, 2021, London Inter-Bank Offered Rate ("LIBOR") of 0.10%, Hong Kong Inter-Bank Offer Rate (“HIBOR”) of 0.16% and Singapore Swap Offer Rate ("SOR") of 0.32%, plus the applicable interest rate spread in accordance with the respective debt agreements.
(4)We are party to certain operating leases for real estate, which primarily include $324 million related to long-term land leases in Macao with an anticipated lease term of 50-years and $17 million related to a long-term land lease in Las Vegas with a 40-year lease term. See "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 14 - Leases" for further details on operating leases.
(5)Mall deposits consist of refundable security deposits received from mall tenants.
(6)In addition to the 39% gross gaming win tax in Macao (which is not included in this table as the amount we pay is variable in nature), we are required to pay an annual premium with a fixed portion and a variable portion, which is based on the number and type of gaming tables and gaming machines we operate. Based on
the gaming tables and gaming machines in operation as of December 31, 2021, the annual premium payable to the Macao government is approximately $22 million through the termination of the gaming subconcession in June 2022.
(7)Primarily consists of all other non-cancellable contractual obligations and primarily relates to certain hotel and restaurant management and service agreements. The amounts exclude open purchase orders with our suppliers that have not yet been received as these agreements generally allow us the option to cancel, reschedule and adjust terms based on our business needs prior to the delivery of goods or performance of services.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any transactions with special purpose entities, nor have we engaged in any derivative transactions other than foreign currency swaps. Refer to Note 9 - Derivative Instruments for outstanding foreign currency swaps as of December 31, 2021.
Restrictions on Distributions
We are a parent company with limited business operations. Our main asset is the stock and membership interests of our subsidiaries. Certain of our debt instruments contain restrictions that, among other things, limit the ability of certain subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness, issue disqualified stock or equity interests, pay dividends or make other distributions, repurchase equity interests or certain indebtedness, create certain liens, enter into certain transactions with affiliates, enter into certain mergers or consolidations or sell certain assets of our Company without prior approval of the lenders or noteholders.
Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This report contains forward-looking statements made pursuant to the Safe Harbor Provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These forward-looking statements include the discussions of our business strategies and expectations concerning future operations, margins, profitability, liquidity and capital resources. In addition, in certain portions included in this report, the words: “anticipates,” “believes,” “estimates,” “seeks,” “expects,” “plans,” “intends” and similar expressions, as they relate to our Company or management, are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Although we believe these forward-looking statements are reasonable, we cannot assure you any forward-looking statements will prove to be correct. These forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors beyond our control, which may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements. These factors include, among others, the risks associated with:
•the uncertainty of the extent, duration and effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the response of governments and other third parties, including government-mandated property closures, increased operational regulatory requirements or travel restrictions, on our business, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and development prospects;
•our ability to maintain our gaming licenses and subconcession in Macao, Singapore and Las Vegas, including the renewal or extension of the subconcession in Macao that expires on June 26, 2022;
•our ability to invest in future growth opportunities;
•the ability to execute our previously announced capital expenditure programs in both Macao and Singapore, and produce future returns;
•the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to the consummation of the proposed sale of our Las Vegas real property and operations, including the Venetian Resort Las Vegas and the Sands Expo and Convention Center (the “Proposed Transaction”), including the receipt of regulatory approvals;
•unanticipated difficulties or expenditures relating to the Proposed Transaction;
•legal proceedings, judgments or settlements that may be instituted in connection with the Proposed Transaction, including those against us, our board of directors and executive officers and others;
•disruptions of current plans and operations caused by the announcement and pendency of the Proposed Transaction;
•potential difficulties in employee retention due to the announcement and pendency of the Proposed Transaction;
•the response of patrons, suppliers, business partners and regulators to the announcement of the Proposed Transaction;
•general economic and business conditions in the U.S. and internationally, which may impact levels of disposable income, consumer spending, group meeting business, pricing of hotel rooms and retail and mall tenant sales;
•disruptions or reductions in travel and our operations due to natural or man-made disasters, pandemics, epidemics or outbreaks of infectious or contagious diseases, political instability, civil unrest, terrorist activity or war;
•the uncertainty of consumer behavior related to discretionary spending and vacationing at our Integrated Resorts;
•the extensive regulations to which we are subject and the costs of compliance or failure to comply with such regulations;
•new developments, construction projects and ventures, including our Cotai Strip developments and MBS Expansion Project;
•regulatory policies in China or other countries in which our patrons reside, or where we have operations, including visa restrictions limiting the number of visits or the length of stay for visitors from China to Macao, restrictions on foreign currency exchange or importation of currency, and the judicial enforcement of gaming debts;
•our leverage, debt service and debt covenant compliance, including the pledge of certain of our assets (other than our equity interests in our subsidiaries) as security for our indebtedness and ability to refinance our debt obligations as they come due or to obtain sufficient funding for our planned, or any future, development projects;
•fluctuations in currency exchange rates and interest rates;
•increased competition for labor and materials due to planned construction projects in Macao and Singapore and quota limits on the hiring of foreign workers;
•our ability to compete for limited management and labor resources in Macao and Singapore, and policies of those governments may also affect our ability to employ imported managers or labor from other countries;
•our dependence upon properties primarily in Macao, Singapore and Las Vegas for all of our cash flow and the ability of our subsidiaries to make distribution payments to us;
•the passage of new legislation and receipt of governmental approvals for our operations in Macao and Singapore and other jurisdictions where we are planning to operate;
•our insurance coverage may not be adequate to cover all possible losses that our properties could suffer and our insurance costs may increase in the future;
•our ability to collect gaming receivables from our credit players;
•our relationship with gaming promoters in Macao;
•our dependence on chance and theoretical win rates;
•fraud and cheating;
•our ability to establish and protect our intellectual property rights;
•conflicts of interest that arise because certain of our directors and officers are also directors and officers of SCL;
•government regulation of the casino industry (as well as new laws and regulations and changes to existing laws and regulations), including gaming license regulation, the requirement for certain beneficial owners of our securities to be found suitable by gaming authorities, the legalization of gaming in other jurisdictions and regulation of gaming on the internet;
•increased competition in Macao and Las Vegas, including recent and upcoming increases in hotel rooms, meeting and convention space, retail space, potential additional gaming licenses and online gaming;
•the popularity of Macao, Singapore and Las Vegas as convention and trade show destinations;
•new taxes, changes to existing tax rates or proposed changes in tax legislation;
•the continued services of our key officers;
•any potential conflict between the interests of our Principal Stockholders and us;
•labor actions and other labor problems;
•our failure to maintain the integrity of our information and information systems or comply with applicable privacy and data security requirements and regulations could harm our reputation and adversely affect our business;
•the completion of infrastructure projects in Macao;
•potential negative impacts from environmental, social and governance and sustainability matters; and
•the outcome of any ongoing and future litigation.
All future written and verbal forward-looking statements attributable to us or any person acting on our behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by the cautionary statements contained or referred to in this section. New risks and uncertainties arise from time to time, and it is impossible for us to predict these events or how they may affect us. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements. We assume no obligation to update any forward-looking statements after the date of this report as a result of new information, future events or developments, except as required by federal securities laws.
Investors and others should note we announce material financial information using our investor relations website (https://investor.sands.com), our company website, SEC filings, investor events, news and earnings releases, public conference calls and webcasts. We use these channels to communicate with our investors and the public about our company, our products and services, and other issues.
In addition, we post certain information regarding SCL, a subsidiary of Las Vegas Sands Corp. with ordinary shares listed on The Stock Exchange of Hong Kong Limited, from time to time on our company website and our investor relations website. It is possible the information we post regarding SCL could be deemed to be material information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires our management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. These estimates and judgments are based on historical information, information currently available to us and on various other assumptions management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could vary from those estimates and we may change our estimates and assumptions in future evaluations. Changes in these estimates and assumptions may have a material effect on our results of operations and financial condition. We believe the critical accounting policies discussed below affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Provision for Expected Credit Losses
We maintain a provision for expected credit losses on casino, hotel and mall receivables and regularly evaluate the balances. We apply standard reserve percentages to aged account balances, which are grouped based on shared credit risk characteristics and days past due. The reserve percentages are based on estimated loss rates supported by historical observed default rates over the expected life of the receivable and are adjusted for forward-looking information. We also specifically analyze the collectability of each account with a balance over a specified dollar amount, based upon the age of the account, the customer's financial condition, collection history and any other known information and adjust the aforementioned reserve with the results from the individual reserve analysis. We also monitor regional and global economic conditions and forecasts, which include the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic, in our evaluation of the adequacy of the recorded reserves.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, there continued to be a delay in payments on casino receivables due to the inability of patrons to travel to our properties or to accomplish financial transactions due to the travel restrictions caused by the COVID-19 Pandemic. The collection of casino receivables has also been impacted by liquidity issues faced by certain patrons also stemming from the COVID-19 Pandemic. We have increased the provision for credit losses in each jurisdiction accordingly to account for the expected credit losses due to the COVID-19 Pandemic. We continue to closely monitor any delays in payments due to the COVID-19 Pandemic and will increase the provision accordingly depending on the facts and circumstances. Although we believe the provision on our casino receivables is adequate as of December 31, 2021, it is possible our provisions could increase if we experience further delays on payments from patrons.
Account balances are written off against the provision when we believe it is probable the receivable will not be recovered. Credit or marker play was 14.5%, 7.9% and 53.9% of table games play at our Macao properties, Marina Bay Sands and Las Vegas Operating Properties, respectively, during the year ended December 31, 2021. Our provision for casino credit losses was 72.5% and 59.8% of gross casino receivables as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The credit extended to gaming promoters can be offset by the commissions payable to said gaming promoters, which is considered in the establishment of the provision for credit losses. Our provision for credit losses from our hotel and other receivables is not material.
Litigation Accrual
We are subject to various claims and legal actions. We estimate the accruals for these claims and legal actions based on all relevant facts and circumstances currently available and include such accruals in other accrued liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets when it is determined such contingencies are both probable and reasonably estimable.
Property and Equipment
As of December 31, 2021, we had net property and equipment of $11.85 billion, representing 59.1% of our total assets. We depreciate property and equipment on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. The estimated useful lives are based on the nature of the assets as well as current operating strategy and legal considerations, such as contractual life. Future events, such as property expansions, property developments, new competition or new regulations, could result in a change in the manner in which we use certain assets requiring a change in the estimated useful lives of such assets. The estimated useful lives of assets are periodically reviewed and adjusted as necessary on a prospective basis.
For assets to be held and used (including projects under development), fixed assets are reviewed for impairment whenever indicators of impairment exist. If an indicator of impairment exists, we first group our assets with other assets and liabilities at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities (the "asset group"). Secondly, we estimate the undiscounted future cash flows directly associated with and expected to arise from the completion, use and eventual disposition of such asset group. We estimate the undiscounted cash flows over the remaining useful life of the primary asset within the asset group. If the undiscounted cash flows exceed the carrying value, no impairment is indicated. If the undiscounted cash flows do not exceed the carrying value, then an impairment is measured based on fair value compared to carrying value, with fair value typically based on a discounted cash flow model. If an asset is still under development, future cash flows include remaining construction costs.
To estimate the undiscounted cash flows of our asset groups, we consider all potential cash flows scenarios, which are probability weighted based on management's estimates given current conditions. Determining the recoverability of our asset groups is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including estimated cash flows, probability weighting of potential scenarios, costs to complete construction for assets under development, growth rates and future market conditions, among others. Future changes to our estimates and assumptions based upon changes in macro-economic factors, regulatory environments, operating results or management's intentions may result in future changes to the recoverability of our asset groups.
For assets to be held for sale, the fixed assets (the "disposal group") are measured at the lower of their carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Losses are recognized for any initial or subsequent write-down to fair value less costs to sell, while gains are recognized for any subsequent increase in fair value less costs to sell, but not in excess of the cumulative loss previously recognized. Any gains or losses not previously recognized that result from the sale of the disposal group shall be recognized at the date of sale. Fixed assets are not depreciated while classified as held for sale.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. (including federal and state) and numerous foreign jurisdictions in which we operate. We record income taxes under the asset and liability method, whereby deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized based on the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, and attributable to operating loss and tax credit carryforwards.
Our foreign and U.S. tax rate differential reflects the fact that U.S. tax rates are higher than the statutory tax rates in Singapore and Macao of 17% and 12%, respectively. In August 2018, we received an additional exemption from Macao's corporate income tax on profits generated by the operation of casino games of chance for the period January 1, 2019 through June 26, 2022, the date our subconcession agreement expires. Additionally, we entered into an agreement with the Macao government in April 2019, effective through June 26, 2022, providing for payments as a substitution for a 12% tax otherwise due from VML shareholders on dividend distributions paid from VML gaming profits, namely a payment of 38 million patacas (approximately $5 million at exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021) for each of the years 2021, 2020 and 2019, each payment to be made on or before January 31 of the following year, and a payment of 18 million patacas (approximately $2 million at exchange rates in effect on December 31, 2021) for the period between January 1, 2022 through June 26, 2022, to be paid on or before July 26, 2022. There is no assurance either of these tax arrangements will be extended beyond their expiration dates.
Accounting standards regarding income taxes require a reduction of the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by a valuation allowance, if based on the available evidence, it is "more-likely-than-not" such assets will not be realized. Accordingly, the need to establish valuation allowances for deferred tax assets is assessed at each reporting period based on a "more-likely-than-not" realization threshold. This assessment considers, among other matters, the nature, frequency and severity of current and cumulative losses, forecasts of future profitability, the duration of statutory carryforward periods, our experience with operating loss and tax credit carryforwards not expiring and tax planning strategies.
We recorded a valuation allowance on the net deferred tax assets of certain foreign jurisdictions of $416 million and $342 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and a valuation allowance on certain net deferred tax assets of our U.S. operations of $4.62 billion and $4.58 billion as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Due to the impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and the resulting reduction in estimated royalty income from an expected decrease in our Macao and Singapore operations, we recorded a valuation allowance on certain U.S. foreign tax credits, which we no longer expect to utilize during the period 2022 through 2027 before their expiration. We believe we made reasonable estimates and judgments in performing the analysis in light of the uncertainties surrounding the COVID-19 Pandemic; however, should the effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic persist for a prolonged duration, we could be required to record additional valuation allowances. Management will reassess the realization of deferred tax assets each reporting period and consider the scheduled reversal of deferred tax liabilities, sources of taxable income and tax planning strategies. To the extent the financial results of these operations improve and it becomes "more-likely-than-not" the deferred tax assets are realizable, we will be able to reduce the valuation allowance in the period such determination is made, as appropriate.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. Accounting standards regarding uncertainty in income taxes provides a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position for recognition by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates it is "more-likely-than-not" the position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of related appeals or litigation processes, if any. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% likely, based solely on the technical merits, of being sustained on examinations. We recorded unrecognized tax benefits of $136 million and $131 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We consider many factors when evaluating and estimating our tax positions and tax benefits, which may require periodic adjustments and for which actual outcomes may be different.
Our major tax jurisdictions are the U.S., Macao, and Singapore. We could be subject to examination for tax years beginning in 2017 in Macao and Singapore and tax years 2010 through 2015 and 2018 through 2020 in the U.S.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See related disclosure at "Item 8 - Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements - Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements."