ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis is intended to provide a summary of significant factors relevant to our financial performance and condition. The discussion and analysis should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K. Results for the fiscal year ended May 29, 2022 are not necessarily indicative of results that may be attained in the future.
The following generally discusses fiscal 2022 and 2021 items and fiscal year comparisons between fiscal 2022 and 2021. Discussions of fiscal 2020 items and fiscal year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in “Part II, Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended May 30, 2021, which we filed with the SEC on July 27, 2021.
Overview
Lamb Weston, along with our joint ventures, is a leading global producer, distributor, and marketer of value-added frozen potato products. We, along with our joint ventures, are the number one supplier of value-added frozen potato products in North America. We, along with our joint ventures, are also a leading supplier of value-added frozen potato products internationally, with a strong and growing presence in high-growth emerging markets. We, along with our joint ventures, offer a broad product portfolio to a diverse channel and customer base in over 100 countries. French fries represent the majority of our value-added frozen potato product portfolio.
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and financial condition, which we refer to in this filing as “MD&A,” is provided as a supplement to the consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Form 10-K to help provide an understanding of our financial condition, changes in financial condition and results of our operations. Our MD&A is based on financial data derived from the financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and certain other financial data (including product contribution margin on a consolidated basis, Adjusted earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”), Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures, Adjusted Diluted earnings per share (“EPS”), and Adjusted Net Income) that is prepared using non-GAAP financial measures. Refer to “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for the definitions of product contribution margin, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures, Adjusted Diluted EPS, and Adjusted Net Income, and a reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to gross profit, net income or diluted EPS, as applicable.
Executive Summary
In fiscal 2022, we delivered a solid financial and operating performance in a highly challenging environment that was characterized by severe input and transportation cost inflation, a historically poor potato crop in the Pacific Northwest, and constraints in labor availability and logistics networks. We drove strong net sales growth by executing pricing actions and improving product and customer mix. These actions, along with our supply chain productivity initiatives, served to offset some, but not all, of the cost and operating headwinds that we faced throughout the year. Specifically, compared with the prior year:
● Net sales increased 12% to $4,098.9 million
● Income from operations decreased 6% to $444.4 million
● Net income decreased 37% to $200.9 million and Adjusted Net Income decreased 4% to $304.1 million
● Diluted EPS decreased 36% to $1.38 and Adjusted Diluted EPS decreased 4% to $2.08
● Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures decreased 3% to $725.7 million
● Net cash provided by operating activities declined 24% to $418.1 million
Compared with fiscal 2021, the increase in net sales was primarily driven by higher price/mix and sales volumes. The increase in price/mix reflected the benefit of multiple product pricing actions across each of our business segments to offset input cost inflation, as well as higher prices charged for product delivery. The increase in sales volumes reflected
higher shipments to restaurant and foodservice channels in North America as demand continued to rebound towards pre-pandemic levels. The increase was most pronounced in our Foodservice segment, which has a higher proportion of its sales to on-premise dining establishments, while shipments to our large chain quick service restaurant (“QSR”) and casual dining restaurant customers in the U.S., which are included in our Global segment, also increased. The sales volume increase was partially offset by lower export volumes, which are included in our Global segment, and lower shipments in our Retail segment. Our sales growth was also tempered by widespread industry supply chain constraints that resulted in lower production run-rates and throughput in our production facilities.
Outside of North America, the recovery in frozen potato demand varied and generally lagged U.S. demand. Shipments to customers in China fell as restaurant traffic and consumer demand was negatively affected by government-imposed restrictions geared towards reducing the spread of COVID-19-related variants, while shipments to other key markets in Asia and Oceania were negatively affected by global logistics constraints. In Europe, which is served by our LWM joint venture, sales volumes increased as restaurant traffic continued to improve, although earnings were negatively affected by inflation, production, and transportation challenges.
Gross profit in fiscal 2022 was flat compared to fiscal 2021, as favorable price/mix offset higher manufacturing and distribution costs on a per pound basis, while income from operations declined $30.4 million to $444.4 million as a result of higher selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses.
Compared to fiscal 2021, net income declined $116.9 million to $200.9 million, while Diluted EPS declined $0.78 to $1.38. Most of the declines were due to a $62.7 million (before and after-tax, or $0.43 per share) non-cash impairment charge associated with LWM’s announced intent, in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, to withdraw from its joint venture in Russia in response to the war in Ukraine, as well as a loss of $53.3 million ($40.5 million after-tax or $0.27 per share) associated with a transaction to lower the interest rates and extend the maturities on some outstanding debt (see Liquidity and Capital Resources below).
We generated full-year cash from operations of $418.1 million and cash flow after investing activities of $107.6 million. We ended the year with $525.0 million of cash and cash equivalents and no borrowings on our revolving credit facility. In addition, we returned $289.1 million to our stockholders, including $138.4 million in cash dividends and $150.7 million of share repurchases. In July 2022, we used approximately $42 million to acquire an additional forty percent interest in our joint venture in Argentina, LWAMSA, increasing our total ownership from fifty percent to ninety percent. Following the acquisition, we will consolidate LWAMSA’s results in our consolidated financial statements.
Outlook
In fiscal 2023, we expect price/mix to increase largely due to pricing actions that we began to implement in fiscal 2022 in an effort to mitigate manufacturing and distribution cost inflation. We also expect sales volumes to grow largely due to the expected continuation in the rise of U.S. demand for frozen potato products, although our volume growth may be tempered by production capacity and logistics constraints. In addition, we expect that U.S. restaurant traffic, demand, and volume growth may be increasingly volatile as consumers respond to the current inflationary environment. We expect the rate of recovery of demand in our key international markets will be mixed, and that our international shipments will continue to be tempered by limited shipping container availability and disruptions to ocean freight networks.
During the first half of fiscal 2023, we expect our gross margins will be pressured as compared to normalized seasonal rates as we continue to manage through significant inflation as well as higher raw potato costs on a per pound basis due to the impact of extreme summer heat that negatively affected the yield and quality of potato crops in the Pacific Northwest in the fall of 2021. We also expect our gross margins in the first half of fiscal 2023 will be pressured by ongoing industrywide operational challenges, including labor and commodities shortages, resulting from volatility in the broader supply chain. During the second half of fiscal 2023, we expect our gross margins will improve if the potato crop harvested in fall 2022 is in line with historical averages, we continue to successfully implement our pricing actions to offset input and transportation costs inflation, and we realize a broad easing of labor and logistics pressures that have been constraining our production and shipments. We expect overall SG&A to be higher as a result of increased compensation and benefits expenses and investments to improve our information technology infrastructure over the long-term, including our efforts to design and implement the next phase of a new ERP system.
Results of Operations
We have four reportable segments: Global, Foodservice, Retail, and Other. We report net sales and product contribution margin by segment and on a consolidated basis. Product contribution margin, when presented on a consolidated basis, is a non-GAAP financial measure. Net sales and product contribution margin are the primary measures reported to our chief operating decision maker for purposes of allocating resources to our segments and assessing their performance. Product contribution margin represents net sales less cost of sales and advertising and promotion (“A&P”) expenses. Product contribution margin includes advertising and promotion expenses because those expenses are directly associated with the performance of our segments. For additional information on our reportable segments and product contribution margin, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below and Note 13, Segments, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Form 10-K.
Fiscal Year Ended May 29, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended May 30, 2021
Net Sales and Product Contribution Margin
Net Sales
Lamb Weston’s net sales for fiscal 2022 increased $428.0 million, or 12%, to $4,098.9 million, compared with $3,670.9 million in fiscal 2021. Price/mix increased 9%, primarily reflecting the benefit of pricing actions across each of our business segments to offset input, manufacturing, and transportation cost inflation, as well as favorable mix. Volume increased 3%, reflecting higher shipments to restaurant and foodservice channels in North America, partially offset by lower exports due to limited shipping container availability and disruptions to ocean freight networks, as well as lower shipments to retail channels. Our volume growth was tempered by an inability to fully serve customer demand due to widespread industry supply chain constraints, including labor and commodities shortages, that resulted in lower production run-rates and throughput in our production facilities.
Global net sales increased $152.7 million, or 8%, to $2,064.2 million, compared with $1,911.5 million in fiscal 2021. Price/mix increased 6% and volume increased 2%. The benefit of domestic and international product and freight pricing actions to offset inflation, as well as favorable mix, drove the increase in price/mix. A strong increase in sales volumes to North American large QSR and casual dining restaurant chain customers was partially offset by lower export shipments due to limited shipping container availability and disruptions to ocean freight networks.
Foodservice net sales increased $300.9 million, or 30%, to $1,318.2 million, compared with $1,017.3 million in fiscal 2021. Volume and price/mix each increased 15%. The benefits of product and freight pricing actions taken throughout the year to offset inflation, as well as favorable mix, drove the increase in price/mix. The segment’s strong volume growth reflects the progressive recovery in demand in its restaurant and non-commercial channels, although growth was tempered by an inability to fully serve customer demand due to widespread industry supply chain constraints, including labor shortages, that resulted in lower production run-rates and throughput in our production facilities.
Retail net sales decreased $8.8 million, or 1%, to $594.6 million, compared with $603.4 million in fiscal 2021. Volume declined 8% while price/mix increased 7%. Lower shipments of private label products, resulting from incremental losses of certain low-margin business, as well as lower shipments of branded products, drove the sales volume decline. The decline in branded product volume reflected an inability to fully serve customer demand due to lower production run-rates and throughput in our production facilities. Product and freight pricing actions across the branded and private label portfolios to offset inflation, as well as improved mix, drove the increase in price/mix.
Net sales in our Other segment declined $16.8 million, or 12%, to $121.9 million, compared with $138.7 million in fiscal 2021. The decline primarily reflects lower volume in our vegetable business, reflecting the negative effect of the extreme summer heat on the yield and quality of the vegetable crops, partially offset by the benefit of pricing actions.
Gross Profit and Product Contribution Margin
Gross profit in fiscal 2022 was flat compared to fiscal 2021 at $832.0 million, as the benefits from higher price/mix and volume were offset by the impact of higher manufacturing and distribution costs on a per pound basis. The higher costs per pound primarily reflected double-digit cost inflation from key inputs, including: edible oils; ingredients such as grains and starches used in product coatings; packaging; labor; and higher transportation costs. The increase in costs per pound also reflected higher raw potato costs due to the impact of extreme summer heat that negatively affected the yield and quality of potato crops in the Pacific Northwest in fall 2021, the effects of labor and commodities shortages on production run-rates, as well as lower raw potato utilization rates. The increase in per pound costs was partially offset by securing changes to product specifications, portfolio simplification, and driving supply chain savings behind our Win as 1 productivity program. Gross profit also included a $28.9 million decrease in unrealized mark-to-market adjustments associated with commodity hedging contracts, which includes a $9.5 million loss in the current year, compared with a $19.4 million gain related to these items in the prior year.
Lamb Weston’s overall product contribution margin in fiscal 2022 declined $1.1 million to $813.1 million, compared with $814.2 million in fiscal 2021. The decline was largely due to a $1.1 million increase in A&P expenses as gross profit was flat (as described above).
Global product contribution margin declined $54.0 million, or 18%, to $252.2 million in fiscal 2022. Higher manufacturing and distribution costs per pound more than offset the benefit of favorable price/mix and higher sales volumes. Global segment cost of sales was $1,806.6 million, up 13% compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher manufacturing and distribution costs and higher sales volumes.
Foodservice product contribution margin increased $109.3 million, or 32%, to $449.3 million in fiscal 2022. Favorable price, volume and mix drove the increase, and were partially offset by higher manufacturing and distribution costs per pound. Cost of sales was $863.8 million, up 28% compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher manufacturing and distribution costs and higher sales volumes.
Retail product contribution margin declined $10.8 million, or 9%, to $109.4 million in fiscal 2022. Higher manufacturing and distribution costs per pound and lower sales volumes drove the decline, partially offset by favorable price/mix and a $0.8 million decrease in A&P expenses. Cost of sales was $477.1 million, up 1% compared to fiscal 2021, primarily due to higher manufacturing and distribution costs, partially offset by lower sales volumes.
Other product contribution margin declined $45.6 million to $2.2 million in fiscal 2022, as compared to $47.8 million in fiscal 2021. These amounts include a $10.4 million loss related to unrealized mark-to-market adjustments and realized settlements associated with commodity hedging contracts in fiscal 2022, and a $27.8 million gain related to the
contracts in fiscal 2021. Excluding these mark-to-market adjustments, Other segment product contribution margin declined $7.4 million, largely due to higher manufacturing costs and lower sales volumes in our vegetable business.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
SG&A expenses were $387.6 million, up $30.4 million, or 9%, in fiscal 2022 compared with fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to higher compensation and benefits expense; higher travel, employee relations and in-person meeting expenses; higher information technology infrastructure costs, including expenses related to the planning and design of our new ERP system, and a $3.5 million contribution to the Lamb Weston charitable foundation. The increase in SG&A was partially offset by lower consulting expenses associated with improving our commercial and supply chain operations.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net was $161.0 million in fiscal 2022, an increase of $42.7 million compared with fiscal 2021. The increase reflects a $53.3 million ($40.5 million after-tax) loss on extinguishment of debt associated with the redemption of our previously outstanding senior notes due 2024 and 2026. Excluding this loss, interest expense, net declined $10.6 million, reflecting a lower weighted average interest rate. For more information, see Note 7, Debt and Financing Obligations, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was 26.3% for fiscal 2022, compared to 22.2% in fiscal 2021. The difference between our effective tax rates in fiscal 2022 and 2021 is primarily due to the Russia impairment charge treated as a non-deductible permanent difference. Our effective tax rate varies from the U.S. statutory tax rate of 21% principally due to the impact of U.S. state taxes, foreign taxes, permanent differences, and discrete items, and was elevated in fiscal 2022 relative to our historical rate due to the Russia impairment charge. Excluding the Russia impairment charge, our effective tax rate for fiscal 2022 was 21.4%.
For further information on income taxes, see Note 3, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in this Form 10-K.
Equity Method Investment Earnings (Loss)
We conduct meaningful business through unconsolidated joint ventures and include our share of the earnings (loss) based on our economic ownership interest in them. Lamb Weston’s share of earnings (loss) from its equity method investments was a loss of $10.7 million and earnings of $51.8 million for fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively. Equity method investment earnings in fiscal 2022 included a $62.7 million non-cash impairment charge to write-off our portion of LWM’s net investment in Russia resulting from LWM’s announced intent to withdraw from its joint venture in response to the war in Ukraine. Equity method investment earnings also included a $26.5 million unrealized gain related to mark-to-market adjustments associated with currency and commodity hedging contracts in fiscal 2022 and an $11.3 million gain related to these items in fiscal 2021. The increase in mark-to-market adjustments in 2022 primarily relates to changes in the value of natural gas derivatives at LWM as commodity markets in Europe have experienced significant volatility.
Excluding the charge associated with the write-off of our portion of LWM’s net investment in Russia and the mark-to-market adjustments, earnings from equity method investments decreased $15.0 million compared to the prior year. The decrease reflects input cost inflation and higher manufacturing and distribution costs in both Europe and the U.S., partially offset by the benefit of favorable price/mix and higher sales volumes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We ended fiscal 2022 with $525.0 million of cash and cash equivalents and $994.6 million of availability on our revolving credit facility, which is net of outstanding letters of credit of $5.4 million. We believe we have sufficient liquidity to meet projected capital expenditures, service existing debt and meet working capital requirements for the next 12 months
with current cash balances and cash from operations, supplemented as necessary by available borrowings under our existing revolving credit facility.
Cash Flows
Below is a summary table of our cash flows, followed by a discussion of the sources and uses of cash through operating, investing, and financing activities:
Operating Activities
During fiscal 2022, cash provided by operating activities decreased $135.1 million to $418.1 million, compared to $553.2 million for fiscal 2021. The decrease related to $130.4 million of cash used for unfavorable changes in working capital, and a $4.7 million decrease in net income, adjusted for non-cash income and expenses. Unfavorable changes in working capital primarily related to a decrease in accounts payable due to timing, an increase in receivables attributable to higher sales at the end of fiscal 2022, compared with the end of fiscal 2021, and higher finished goods inventories due to increased input costs and global disruption in freight networks. These unfavorable changes were partially offset by a favorable change in accrued liabilities, which was primarily due to a shift in the timing of accrued interest payments for our senior notes. Specifically, our senior notes due 2030 and 2032, which were issued in fiscal 2022, have payments due in the first quarter of fiscal 2023, whereas the now-redeemed senior notes due 2024 and 2026 had interest payments due in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021. See “Result of Operations” in this MD&A for more information related to the decrease in income from operations.
Investing Activities
Investing activities used $310.5 million of cash in fiscal 2022, compared with $162.5 million in fiscal 2021. The increase primarily relates to our concentrated effort in the prior year to control spending during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic to preserve liquidity. In addition to maintenance capital expenditures, fiscal 2022 also reflected increased investments to support capacity expansion projects in Idaho and China.
We expect capital investments in fiscal 2023 to be approximately $475 million to $525 million, depending on timing of projects, which include among other items: construction of a previously announced french fry production line and plant modernization investments in Idaho, construction of a greenfield french fry processing facility in China, and capital investments to upgrade information systems and ERP infrastructure. These expenditures could increase or decrease as a result of a number of factors, including our financial results, future economic conditions, supply chain constraints for equipment, and our regulatory compliance requirements. At May 29, 2022, we had commitments for capital expenditures of $304.7 million.
In July 2022, we acquired an additional forty percent interest in our Argentina joint venture, LWAMSA, for approximately $42 million, increasing our total ownership of LWAMSA from fifty percent to ninety percent. Following this acquisition, we will consolidate LWAMSA’s results in our consolidated financial statements.
Financing Activities
During fiscal 2022, cash used for financing activities decreased $610.6 million to $363.4 million, compared with $974.0 million used during fiscal 2021. During fiscal 2022, financing activities primarily related to issuing U.S. dollar-denominated senior notes and a RMB-denominated loan facility for combined net proceeds of $1,676.1 million, offset by $1,698.1 million of debt and financing obligation repayments, including cash used to redeem our previously outstanding senior notes due 2024 and 2026 (including the payment of a call premium of $39.6 million), and the payment of $138.4 million of cash dividends to common stockholders. In addition, we used $158.4 million of cash to repurchase 2,407,184 shares of our common stock at an average price of $62.59 and withheld 118,204 shares from employees to cover income and payroll taxes on equity awards that vested during the year. As of May 29, 2022, $268.9 million remained authorized for repurchase under our share repurchase program.
During fiscal 2021, we repaid the $495.0 million we borrowed under our revolving credit facility at the onset of the pandemic, and we repaid $305.5 million of other debt and financing obligations (including the repayment of the $271.9 million term loan facility that was scheduled to mature in November 2021). We also paid $135.3 million in cash dividends to common stockholders. During fiscal 2021, we repurchased 328,918 shares of our common stock at an average price of $78.19 and withheld 164,992 shares of common stock from employees to cover income and payroll taxes on equity awards that vested during the period.
For more information about our debt, including among other items, interest rates, maturity dates, and covenants, see Note 7, Debt and Financing Obligations, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K. At May 29, 2022, we were in compliance with all covenants contained in our credit agreements.
Investments in Joint Ventures
We conduct some of our business through three unconsolidated joint ventures and account for these investments using equity method accounting. For more information about our investments in joint ventures, see Note 4, Equity Method Investments, of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Obligations and Commitments
As part of our ongoing operations, we enter into arrangements that obligate us to make future payments under contracts such as debt agreements, lease agreements, potato supply agreements, and unconditional purchase obligations. The unconditional purchase obligation arrangements are entered into in the normal course of business in order to ensure adequate levels of sourced product are available.
A summary of our material cash requirements for our known contractual obligations as of May 29, 2022 are as follows:
(a) See the below Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K for more information.
● Long-term debt, including current portion. See Note 7, Debt and Financing Obligations, for more information on debt payments and the timing of expected future payments.
● Leases. See Note 8, Leases, for more information on our operating and finance lease obligations and timing of expected future
payments.
● Purchase obligations and capital commitments. See Note 14, Commitments, Contingencies, Guarantees, and Legal Proceedings, for more information on our purchase obligations and the timing of future payments and capital commitments in connection with the expansion and replacement of existing facilities and equipment.
(b) Amounts represent estimated future interest payments assuming our long-term debt is held to maturity and using interest rates in effect as of May 29, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of May 29, 2022 that are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations are based upon the Company’s consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to our trade promotions, income taxes, and impairment, among others. We base our estimates on historical experiences combined with management’s understanding of current facts and circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Critical accounting estimates are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and operating results. These estimates require management’s most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments. We review the development, selection, and disclosure of our critical accounting estimates with the Audit and Finance Committee of our Board of Directors.
We have made appropriate accounting estimates based on the facts and circumstances available as of the reporting date. To the extent there are differences between these estimates and actual results, our consolidated financial statements may be affected.
Sales Incentives and Trade Promotion Allowances
We promote our products with advertising, consumer incentives, and trade promotions. Sales promotions include, but are not limited to, discounts, coupons, rebates, and volume-based incentives. The estimates for sales incentives are based principally on historical sales and redemption rates, influenced by judgments about current market conditions such as competitive activity in specific product categories.
Trade promotion programs include introductory marketing funds such as slotting fees, cooperative marketing programs, temporary price reductions, and other activities conducted by our customers to promote our products. The costs of these programs are recognized as a reduction to revenue with a corresponding accrued liability. The estimate of trade promotions is inherently difficult due to information limitations as the products move beyond distributors and through the supply chain to operators. Estimates made by management in accounting for these costs are based primarily on our historical experience with marketing programs, with consideration given to current circumstances and industry trends and include the following: quantity of customer sales, timing of promotional activities, current and past trade-promotion spending patterns, the interpretation of historical spending trends by customer and category, and forecasted costs for activities within the promotional programs.
The determination of sales incentive and trade promotion costs requires judgment and may change in the future as a result of changes in customer demand for our products, promotion participation, particularly for new programs related to the introduction of new products. Final determination of the total cost of promotion is dependent upon customers
providing information about proof of performance and other information related to the promotional event. Because of the complexity of some of these trade promotions, the ultimate resolution may result in payments that are different from our estimates. As additional information becomes known, we may change our estimates. At May 29, 2022 and May 30, 2021, we had $41.2 million and $39.9 million, respectively, of accrued trade promotions payable recorded in “Accrued liabilities” on our Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Income Taxes
We compute the provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled.
Inherent in determining the annual tax rate are judgments regarding business plans, planning opportunities, and expectations about future outcomes. Management judgments are required for the following items:
● Management reviews deferred tax assets for realizability. Valuation allowances are established when management believes that it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Changes in valuation allowances from period to period are included in the tax provision.
● We establish accruals for unrecognized tax benefits when, despite the belief that our tax return positions are fully supported, we believe that an uncertain tax position does not meet the recognition threshold of Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 740, Income Taxes. These contingency accruals are adjusted in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the progress of tax audits, the expiration of the statute of limitations for the relevant taxing authority to examine a tax return, case law and emerging legislation. While it is difficult to predict the final outcome or timing of resolution for any particular matter, we believe that the accruals for unrecognized tax benefits at May 29, 2022, reflect the estimated outcome of known tax contingencies as of such date in accordance with accounting for uncertainty in income taxes under ASC 740.
● We recognize the tax impact of including certain foreign earnings in U.S. taxable income as a period cost. We have not recognized deferred income taxes for local country income and withholding taxes that could be incurred on distributions of certain non-U.S. earnings or for outside basis differences in our subsidiaries, because we plan to indefinitely reinvest such earnings and basis differences. Remittances of non-U.S. earnings are based on estimates and judgments of projected cash flow needs, as well as the working capital and investment requirements of our non-U.S. and U.S. operations. Material changes in our estimates of cash, working capital, and investment needs in various jurisdictions could require repatriation of indefinitely reinvested non-U.S. earnings, which could be subject to applicable non-U.S. income and withholding taxes. While we believe the judgments and estimates discussed above and made by management are appropriate and reasonable under the circumstances, actual resolution of these matters may differ from recorded estimated amounts. Further information on income taxes is provided in Note 3, Income Taxes, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Equity Method Investments
Long lived assets. Our manufacturing assets are shared across all reporting segments, which are grouped together for long-lived asset impairment assessment. We review these long-lived assets for impairment upon the occurrence of events or changes in circumstances which indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be fully recoverable, measured by comparing their net book value to the undiscounted projected future cash flows generated by their use. Impaired assets are recorded at their estimated fair value.
In evaluating impairment of long-lived assets, we consider events or changes in circumstances related to market prices, physical condition of assets, legal actions, construction costs, future operating cash flows, remaining depreciable
lives, and potential asset disposal. At May 29, 2022 and May 30, 2021, we did not identify any triggering events that would indicate that the carrying amounts of our assets groups may not be recoverable.
Equity method investments. We conduct some of our business through unconsolidated joint ventures and include our share of the earnings based on our economic ownership interest in them. At May 29, 2022 and May 30, 2021, we held 50% equity interests in three potato processing joint ventures, including LWM, Lamb Weston RDO, and LWAMSA. These investments are accounted for under the equity method of accounting. We are required to assess our equity method investments for other-than-temporary impairment when events or circumstances suggest the carrying amount of the investment may be impaired. We perform our assessment of other-than-temporary impairment for each investment individually.
In evaluating other-than-temporary impairment of equity method investments, we consider events or changes in circumstances related to investee operating losses, investee future cash flows, and the ability to retain our investment in the investee. In May 2022, in response to the war in Ukraine, LWM announced its intent to withdraw from its investment in Russia and recorded a charge to write-off its net investment in the market. Our portion of the non-cash impairment charge was $62.7 million. There were no indications of other-than-temporary impairment in any of our other equity method investments.
New and Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a listing of new and recently issued accounting standards, see Note 1, Nature of Operations and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Form 10-K.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement the financial information included in this report, we have presented product contribution margin on a consolidated basis, Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures, Adjusted Diluted EPS, and Adjusted Net Income, each of which is considered a non-GAAP financial measure.
Product contribution margin is one of the primary measures reported to our chief operating decision maker for purposes of allocating resources to our segments and assessing their performance. Product contribution margin represents net sales less cost of sales and advertising and promotion expenses. Product contribution margin includes advertising and promotion expenses because those expenses are directly associated with the performance of our segments. Our management also uses Adjusted EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures, Adjusted Diluted EPS, and Adjusted Net Income, to evaluate our performance excluding the impact of certain non-cash charges and other special items in order to have comparable financial results to analyze changes in our underlying business between reporting periods. We include these non-GAAP financial measures because management believes they are useful to investors in that they provide for greater transparency with respect to supplemental information used by management in its financial and operational decision making. We believe that the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures, when used in conjunction with GAAP financial measures, is a useful financial analysis tool that can assist investors in assessing our operating performance and underlying prospects. These non-GAAP financial measures should be viewed in addition to, and not as alternatives for, GAAP financial measures. These non-GAAP financial measures may differ from similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures presented by other companies, and other companies may not define these non-GAAP financial measures the same way. These measures are not a substitute for their comparable GAAP financial measures, such as gross profit, net income or diluted earnings per share, as applicable, and there are limitations to using non-GAAP financial measures.
See “Results of Operations - Fiscal Year Ended May 29, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended May 30, 2021 - Net Sales and Product Contribution Margin” above for a reconciliation of product contribution margin on a consolidated basis to gross profit.
The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures.
(a) In May 2022, LWM announced its intent to withdraw from its investment in Russia and wrote-off its net investment. Our portion of the non-cash impairment charge was $62.7 million.
The following table reconciles net income to Adjusted Net Income, and diluted EPS to Adjusted Diluted EPS:
(a) Diluted weighted average common shares were 145.9 million and 147.1 million in fiscal 2022 and 2021, respectively.
(b) See footnote (a) to the reconciliation of net income to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA including unconsolidated joint ventures above for a discussion of the item impacting comparability.
(c) The fiscal year ended May 29, 2022, includes a loss on the extinguishment of debt of $53.3 million ($40.5 million after-tax), which consists of a call premium of $39.6 million related to the redemption of our senior notes due 2024 and 2026 and the write-off of $13.7 million of debt issuance costs associated with those notes.