Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
LegalZoom is a leading online platform for legal and compliance solutions in the United States, or U.S. Our core offerings include business formations, intellectual property and estate planning services, and we have recently expanded our platform to include professional expertise and other products, both legal and non-legal, to better meet the needs of small businesses. Our unique position at business inception allows us to become a trusted business advisor, supporting the evolving needs of a new business throughout its lifecycle. Along with formations, our services include ongoing compliance and tax advice and filings, trademark filings, and estate plans. Additionally, we have unique insights into our customers and leverage our product as a channel to introduce small businesses to leading brands in our partner ecosystem, solving even more of their business needs. We operate across all 50 states and over 3,000 counties in the U.S. and have more than 20 years of experience navigating complex regulation and simplifying the legal and compliance process for our customers.
Initial Public Offering
The registration statement related to our IPO was declared effective on June 29, 2021, and our common stock began trading on the Nasdaq Global Select Market on June 30, 2021. On July 2, 2021, we completed our IPO for the sale of 19,121,000 shares of our common stock, $0.001 par value per share at an offering price of $28.00 per share, for proceeds of $505.9 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions pursuant to our Prospectus. In addition, we sold 2,868,150 shares of our common stock for net proceeds of $75.9 million pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriter’s option to purchase additional shares in connection with the IPO. In addition, on July 2, 2021, we sold 3,214,285 shares of our common stock in a private placement with an existing related party stockholder for proceeds of $85.0 million, net of underwriting discounts and commissions. We raised aggregate proceeds of $666.9 million from our IPO and private placement after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions. We incurred stock issuance costs of $5.6 million. Proceeds raised from our IPO were used to repay the full outstanding balance of $521.6 million on our 2018 Term Loan.
Upon the completion of our IPO, 23,081,080 outstanding shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock with a carrying value of $70.9 million converted into an aggregate of 46,162,160 shares of common stock. Following the completion of the IPO, we have one class of authorized and outstanding common stock. Immediately upon the completion of our IPO, we filed an Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation, which authorized a total of 1,000,000,000 shares of common stock, $0.001 par value per share and 100,000,000 shares of preferred stock, par value $0.001 per share.
Our Business Model and Growth Strategy
Our business model is to acquire customers at the time of business formation and then continue to serve their legal, compliance and tax solutions needs over the life of their businesses with our mix of transaction, subscription, and partner offerings. Transaction products include legal documents, business filings, and related services for small business owners and their families, such as business formations, annual compliance filings, intellectual property, estate planning documents, forms, and agreements. Subscription products include compliance solutions and credentialed professional subscription services, including legal and tax advisory services as well as additional owned services such as virtual mail. We also introduce our customers to a variety of third-party partners, giving them access to critical services they need to start and run their businesses, such as business license services, bookkeeping services, banking services, productivity tools, and business insurance, among others.
Our strategy is to scale our existing business and gain market share by investing in core products and sales and marketing; expand our addressable market, attract additional customers and increase conversion through the introduction of more competitively priced products and services; integrate our independent attorney network and tax professionals into our core product set; and grow average revenue per subscription unit, or ARPU, and partnership revenue through building in-house adjacencies and expanding our partner ecosystem to provide new recurring revenue streams.
Key Business Metrics
In addition to the measures presented in our consolidated financial statements, we regularly monitor the following financial and operating metrics to evaluate the growth of our business, measure the effectiveness of our marketing efforts, identify trends, formulate financial forecasts and make strategic decisions.
Number of business formations
We define the number of business formations in a given period as the number of global LLC, incorporation, not-for-profit and other formation orders placed on our platform in such period. We consider the number of business formations to be an important metric considering that it is typically the first product or service small business customers purchase on our platform, creating the foundation for additional products and subsequent subscription and partner revenue as they adopt additional products and services throughout their business lifecycles.
The below table sets forth the number of business formations for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
We experienced an 18% increase from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021 and a 29% increase from the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. The increase in the number of business formations on our platform during the year ended December 31, 2021, reflected year-over-year growth in overall U.S. business formations in 2021 as well as the increase in business generated from our higher sales and marketing investments.
Number of transactions
We define the number of transactions in a given period as gross transaction order volume, prior to refunds, on our platform during such period, excluding transactions from our subsidiary, Beaumont ABS Limited, or Beaumont, which was divested in April 2020. Transactions may include one or more services purchased at the same time. For example, a customer of our business formation services may choose to form an LLC and purchase an operating agreement and business licenses at the same time. This constitutes a single transaction. Refunds, or partial refunds, may be issued under certain circumstances pursuant to the terms of our customer satisfaction guarantee. We consider the number of transactions to be an important metric considering that our customers generally begin their LegalZoom journey with a transaction, creating the foundation for generating subsequent subscription and partner revenue.
The below table sets forth the number of transactions for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
We experienced a 10% increase from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021 and a 29% increase from the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the number of transactions during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from year-over-year growth in overall U.S. business formations in 2021. Our estate planning and other consumer transactions declined as a percentage of total transactions in the year ended December 31, 2021, and we expect the proportion of consumer transactions to continue to decrease over time as we focus more of our investment in small business formations, which have a significantly higher average order value. Estate planning transactions benefited from tailwinds driven by the COVID-19 pandemic in the year ended December 31, 2020 as individuals turned to our online services given the relative inaccessibility of offline alternatives. We expect to continue to grow transactions; however, the growth may fluctuate period-over-period based on the variability of overall business formations and estate planning transactions.
Average order value
We define average order value for a given period as total transaction revenue divided by total number of transactions in such period, excluding revenue and related transactions from our Beaumont subsidiary. We consider average order value to be an important metric given it indicates how much customers are spending on our platform per transaction. Estate planning transactions are generally at a lower price point, making our overall average order value lower than our typical price point for small business formations.
The below table sets forth the average order value for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Average order value increased by 12% from the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2021 and increased by 3% from the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively. Growth in average order value for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in the proportion of business formations and other small business transactions, which have a significantly higher order value compared to other transactions relative to total transactions, the timing of transaction revenue recognition and increased customer adoption of our attorney-led trademark product. Transaction revenue recognized in the year ended December 31, 2020 was negatively impacted by capacity constraints related to the COVID-19 pandemic, including delays at various secretaries of state, which pushed fulfillment of some transaction orders placed during the year to the year ended December 31, 2021. We further increased fulfillment rates, and therefore our recognized revenue, in the year ended December 31, 2021 by increasing automation and expanding production capacity to improve our customer experience. Growth may fluctuate period-over-period based on the mix of business formations relative to estate planning transactions, the timing of transaction revenue recognition, and our ability to introduce and sell new products. We expect year-over-year growth in average order value to moderate in 2022 as we introduce more competitively priced products to complement our suite of premium-priced expert-assisted solutions. In doing so, we may determine to make certain of our service offerings available at a low cost or without charge to attract and convert additional customers.
Number of subscription units
We define the number of subscription units in a given period as the paid subscriptions that remain active at the end of such period, including those that are not yet 60 days past their subscription order dates, excluding subscriptions from our employer group legal plan and small business concierge subscription service, for which we ceased acquiring new subscribers in October 2020. Refunds, or partial refunds, may be issued under certain circumstances pursuant to the terms of our customer satisfaction guarantee.
We consider the number of subscription units to be an important metric since subscriptions enable us to increase lifetime value through deeper, longer-term relationships with customers. Subscriptions typically range from 30 days to one year in duration and the vast majority of our new subscriptions originate from business formation orders and have an annual term. Our customers can have multiple subscriptions at the end of a period. For example, a popular combination for a new small business owner is attorney advice and registered agent subscriptions. Our registered agent offering comprised approximately 65% of our subscription units for the year ended December 31, 2021, 64% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 63% for the year ended December 31, 2019.
The below table sets forth the number of subscription units as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
We achieved 22% growth in our number of subscription units from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, reflecting strong growth from our registered agent, compliance, and tax advisory subscriptions primarily due to the year-over-year growth in business formations. The number of subscription units as of December 31, 2020 increased 18% from 921,000 units as of December 31, 2019. We aim to continue to grow subscription units by increasing the proportion of our small business customers that purchase a subscription service at the time of their initial formation purchase and by improving retention rates.
Average revenue per subscription unit
We define ARPU as of a given date as subscription revenue for the 12-month period ended on such date, or LTM, divided by the average number of subscription units at the beginning and end of the LTM period, excluding revenue and subscriptions from our employer group legal plan and small business concierge subscription service, for which we ceased acquiring new subscribers in October 2020. We consider ARPU to be an important metric because it helps to illustrate our ability to deepen our relationship with our existing customers as they purchase incremental and higher-value services. We have expanded ARPU in recent periods, and for the year ended December 31, 2021, ARPU increased 6% from the same period in 2020.
The below table sets forth ARPU as of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
The increase in ARPU in the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a shift in the mix of subscription units resulting from continued growth of our registered agent service and, to a lesser extent, our tax advisory business and subscriptions acquired through our purchase of Earth Class Mail, Inc., or Earth Class Mail. We expect ARPU to increase over time as these businesses, which carry higher average price points than our other subscription products, comprise a greater share of total subscription units.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our future performance will depend on many factors, including the following:
•Our share of business formations. The majority of our transaction revenue is generated by providing formation services to guide our customers through the transition from being aspiring business owners to actually launching their entities. We offer entity formation services for LLCs, corporations and non-profits. In the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, business formations represented the largest share of our total transaction orders. In addition, business formations act as an entrance point for many customers to the LegalZoom ecosystem, where they then often purchase additional products and services. Our business depends on the continuation of new business formations in the U.S., which may be seasonal in nature and dependent on macroeconomic factors, and even more so, on our ability to increase our share of these formations.
•Product leadership. We have invested significantly in our user experience, which we believe is critical to attracting and converting customers and improving retention. These investments consist mainly of creating educational content, improving our website and application user interface, and creating and offering additional products and services, including the growing use of experts in the customer journey. The performance of our product is important to attracting new customers to our platform, maintaining a healthy subscriber base and retaining our customers.
•Ability to enhance customer lifetime value. Many of our subscribers have increased their cumulative spend with us over time as they have expanded their use of our platform to include additional products and subscription services. Our relationship with our small business customers typically starts with the formation of their business and deepens as their businesses grow and their needs become more complex. By continuing to develop new products and subscription services such as tax advice and preparation to address such needs, we expect to see higher customer engagement and retention, which in turn would further increase our customer lifetime value. Additionally, we offer third-party services via our partner ecosystem, and we expect to be able to generate incremental revenue via these offerings.
•Investment in marketing. We have invested, and expect that we will continue to invest, in our brand and the promotion of our services through our various customer acquisition channels, including search engine marketing, search engine optimization, television, digital video, social, radio, and our inside sales team to acquire new customers and grow our business. We frequently evaluate how we price, market, and sell transaction products in order to optimize our subscription business. Given our customer acquisition efficiency, we intend to increase our marketing spend over the medium term.
•Investment in tax offerings. Tax represents a natural adjacency in our mission to make legal and compliance services accessible to small businesses. Based on customer surveys, we estimate that approximately 70% of small business owners that sought a tax accountant did not have one at the time of their entity formation but face tax implications as a result of the entity they choose. To address this customer need, we have invested in launching our Tax Advisory offering. We incurred costs related to this investment in 2020 and 2021 and anticipate continued investment throughout 2022, as we believe that our tax offerings represent an attractive opportunity for incremental revenue growth.
•Talent acquisition and retention. We are focused on providing a quality employee experience as we believe the future success of our business is heavily dependent on our ability to attract and retain talented and highly productive employees, including software engineers, product designers, brand and performance marketers, and customer-facing positions. We compete for talent within the technology industry and believe that our strong brand recognition and greater company purpose are important, positive considerations in our ability to recruit talent. We also are scaling an in-house team of certified public accountants (CPAs) and enrolled agents that are critical to our tax offerings.
•COVID-19 impact. The ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on consumer spending patterns, the success of existing small businesses and the formation of new small businesses, as well as the impact of attempts to reopen the offline economy and lessening of restrictions on movement and travel, remains uncertain. For example, beginning in the second quarter of 2020, we saw tailwinds driven by the COVID-19 pandemic as individuals and small businesses turned to online services given the relative inaccessibility of offline alternatives and due to the availability of government stimulus checks. These tailwinds subsided in the back half of 2021 due to the easing of government stimulus supporting individuals and small businesses impacted by the pandemic. While we believe these shifts reflect, in part, an acceleration of existing secular trends toward greater adoption of online services, our growth rate may moderate if these trends moderate or reverse over time.
Key Components of our Results of Operations
Revenue
We generate revenue from the sources identified below.
Transaction revenue. Transaction revenue is primarily generated from our customized legal document services upon fulfillment of these services. Transaction revenue includes filing fees and is net of cancellations, promotional discounts, sales allowances and credit reserves. Until April 2020, when we ceased providing such services, we also generated transaction revenue from our residential and commercial conveyancing business in the United Kingdom, or U.K., and revenue for these services was recognized when delivered to the customer. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we commenced providing tax preparation services in the U.S. which are recognized at the point in time when the customer’s tax return is filed and accepted by the applicable government authority.
Subscription revenue. Subscription revenue is generated primarily from subscriptions to our registered agent services, compliance packages, attorney advice, legal forms services, tax advisory services, and virtual mail services in addition to software-as-a-service, or SaaS, subscriptions in the U.K. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we commenced providing tax, bookkeeping and payroll subscription services. We generally recognize revenue from our subscriptions ratably over the subscription term. Subscription terms generally range from thirty days to one year. Subscription revenue includes the value allocated to bundled free trials for our subscription services and is net of promotional discounts, cancellations, sales allowances and credit reserves and payments to third-party service providers such as legal plan law firms and tax service providers.
For transaction and subscription revenue, we generally collect payments and fees at the time orders are placed and prior to services being rendered. We record amounts collected for services that have not been performed as deferred revenue on our consolidated balance sheet. The transaction price that we record is generally based on the contractual amounts and is reduced for estimated sales allowances for price concessions, charge-backs, sales credits and refunds, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize.
Partner revenue. Partner revenue consists primarily of one-time or recurring fees earned from third-party providers from leads generated to such providers through our online legal platform. Revenue is recognized when the related performance-based criteria have been met. We assess whether performance criteria have been met on a cost-per-click or cost-per-action basis. In the near term, we expect lower performance in partner revenue as we transition away from legacy partners that do not align with our new strategic direction and focus more on long-term opportunities to have strategic partnerships that build on recurring revenue models.
See the section titled “-Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates-Revenue Recognition” for a description of the accounting policies related to revenue recognition, including arrangements that contain multiple deliverables.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue includes all costs of providing and fulfilling our services. Cost of revenue primarily includes government filing fees; costs of fulfillment, customer care and credentialed professionals, and related benefits, including stock-based compensation; and costs of independent contractors for document preparation; telecommunications and data center costs, amortization of acquired developed technology; depreciation and amortization of network computers, equipment and internal-use software; printing, shipping and handling charges; credit and debit card fees; allocated overhead; legal document kit expenses; and sales and use taxes. We defer direct and incremental costs primarily related to government filing fees incurred prior to the associated service meeting the criteria for revenue recognition. These contract assets are recognized as cost of revenue in the same period the related revenue is recognized.
We expect our cost of revenue to increase in absolute dollars as we continue to invest in enhancing our customer experience and in new product development, including expert-assisted offerings for our tax and attorney assisted legal offerings.
Gross profit and gross margin
Gross profit, or revenue less cost of revenue, and gross margin, or gross profit as a percentage of revenue, have been and will continue to be affected by various factors, primarily the mix between transaction, subscription and partner revenue. Our gross margin on subscription and partner revenue is higher than our gross margin on transaction revenue. Our long term gross margin expansion is also expected to be driven by automation improvements and digitization efforts. Further, our acquisitions of other companies have negatively impacted our gross margin in the short term, and any such future acquisitions could have a similar effect.
In the short term, we expect our gross profit to increase in absolute dollars but our gross margin to be impacted by our continued investment in scaling our tax advisory business, which has lower gross margins than other products in our portfolio. However, we expect our gross margin to increase modestly over the longer term as we continue to focus on growing higher-margin subscription revenue and invest in fulfillment automation technologies. However, our gross margin could fluctuate from period to period due to fulfillment rates and seasonality.
Operating expenses
Our operating expenses consist primarily of sales and marketing, technology and development, general and administrative expenses, and to a lesser extent, impairments of goodwill, long-lived assets and other assets, in addition to a loss on sale of a business in 2020.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of customer acquisition media costs; compensation and related benefits, including stock-based compensation for marketing and sales personnel; media production; public relations and other promotional activities; general business development activities; an allocation of depreciation and amortization and allocated overhead. Customer acquisition media costs consist primarily of search engine marketing, television and radio costs. Marketing and advertising costs to promote our services are expensed in the period incurred. Media production costs are expensed the first time the advertisement is aired.
We intend to continue to make significant investments in sales and marketing to drive additional revenue, further penetrate our expanding addressable market, and build on our digital brand leadership and awareness. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing expenses to continue to increase and to be our largest operating expense category for the foreseeable future.
Technology and development
Technology and development expenses consist primarily of personnel costs and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, expenses for outside consultants, an allocation of depreciation and amortization and allocated overhead. These expenses include costs incurred in the development and implementation of our websites, mobile applications, online legal platform, research and development and related infrastructure. Technology and development expenses are expensed as incurred, except to the extent that such costs are associated with internal-use software costs that qualify for capitalization.
We expect our technology and development expenses to continue to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future as we invest in new products and services and in production automation technologies to enhance our customer experience. We expect our technology and development expenses to remain relatively consistent or increase as a percentage of our revenue over the long term, although our technology and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period-to-period due to seasonality and the timing and extent of these expenses.
General and administrative
Our general and administrative expenses relate primarily to compensation and related benefits, including stock-based compensation, for executive and corporate personnel, professional and consulting fees, an allocation of depreciation and amortization, allocated overhead and legal costs. We expense legal costs for defending legal proceedings as incurred.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars for the foreseeable future due to additional costs associated with accounting, compliance, insurance and investor relations as we have recently become a public company. Over the next three years, we will incur significant stock-based compensation expense as a result of certain modifications to equity awards that occurred in connection with our IPO; however, we expect our general and administrative expenses to decrease as a percentage of our revenue over the longer term, although our general and administrative expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of our revenue from period-to-period due to seasonality and the timing and extent of these expenses.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net, consists primarily of interest expense on our 2018 Credit Facility, hedging instruments, capital lease obligations and amortization of debt issuance costs. Interest expense, net, decreased in 2020 primarily due to a decrease in London Interbank Offered Rate, or LIBOR, on our 2018 Term Loan.
We expect interest expense, net, to decrease significantly in the near term as a result of the full repayment of our outstanding indebtedness under our 2018 Term Loan in July 2021 after the completion of our IPO and the extinguishment of hedging instruments.
Income taxes
Our provision for income taxes consists of current and deferred federal, state and foreign income taxes.
At December 31, 2021, we had federal net operating loss, or NOL, carryforwards of $29.8 million, which will begin to expire in 2031. At December 31, 2021, we had state NOL carryforwards of $49.8 million, which will begin to expire in 2022 and we had foreign NOL carryforwards of $32.4 million, which can be carried forward indefinitely and are not subject to expiration. In general, under Sections 382 and 383 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or the Code, if a corporation undergoes an “ownership change,” generally defined as a greater than 50% change, by value, in its equity ownership by certain stockholders over a three-year period, the corporation’s ability to use its pre-change NOLs and other pre-change tax attributes, such as research tax credits, to offset its post-change income or taxes may be limited.
We had an ownership change in prior years, and as a result certain federal and state NOLs were limited pursuant to Section 382 of the Code. This limitation has been accounted for in calculating our available NOL carryforwards. We may experience an ownership change in the future or subsequent changes in our stock ownership, some of which changes are outside our control. If we undergo another ownership change, such potential ownership changes may affect our ability to utilize our deferred tax assets. In addition, at the state level, there may be periods during which the use of NOLs is suspended or otherwise limited, which could accelerate or increase our state taxes we owe.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statement of operations data for each of the periods indicated. The period-to-period comparison of financial results should not be considered as a prediction or indicative of our future results.
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
Stock-based compensation expense increased significantly for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the modification of certain equity awards in connection with our IPO. Refer to Note 14 of our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)Includes depreciation and amortization expense for our property and equipment, including capitalized internal-use software and intangible assets as follows:
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $104.4 million, or 22%, to $575.1 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in subscription revenue and transaction revenue. Subscription revenue was 50% and 49% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and transaction revenue was 45% of total revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Subscription revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $59.1 million, or 26%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a 22% increase in the number of subscription units and a 6% improvement in ARPU. The increase in subscription units was primarily driven by increased business formations and improved retention. Strong performance from our registered agent subscription services drove the largest contribution of growth in the number of subscription units. The increase in ARPU was primarily due to a shift in the mix of subscription units resulting from continued growth of our registered agent service and, to a lesser extent, our tax advisory business and subscriptions acquired through our purchase of Earth Class Mail.
Transaction revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $46.0 million, or 22%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, driven by a 10% increase in the number of transactions and a 12% improvement in average order value.
Partner revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased $0.7 million, or 2%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease resulted from our transition away from certain legacy partner relationships that no longer align with our strategic direction.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $34.8 million, or 23%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher filing fees, fulfillment costs, and other variable cost of revenue related to the increased transaction volumes and increased production capacity to improve our customer experience.
Gross profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $69.6 million, or 22%. The increase was driven by increased revenue partially offset by higher filing fees, fulfillment costs, and other variable cost of revenue.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $107.9 million, or 63%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in customer acquisition marketing spend of $76.2 million, an increase in stock-based compensation of $14.6 million, mainly in connection with our IPO, increased payroll and related costs in our sales organization of $10.2 million due to increased headcount to support higher revenue, and an increase in media production spend of $3.9 million. Customer acquisition marketing spend was $195.4 million and $119.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively, as we invested to expand our customer base and build our digital brand leadership and awareness.
Technology and development
Technology and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $42.1 million, or 101%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation of $36.1 million, mainly in connection with our IPO, and an increase in payroll and related benefits of $4.2 million, mainly due to increased headcount as we added staff to support our investment in new products and services.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased $55.6 million, or 109%, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a $46.8 million increase in stock-based compensation, mainly in connection with our IPO, an increase in professional service costs of $6.4 million due in part to the acquisition of Earth Class Mail, recruiting costs for new hires, as well as accounting, legal, compliance and insurance costs associated with becoming a public company, and a $5.4 million increase in payroll and related benefits, mainly due to increased headcount. These increases were partially offset by a $2.4 million reduction in restructuring costs incurred in the prior year related to the reduction in headcount of our U.S. workforce.
Impairment of long-lived and other assets
In 2021 and 2020, we recorded non-cash charges related to the impairment of internal-use software projects that were no longer aligned with our go-forward strategy.
Loss on sale of business
In April 2020, in connection with our sale of our Beaumont subsidiary, we incurred a loss of $1.8 million. No comparable losses were incurred in 2021.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net, decreased by $7.5 million to $28.0 million for the year ended 2021. The decrease was primarily due to the repayment of the 2018 Term Loan in July 2021.
Other income, net
The change in other income, net between 2021 and 2020 was primarily due to changes in foreign currency movements related to our intercompany loans which were denominated in British Pound Sterling, or GBP.
Loss on debt extinguishment
Loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $7.7 million due to the write down of unamortized debt issuance costs associated with the full repayment of our 2018 Term Loan in July 2021.
Impairment of available-for-sale debt securities
In 2020, we fully impaired our investment in firma.de Firmenbaukasten AG, a German limited liability company. We incurred a loss of $4.8 million as the present value of cash flows expected to be collected was less than the amortized cost basis of the investment.
(Benefit from) provision for income taxes
The benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from a $13.4 million favorable change in our income taxes as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily due to the tax impact from the decrease in our U.S. income in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 as well as the increased benefits from the exercise of non-qualified stock options and settlements of restricted stock units, or RSUs, in 2021 as compared to 2020.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2019 and 2020
Revenue
Total revenue increased $62.3 million, or 15.2%, to $470.6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by increases in transaction revenue and subscription revenue. Transaction revenue was 41.2% and 45.1% of total
revenue in 2019 and 2020, respectively, and subscription revenue was 50.6% and 48.8% of total revenue in 2019 and 2020, respectively.
Transaction revenue increased $43.8 million, or 26.0%, to $212.1 million in 2020 driven by a 29.1% increase in the number of transactions.
Subscription revenue increased $23.4 million, or 11.3%, to $229.8 million in 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a 17.8% increase in the number of subscription units coupled with a 0.9% increase in ARPU. Strong performance from our registered agent subscription services drove the largest contribution of growth to both the number of subscription units and ARPU.
Partner revenue decreased $4.9 million, or 14.7%, to $28.7 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to cessation of certain partnership arrangements that were not aligned with our go-forward strategy.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue increased $17.6 million, or 12.9%, to $154.6 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher filing fees and costs associated with customer care as a result of the increase in transaction volume.
Gross profit
Gross profit for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased $44.6 million, or 16%. The increase was driven by increased revenue partially offset by higher filing fees and costs associated with customer care as a result of the increase in transaction volume.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $55.5 million, or 47.9%, to $171.4 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to our strategy to increase customer acquisition marketing costs by $52.0 million, predominantly in the search engine marketing channel, as we invested to expand our customer base and build on our digital brand leadership and awareness. We increased our customer acquisition marketing costs beginning in the second quarter of 2020 in anticipation of growing demand. Customer acquisition marketing spend was $119.2 million and $67.2 million for 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Technology and development
Technology and development expenses increased $4.7 million, or 12.5%, to $41.9 million in 2020. The increase was primarily due to lower capitalization of personnel costs for internal-use software development.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses decreased $6.7 million, or 11.7%, to $51.0 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower business strategy consulting and outside legal expenses coupled with lower travel and entertainment spend due to the impact of COVID-19 in 2020.
Impairment of goodwill, long-lived and other assets
In 2019, we recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $10.6 million related to our U.K. reporting unit. In 2020 and 2019, we impaired $1.1 million and $3.7 million, respectively, related to internal-use software projects that were no longer considered part of our strategic business plans.
Loss on sale of business
In April 2020, in connection with our sale of our Beaumont subsidiary, we incurred a loss of $1.8 million. No comparable losses were incurred in 2019.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net, decreased by $3.1 million to $35.5 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily a result of a decrease in LIBOR on our 2018 Term Loan partially offset by costs related to our interest rate swaps and amortization of debt issuance costs.
Other income, net
The change in other income, net between 2019 and 2020 was primarily due to a gain from the change in the fair value of our financial guarantee of $1.8 million, partially offset by changes in foreign currency movements related to our intercompany loans which are denominated in GBP.
Impairment of available-for-sale debt securities
In 2020, we fully impaired our investment in Firma.de Firmenbaukasten AG, a German limited liability company, and we incurred a loss of $4.8 million as the present value of cash flows expected to be collected was less than the amortized cost basis of the investment. No comparable losses were incurred in 2019.
Provision for income taxes
Provision for income taxes decreased $0.7 million, or 23.2%, to $2.4 million in 2020. The decrease was primarily due to increased benefits from the exercise of non-qualified stock options in 2020 compared to 2019, increased interest deductions under Section 163(j) due to the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, and reduced nondeductible expenses in 2020 compared to 2019.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Since inception, we have funded our operations and capital expenditures primarily from private sales of equity securities, cash flows provided by operating activities and equity and debt financing arrangements, including the proceeds of our IPO. Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are to finance working capital, capital expenditures and general corporate purposes. At December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $239.3 million, which consisted of cash on deposit with banks and money market funds, of which $1.0 million related to our foreign subsidiaries. Our cash and cash equivalents increased by $124.8 million from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, primarily from raising $666.9 million from our IPO, net of underwriting discounts and commissions, and after repayment in full of the outstanding principal from our 2018 Term Loan in July 2021 of $521.6 million, the acquisition of Earth Class Mail in November 2021 for $61.5 million, and the lapse of restrictions on $25.0 million in a cash equivalent upon the release of collateral related to a personal loan by a former executive in June 2021.
We currently anticipate that our available cash, cash equivalents and cash provided by operating activities will be sufficient to meet our operational cash needs for at least the next twelve months. We have the ability to supplement our liquidity needs with borrowings under our Amended and Restated Credit and Guaranty Agreement, or 2021 Revolving Facility,.
We have historically considered the undistributed earnings of our foreign subsidiaries to be indefinitely reinvested, and accordingly no taxes have been provided on such earnings. We continue to evaluate our plans for reinvestment or repatriation of unremitting foreign earnings and have not changed our previous indefinite reinvestment determination following the enactment of the Tax Act. We have not repatriated funds to the U.S. to satisfy domestic liquidity needs, nor do we anticipate the need to do so. If we determine that all or a portion of our foreign earnings are no longer indefinitely reinvested, we may be subject to foreign withholding taxes and U.S. state income taxes.
Borrowings
2021 Revolving Facility
On July 2, 2021, we entered into our 2021 Revolving Facility with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as the administrative agent. This agreement amends and restates our first lien credit and guarantee agreement with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A, or 2018 Credit Facility, and permits revolving borrowings of up to $150.0 million. The 2021 Revolving Facility provides for the issuance of up to $20.0 million of letters of credit as well as borrowings on same-day notice, referred to as swingline loans, in an amount of up to $10.0 million. We have $150.0 million available for use under our 2021 Revolving Facility.
Subject to the satisfaction of certain criteria, we will be able to increase the facility by an amount equal to the sum of (i) the greater of $90.0 million and 75% of consolidated last twelve months Cash EBITDA, which is defined in
the 2018 Credit Facility, or LTM Cash EBITDA, plus (ii) unused amounts under the general debt basket (i.e., an amount equal to the greater of $50.0 million and an equivalent percentage of consolidated LTM Cash EBITDA), plus (iii) an unlimited amount so long as the borrower is in pro forma compliance with the Financial Covenant (as defined below), in each case, with the consent of the lenders participating in the increase.
We are required to pay a commitment fee in respect of unutilized commitments under the 2021 Revolving Facility. The commitment fee is, initially, 0.35% per annum. The commitment fee is subject to one reduction of 0.10% if the total net first lien leverage ratio does not exceed 3.50 to 1.00. We are also required to pay customary letter of credit fees and agency fees. The interest rate applicable to the 2021 Revolving Facility is, at our option, at a rate equal to the greatest of (i) the administrative agent’s prime rate; (ii) the federal funds effective rate plus 1/2 of 1.0% and (iii) one month LIBOR (subject to a 1.00% floor), plus 1.00% or LIBOR (subject to a 0.00% floor) plus 2.00%. The interest rate margins under the 2021 Revolving Facility are subject to one reduction of 0.25% and a further reduction of 0.25% if the total net first lien leverage ratio does not exceed 3.50 to 1.00 and 2.50 to 1.00, respectively.
We have the option to voluntarily repay outstanding loans at any time without premium or penalty, other than customary “breakage” costs with respect to LIBOR loans. There is no scheduled amortization under the 2021 Revolving Facility. The principal amount outstanding is due and payable in full at maturity, five years from the closing date of the 2021 Revolving Facility.
Obligations under the 2021 Revolving Facility are guaranteed by our existing and future direct and indirect material wholly-owned domestic subsidiaries, subject to certain exceptions. The 2021 Revolving Facility is secured by a first-priority security interest in substantially all of the assets of the borrower and the guarantors, subject to certain exceptions.
The 2021 Revolving Facility contains a number of covenants that, among other things and subject to certain exceptions, restrict our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to incur additional indebtedness and guarantee indebtedness; create or incur liens; pay dividends and distributions or repurchase capital stock; merge, liquidate and make asset sales; change lines of business; change our fiscal year; incur restrictions on our subsidiaries’ ability to make distributions and create liens; modify our organizational documents; make investments, loans and advances; and enter into certain transactions with affiliates.
The 2021 Revolving Facility requires compliance with a total net first lien leverage ratio of 4.50 to 1.00, or Financial Covenant. The Financial Covenant will be tested at quarter-end only if the total principal amount of all revolving loans, swingline loans and drawn letters of credit that have not been reimbursed exceeds 35% of the total commitments under the 2021 Revolving Facility on the last day of such fiscal quarter.
Cash flows
The following table sets forth a summary of our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Net cash provided by operating activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our customers for our transaction and subscription services. Our primary uses of cash in operating activities are for our fulfillment, production and customer care costs, employee salaries and benefits, sales and marketing expenses and third-party consulting expenses. Net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by our net (loss) income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expense, stock-based compensation and impairments of long-lived assets, as well as the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
In 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $54.2 million resulting from a net loss of $108.7 million, adjusted for stock-based compensation and other non-cash expenses of $139.1 million and net cash flows provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $23.7 million. The $23.7 million of net cash flows provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities included a $17.9 million increase in deferred revenue resulting from growth of our subscription units, which are predominantly billed in advance of our revenue recognition, a
$16.1 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities due to the timing of our payments, partially offset by a $10.1 million increase in accounts receivable, prepaid expenses and other current assets.
In 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $93.0 million resulting from net income of $9.9 million, adjusted for non-cash expenses of $44.8 million and net cash flow provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $38.4 million. The $38.4 million of net cash flows provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities included a $23.2 million increase in deferred revenue primarily as a result of the growth of our subscription units, which are predominantly billed in advance of our revenue recognition, and a $13.8 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities, due to the timing of our payments.
In 2019, cash provided by operating activities was $52.7 million resulting from net income of $7.4 million, adjusted for non-cash expenses of $38.4 million and net cash flow provided by changes in operating assets and liabilities of $6.9 million. The $6.9 million of net cash flows provided from changes in our operating assets and liabilities included a $5.6 million increase in deferred revenue primarily as a result of the growth of our subscription units, and a $3.9 million increase in accounts payable, partially offset by a $1.6 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities due to the timing of our payments.
Net cash used in investing activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of capital expenditures to purchase property and equipment necessary to support our customer contact center, network and operations, the capitalization of internal-use software necessary to develop and maintain our platform and deliver new products and features, which provide value to our customers, business acquisitions and investments in other companies. As our business grows, we expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase.
In 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $77.7 million, resulting primarily from the acquisition of Earth Class Mail, Inc. in November 2021 for $61.5 million, $11.7 million paid for property and equipment, including capitalized internal-use software and a $3.3 million charge for the extinguishment of interest rate swaps in the third quarter.
In 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $12.7 million resulting primarily from $10.6 million in purchases of property and equipment, including capitalized internal-use software.
In 2019, net cash used in investing activities was $20.7 million resulting primarily from $18.3 million in purchases of property and equipment, including capitalized internal-use software, and $2.7 million in investments in available-for-sale debt securities and other equity securities.
Net cash provided by (used in) financing activities
Our primary uses of cash in financing activities are for our servicing and refinancing of our long-term debt, repurchases of common stock and settlements of stock options and RSUs. Net cash provided by financing activities is primarily impacted by exercises of stock options by our employees and issuance of common stock.
In 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $123.4 million, primarily from issuance of common stock for net proceeds of $666.9 million, offset by full repayment of our 2018 Term Loan and hybrid debt totaling $525.6 million and payment of offering costs of $5.6 million.
In 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $15.1 million resulting primarily from repayments on our 2018 Term Loan totaling $5.4 million, repurchases of common stock of $4.8 million and repurchases of common stock for tax withholding obligations of $3.6 million. In March 2020, we drew down the full $40.0 million available from our 2018 Revolving Facility in response to macroeconomic concerns with regards to COVID-19. The 2018 Revolving Facility was paid in full by May 2020.
In 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $12.9 million resulting primarily from repayments on our 2018 Term Loan totaling $5.4 million, repurchases of common stock for tax withholding obligations of $3.8 million and the repurchase of common stock of $1.5 million.
Contractual obligations and commitments
We have contractual commitments for our 2021 Revolving Facility, operating leases, marketing and technology expenditures. For additional information, see Note 10 and Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
We believe our current cash and cash equivalents, as well as cash expected to be generated by future operating activities, will be sufficient to meet our contractual obligations for the next twelve months.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
We do not have any relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, such as entities often referred to as structured finance or special purpose entities, that were established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures, as described below, to understand and evaluate our core operating performance. These non-GAAP financial measures, which may be different than similarly titled measures used by other companies, are presented to enhance investors’ overall understanding of our financial performance and should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, the financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe that these non-GAAP financial measures provide useful information about our financial performance, enhance the overall understanding of our past performance and future prospects and allow for greater transparency with respect to important measures used by our management for financial and operational decision-making. We are presenting these non-GAAP measures to assist investors in seeing our financial performance using a management view and because we believe that these measures provide an additional tool for investors to use in comparing our core financial performance over multiple periods with other companies in our industry.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
We define Adjusted EBITDA as net (loss) income adjusted to exclude interest expense, net, (benefit from) provision for income taxes, depreciation and amortization, other income, net, non-cash stock-based compensation, loss on debt extinguishment, impairment of goodwill, long-lived and other assets, losses from impairment of available-for-sale debt securities, restructuring expenses, legal expenses, acquisition related expenses, IPO-related costs and other transaction-related expenses and certain other non-recurring expenses. Our Adjusted EBITDA financial measure differs from GAAP in that it excludes certain items of income and expense. We define Adjusted EBITDA margin as Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of revenue. We define net (loss) income margin as net (loss) income as a percentage of revenue based on our consolidated financial statements.
Adjusted EBITDA is one of the primary performance measures used by our management and our board of directors to understand and evaluate our financial performance and operating trends, including period-to-period comparisons, prepare and approve our annual budget, develop short- and long-term operational plans and determine appropriate compensation plans for our employees. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and others in understanding and evaluating our results of operations in the same manner as our management team and board of directors. In assessing our performance, we exclude certain expenses that we believe are not comparable period over period. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. There are a number of limitations related to the use of Adjusted EBITDA rather than net (loss) income, which is the nearest GAAP equivalent of Adjusted EBITDA, and it may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure. Some of these limitations include that the non-GAAP financial measure:
•does not reflect interest expense, or the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments, which reduces cash available to us;
•does not reflect provision for income taxes that may result in payments that reduce cash available to us;
•excludes depreciation and amortization and, although these are non-cash expenses, the assets being depreciated may be replaced in the future;
•does not reflect foreign currency exchange or other gains or losses, which are included in other (expense) income, net;
•excludes stock-based compensation expense, which has been, and will continue to be, a significant recurring expense for our business and an important part of our compensation strategy;
•excludes losses from impairments of goodwill, long-lived and other assets and available-for-sale debt securities;
•excludes legal expenses, which reduce cash available to us;
•excludes acquisition related expenses, which reduce cash available to us;
•excludes restructuring expenses, which reduce cash available to us;
•excludes IPO-related costs and other transaction-related expenses that are not considered representative of our underlying performance, which reduce cash available to us;
•excludes debt extinguishment charges that represent accelerated amortization of debt issuance costs related to the early extinguishment of our long-term debt, which adjustments are not expected to recur and do not reflect expected ongoing operating results; and
•does not reflect certain other non-recurring expenses that are not considered representative of our underlying performance, which reduce cash available to us.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA for each of the periods indicated:
______________
(1)Legal expenses include costs accrued or paid for potential litigation settlements, and are net of insurance recoveries, if any.
(2)IPO-related costs and other transaction-related expenses include certain non-recurring expenses incurred in connection with our IPO.
(3)In 2021, we incurred expenses related to early termination of our U.K. lease agreement. In 2020, we incurred a loss on sale from the disposal of Beaumont, our conveyancing business in the U.K., of $1.8 million. In 2019, we incurred certain expenses for strategic transactions that were not consummated, including $4.6 million of costs associated with our filing of a registration statement, $1.9 million of compensation expense recorded in general and administrative expenses related the establishment of a financial guarantee for a former executive officer, and $0.4 million for other transaction related expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased from $88.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $47.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease of $40.3 million reflects an increase in revenue of $104.4 million offset by increases in cost of revenue of $35.1 million, customer acquisition media spend of $76.2 million and other operating expenses of $33.4 million, excluding non-cash and non-recurring items. We expect our Adjusted EBITDA to increase in absolute dollars in the longer term, although the rate at which our Adjusted EBITDA may grow could vary based upon the interplay of the foregoing factors.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased from $97.2 million in 2019 to $88.0 million in 2020. The decrease of $9.2 million primarily reflects an investment in customer acquisition media spend, which increased by $52.0 million in 2020 as we invested to expand our customer base and build on our digital brand leadership and awareness, as well as an increase in cost of revenue of $17.7 million driven by increases in customer care and fulfillment costs, partially offset by an increase in revenue of $62.2 million.
Free cash flow
Free cash flow is a liquidity measure used by management in evaluating the cash generated by our operations after purchases of property and equipment including capitalized internal-use software. We consider free cash flow to be an important measure because it provides useful information to management and investors about the amount of cash generated by our business that can be used for strategic opportunities, including investing in our business and strengthening our balance sheet. Once our business needs and obligations are met, cash can be used to maintain a strong balance sheet and invest in future growth. The usefulness of free cash flow as an analytical tool has limitations because it excludes certain items that are settled in cash, does not represent residual cash flow available for discretionary expenses, does not reflect our future contractual commitments, and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry. Accordingly, it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to free cash flow:
We experienced a decrease in our free cash flow from $82.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $42.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to a $38.9 million reduction in net cash provided by operating activities. The decline in net cash provided by operating activities resulted from a $24.2 million reduction in net income after adjusting for stock-based compensation and other non-cash items, and a $14.7 million unfavorable change in our operating assets and liabilities. Free cash flow was also impacted by higher capital expenditures for the purchase of property and equipment, including capitalization of internal-use software. We expect our free cash flow to increase in absolute dollars over the longer term, although the rate at which our free cash flow may grow could vary based upon the interplay of the factors discussed above.
We experienced an increase in our free cash flow from 2019 to 2020 as a result of an increase in net cash provided by operating activities, which was primarily due to an increase of $17.6 million in deferred revenue driven by an increase in subscription units as well as an $8.5 million increase in accounts payable due to the timing of our payments. Additionally, in the year ended 2020 as compared to 2019, we recorded a decrease in purchase of property and equipment related to less capitalization of internal-use software projects.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, our free cash flow included cash payments for interest related to our 2018 Credit Facility of $12.3 million, $27.9 million and $37.3 million, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on certain accounting standards adopted in 2021 and recent accounting announcements that have not yet been required to be implemented and may be applicable to our future operations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Estimates are used for, however not limited to, revenue recognition, sales allowances and credit reserves, available-for-sale debt securities, valuation of long-lived assets and goodwill, income taxes, commitments and contingencies, valuation of assets and liabilities acquired in business combinations, fair value of derivative instruments and stock-based compensation. Actual results could differ materially from those estimates. Our most critical accounting policies are summarized below. See Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of our other significant accounting policies.
Revenue recognition
We derive our revenue from the following sources:
Transaction revenue-Transaction revenue is primarily generated from our customized legal document services upon fulfillment of these services. Transaction revenue includes filing fees and is net of cancellations, promotional discounts and sales allowances. Until April 2020, when we ceased providing such services, we also generated transaction revenue from our residential and commercial conveyancing business in the U.K. Revenue for these services was recognized when delivered to the customer. In addition, until July 2019, when we ceased providing such services, we generated revenue from litigation services in the U.K., and we recognized this revenue based on the time incurred by the attorneys at their market billing rates. In 2020, we commenced providing tax advice and filing services in the U.S., which are recognized at the point in time when the customer’s tax return is filed and accepted by the applicable government authority.
Subscription revenue-Subscription revenue is generated primarily from subscriptions to our registered agent services, compliance packages, attorney advice, and legal forms services, in addition to SaaS subscriptions in the U.K. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we commenced providing tax, bookkeeping and payroll subscription services. We recognize revenue from our subscriptions ratably over the subscription term. Subscription terms generally range from thirty days to one year. Subscription revenue includes the value allocated to bundled free-trials for our subscription services and is net of promotional discounts, cancellations, sales allowances and credit reserves and payments to third-party service providers such as legal plan law firms and tax service providers.
Partner revenue-Partner revenue consists primarily of one-time or recurring referral fees earned from third-party providers from leads generated to such providers through our online legal platform. Revenue is recognized when the related performance-based criteria have been met. We assess whether performance criteria have been met on a cost-per-click or cost-per-action basis.
We determine revenue recognition through the following five steps: identification of a contract with a customer; identification of the performance obligations in the contract; determination of the transaction price; allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and recognition of revenue when or as the performance obligations are satisfied.
Our customers generally pay for transactions in advance by credit or debit card except for certain services provided under installment plans where we allow customers to pay for their order in two or three equal payments. The first installment due under the installment plans is charged to the customer’s debit or credit card on the date the order is placed, and the remaining installments are generally charged on a monthly basis thereafter. We recognize revenue for the amount we expect to be entitled to for providing the services to our customers. The total fees collected by us for our services include, as applicable, expedited services fees, government filing fees, shipping fees and sales tax.
Subscription services are generally paid monthly or annually in advance of the subscription period except for SaaS services in the U.K., which are invoiced monthly in arrears. Amounts collected in advance of revenue recognition are recorded in deferred revenue. Customers may pay for services, however, may not provide the necessary information to complete a transaction. We attempt to contact the customer to complete the abandoned order. We recognize revenue on abandoned services, or breakage, when it is likely to occur and the amount can be recognized without significant risk of reversal. We recognize breakage in proportion to the pattern of rights exercised by the customer. Judgment is required to determine the amount of breakage and when breakage is likely to occur, which we estimate based on historical data of breakage for similar services.
Services we offer can generally either be purchased on a stand-alone basis or bundled together as part of a package of services. Accordingly, a significant number of our arrangements include multiple performance obligations, such as the preparation of legal documents combined with related document revision, document storage, registered agent services, and free trial periods of our legal plans. At contract inception, we assess the services promised in our contracts with customers and identify performance obligations for each promise to transfer to the customer a service or bundle of services that is distinct. The identification of distinct performance obligations within our packages may require significant judgment.
The transaction price allocated to each separate performance obligation represents the amount of consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for the services we provide. The transaction price is based on the contractual amounts in our contracts and is reduced for estimated sales allowances for price concessions, charge-backs, sales credits and refunds, which are accounted for as variable consideration when estimating the amount of revenue to recognize. We only include variable consideration in the transaction price to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. We estimate sales allowances using the expected value method. We have established a sufficient history of estimating sales allowances given the large number of homogeneous transactions. The majority of our allowances and reserves are known within
a relatively short period of time following our balance sheet date. The estimated provision for sales allowances has varied from actual results within ranges consistent with management’s expectations. The transaction price excludes sales taxes.
Contracts with our customers may include options to purchase additional future services, and in the case of subscription services, options to auto-renew the subscription service. Additional consideration attributable to either the option to purchase additional future services or the option to renew are excluded from the transaction price until such time that the option is exercised, unless these options provide a material right to the customer.
For arrangements that contain multiple performance obligations, such as our bundled arrangements, we allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on estimates of the standalone selling price of each performance obligation within the bundle. For the services we sell on a standalone basis, we use the sales price of these services in the allocation of the transaction price in bundled arrangements. Where we do not sell the service on a standalone basis, we estimate the standalone selling price based on the adjusted market assessment approach or the expected cost plus a margin approach when market information is not observable. In these cases, the determination of the standalone selling price may require significant judgment.
We recognize revenue when we satisfy the performance obligation by transferring the promised good or service to the customer. For our transaction-based services, we generally recognize revenue at a point-in-time when the services are delivered to the customer. For our subscription-based services we recognize revenue on a straight-line basis over the subscription term. For our partner-based services, we recognize revenue at a point-in-time when the related performance-based criteria have been met.
We do not have significant financing components in arrangements with our customers.
Principal agent considerations
In certain of our arrangements, another party may be involved in providing services to our customer. We evaluate whether we can recognize revenue gross as a principal or net as an agent. We record revenue on a gross basis when we are the principal in the arrangement. To determine whether we are a principal or an agent, we identify the specified good or service to be provided to the customer and assess whether we control the specified good or service before that good or service is transferred to the customer. We evaluate a number of indicators of whether we control the good or service before it is transferred to the customer, including whether we have primary fulfillment responsibility and obligation to perform the services being sold to the customer; we have latitude in establishing the sales price; and we have inventory risk.
In arrangements in which we are the principal, we record as revenue the amounts we have billed to our customer, net of sales allowance, and we record the fee payable to the third-party as cost of revenue. We are the principal in most of our legal document preparation and registered agent services, including legal entity formations and similar arrangements and formation, and formerly, conveyancing services, in the U.K. For these services, revenue includes filing and similar fees.
In arrangements in which we are not the principal, we record revenue on a net basis, which is equal to the amount billed to our customer, net of sales allowances and the fee payable to the third-party or partner that is primarily responsible for performing the services for the customer. We are not a law firm in the U.S. and cannot provide legal advice through our U.S. entities, therefore the participating independent law firms in our legal plans control the service to the customer and have the primary service obligation to provide attorney consultations to our customers, for which we pay the law firms a monthly fee. For these arrangements, we recognize revenue on a net basis as an agent. Since 2016, our Alternative Business Structure, or ABS, subsidiary in the U.K. began offering legal advisory services that were marketed through our website. Our ABS provides independent legal advice to our customers and is directly responsible for, and controls the fulfillment of, the legal services. Accordingly, for services provided by our ABS, we recognize revenue as the principal. For other services provided by third-parties, including deed transfer, accounting, tax, credit monitoring, business data protection and logo design services, revenue is recognized net of fees payable to third-parties. For partner revenue, we receive a fee for the referral of our customer to the partner or we retain a portion of the fee paid by the customer and share the remainder with partner. Our partner controls the service to the customer and the partner is responsible for fulfilling the referred service to the customer; accordingly, we recognize revenue for these arrangements on a net basis.
Revenue includes shipping and handling fees charged to customers.
Business combinations
The results of businesses acquired in a business combination are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Purchase accounting results in assets and liabilities of an acquired
business being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any excess purchase consideration over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill.
We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed for an acquisition and allocate the purchase price to their respective net tangible and intangible assets. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates. Intangible assets consist primarily of customer relationships and developed technology. Judgment and estimates include the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue and cash flows, the rate of customer subscription non-renewals, discount rates, the estimated level of effort and related costs of reproducing or replacing the assets acquired, and selection of comparable companies. We generally engage the assistance of third-party valuation specialists in determining fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and contingent consideration, if any, in a business combination. Amounts recorded in a business combination may change during the measurement period, which is a period not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, as additional information about conditions existing at the acquisition date becomes available.
Transaction costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred and are included in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the aggregate fair value of the consideration transferred in a business combination over the fair value of the assets acquired, net of liabilities assumed. Goodwill is not amortized, however, it is subject to impairment testing at the reporting unit level annually during the fourth quarter of our fiscal year or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill may be impaired.
In assessing impairment, we have the option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether or not a reporting unit is impaired. Alternatively, we may perform a quantitative impairment assessment or if the qualitative assessment indicates that it is more-likely-than-not that the reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative analysis is required. The quantitative analysis compares the estimated fair value of the reporting unit with its respective carrying amount, including goodwill. If the estimated fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount including goodwill, goodwill is considered not to be impaired. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount including goodwill, then a goodwill impairment charge is recorded by the amount that the carrying value exceeds the fair value, up to the carrying amount of goodwill.
For our goodwill impairment test performed in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 2020, the fair value of our consolidated reporting unit significantly exceeded our carrying value.
In 2019, we had two reporting units, the U.S. reporting unit and the U.K. reporting unit. Our U.K. reporting unit’s performance was below expectations and further deteriorated in 2019. Our quantitative goodwill assessment in 2019 concluded that the carrying value of the U.K. reporting unit exceeded its fair value, and accordingly, we impaired all the goodwill attributable to the U.K. reporting unit of $10.6 million.
Loss contingencies
We record loss contingencies in our consolidated financial statements in the period when they are probable and reasonably estimable. If the amount is probable and we are able to reasonably estimate a range of loss, we accrue the amount that is the best estimate within that range, and if no amount is better than any other in the range, we record the amount at the low end in the range. We disclose those contingencies that we believe are at least reasonably possible but not probable regardless of whether they are reasonably estimable. The likelihood of a loss is determined using several factors including the nature of the matter, advice of our internal and external counsel, previous experience and historical and relevant information available to us. The determination of the likelihood of loss or the range of loss requires significant management judgment. We expense legal costs for defending legal proceedings as incurred.
As discussed in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are subject to pending matters for which we believe that we have meritorious defenses to the claims and intend to defend against vigorously.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates anticipated to be in effect when those tax assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in the consolidated statements of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
We make judgments in evaluating whether deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income on a jurisdictional basis. A valuation allowance is established if, based upon the available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. We consider all available evidence, both positive and negative, including historical levels of income. We also consider expectations and risk associated with estimates of future taxable income in assessing the need for a valuation allowance. If our assumptions and consequently our estimates, change in the future, the valuation allowance may be increased or decreased, resulting in an increase or decrease, which may be material, to our (benefit from) provision for income taxes and the related impact on our net (loss) income.
We recognize tax benefits from an uncertain position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities, based on the technical merits. If this threshold is met, we measure the tax benefit as the largest amount of the benefit that is greater than fifty percent likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. We recognize penalties and interest accrued with respect to uncertain tax positions as a component of the income tax provision.
See Note 18 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on our income taxes.
Stock-based compensation
We estimate the fair value of employee stock-based payment awards on the grant-date and recognize the resulting fair value, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model for estimating the fair value of options granted under our stock option plans that vest based on service and performance conditions. The fair value of RSUs, that vest based on service and performance conditions is determined based on the value of the underlying common stock at the date of grant. For awards that contain market conditions, we estimate the fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model. We record expense for awards that contain performance conditions only to the extent that we determine it is probable that the performance condition will be achieved. Expense for awards containing market conditions is not reversed even if the market condition is not achieved. We have elected to treat stock-based payment awards with graded vesting schedules and time-based service conditions as a single award and recognize stock-based compensation on a straight-line basis, net of estimated forfeitures, over the requisite service period. Awards with performance or market conditions are recognized using graded vesting.
Options. The Black-Scholes option pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model requires us to make certain assumptions including the fair value of our underlying common stock, the expected term, the expected stock price volatility, the risk-free interest rates and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. These assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model and the Monte Carlo simulation model, other than the fair value of our common stock (see the section titled “-Common Stock Valuations” below), are estimated as follows:
•Expected term. The expected term of employee stock options represents the weighted-average period that the stock options are expected to remain outstanding. The expected term of options granted is estimated based upon actual historical exercise and post-vesting cancellations, adjusted for expected future exercise behavior.
•Risk-free interest rate. The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates on the U.S. government securities appropriate for the expected term of our stock options.
•Expected volatility. Because our common stock has limited publicly traded history, we estimate the expected volatility from the historical volatility of selected public companies with comparable characteristics to us, including similarity in size, lines of business, market capitalization and revenue and financial leverage. We determine the expected volatility assumption using the frequency of daily historical prices of comparable public company’s common stock for a period equal to the expected term of the options. We periodically assess the comparable companies and other relevant factors used to measure expected volatility for future stock option grants.
•Expected dividend yield. The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and expectation of dividend payouts. Other than the special dividends paid in 2015, 2017 and 2018 which resulted in corresponding reductions in the exercise price of the stock options, we have not declared or paid any cash dividends on our common stock, and we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends in the foreseeable future.
Stock-based compensation expense is recognized based on awards that are ultimately expected to vest. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates. Forfeitures are estimated based on our historical experience and future expectations.
If any of the assumptions used in the Black-Scholes option pricing model change significantly, stock-based compensation for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously.
The determination of stock-based compensation is inherently uncertain and subjective and involves the application of valuation models and assumptions requiring the use of judgment. If we had made different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense, and our net (loss) income for 2021, 2020 and 2019, may have been materially different.
The weighted-average assumptions that were used to calculate the grant-date fair-value of our stock option grants were as follows:
In 2021, we granted 970,970 stock options at a weighted-average grant-date fair value of $11.78. We have options that vest upon the satisfaction of service-based vesting conditions, which is typically over a four-year period. For these options we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of 4 years net of forfeitures. We previously had various performance options that vested upon our IPO. These performance options will continue to vest over their remaining service period.
Restricted stock units. We have granted restricted stock awards as follows:
RSUs that vest upon the satisfaction of service-based vesting conditions, which is typically over a four-year period. For these RSUs we recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of 4 years.
Common stock valuations. Prior to our IPO, we determined the fair value of our common stock using valuation approaches in accordance with the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, Accounting and Valuation Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. Subsequent to our IPO, we utilized our common stock values as traded in the public market as an input into our valuation models.
Option modifications in connection with our IPO. For retention purposes, in connection with our IPO, we amended the vesting conditions of 4,477,218 outstanding performance options of certain executive officers and employees so that the performance options would not fully vest immediately upon an IPO. Instead, subject to and contingent upon the effective date of an IPO, the modified performance options for executive officers will vest monthly over a four-year period from their original vesting commencement dates and the modified performance options of certain employees will vest 25% on the first anniversary from the vesting commencement date, and then vest monthly over the remaining service period, subject to continued employment through the applicable vesting dates. As the modified awards contain a performance condition that is satisfied upon an IPO, we remeasured the fair value of the performance options on the date of modification. This new fair value of approximately $76.6 million was recognized as stock-based compensation expense using the graded vesting method, with an immediate stock-based compensation expense recognized on the effective date of our IPO for the modified performance options for which the service vesting condition was satisfied through the effective date of the IPO, and all remaining compensation will be recognized thereafter over the remaining service period. No compensation expense was recognized for these modified performance options until our IPO was declared effective.
In addition, in connection with our IPO, we amended the vesting conditions of 3,627,936 outstanding performance options of an executive officer so that in the event of an IPO the modified 2019 performance option would vest monthly over a four-year period from the vesting commencement date in 2019, subject to continued employment of the executive officer, rather than vesting upon the fourth anniversary of the original date of grant based on achieving certain stock price thresholds. Incremental stock-based compensation expense as a result of the modification was approximately $11.4 million and was measured using a Monte Carlo simulation immediately prior to the modification date and a Black-Scholes option pricing model immediately after the modification date. Upon IPO, we recognized stock-based compensation expense for the modified 2019 performance option for which the service vesting condition was satisfied through the effective date of the IPO and all remaining compensation will be recognized thereafter over the remaining service period using the graded vesting method.
In addition, we modified the vesting conditions of 111,902 outstanding performance RSUs of certain employees so that the modified performance RSUs do not vest immediately upon an IPO. Instead, subject to and contingent upon the effective date of an IPO, the modified performance RSUs will vest 25% on the first anniversary from the original vesting commencement dates, then vest monthly over the remaining service period, subject to the continued employment through the applicable vesting dates. As the modified RSUs contain a performance condition that is
satisfied upon an IPO, we remeasured the fair value of the performance RSUs on the date of modification. This new fair value of approximately $2.9 million will be recognized as stock-based compensation expense using the graded vesting method, with an immediate stock-based compensation expense recognized on the effective date of our IPO for the performance RSUs for which the service vesting condition was satisfied through the effective date of the IPO, and all remaining compensation will be recognized thereafter over the remaining service period. No compensation expense was recognized for these modified performance RSUs until our IPO is declared effective.
In addition, we modified the vesting conditions of 1,725,942 outstanding liquidity event RSUs, or LERSUs, and 1,706,888 outstanding time-based options of certain executive officers to amend the severance vesting acceleration benefit applicable for the LERSUs and remove the change in control vesting acceleration benefit for the time-based options. There was no incremental stock-based compensation associated with the modification of the time-based options. We remeasured the fair value of the LERSUs on the date of modification and this new fair value of approximately $43.3 million will be recognized using the graded vesting method, with an immediate stock-based compensation expense recognized on the effective date of our IPO for the modified LERSUs that have satisfied the service-vesting condition through the effective date, and all remaining compensation will be recognized thereafter over the remaining service period. No compensation expense was recognized for these modified LERSUs until our IPO is declared effective.
The fair value of the modified performance options, 2019 performance option, performance RSUs and LERSUs were remeasured using the fair value of our common stock, as approved by the Pricing Committee of our board of directors, which was $25.50 per share, the midpoint of the price range set forth for the IPO.
IPO Grants. In June 2021, we granted RSUs to our executive officers that were contingent on the effectiveness of a registration statement, or IPO RSU Grants. The IPO RSU Grants had a grant-date fair value of approximately $10.9 million and the number of shares underlying the IPO RSU Grants was based on the IPO price to the public. In addition, we granted options to purchase shares of common stock, or IPO Options, with an exercise price that was equal to the IPO price to the public for the number of shares equal to 2.5 times the number of shares subject to the IPO RSU. Because the number of shares and exercise price of the IPO Options was based on the IPO price, the grant date for accounting purposes was not established until the effective date of our IPO. As the IPO is a performance condition, no stock-based compensation expense was recognized until our IPO was declared effective and then stock-based compensation was recognized over a weighted-average requisite service period of approximately 4.0 years. The actual amount of stock-based compensation cost for the IPO options was dependent upon the IPO price to the public.
JOBS Act Accounting Election
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act, or JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to avail ourselves of delayed adoption of new or revised accounting standards and, therefore, we will not be subject to the same requirements to adopt new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. To the extent that we no longer qualify as an emerging growth company we will be required to adopt certain accounting pronouncements earlier than the adoption dates disclosed below which are for non-public business entities.
In addition, we intend to rely on the other exemptions and reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if as an “emerging growth company” we intend to rely on such exemptions, we are not required to, among other things, (1) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, (2) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (3) the requirement of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding the communication of critical audit matters in the auditor’s report on the financial statements and (4) disclose certain executive compensation-related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply until the last day of the 2026 fiscal year or until we no longer meet the requirements of being an emerging growth company, whichever is earlier.