Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this annual report including, without limitation, statements under this “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding our financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward looking statements. When used in this annual report, words such “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions, as they relate to us or our management, identify forward-looking statements.
Factors that might cause or contribute to such a discrepancy include, but are not limited to, those described in our other SEC filings. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, our management. No assurance can be given that results in any forward-looking statement will be achieved and actual results could be affected by one or more factors, which could cause them to differ materially. The cautionary statements made in this annual report should be read as being applicable to all forward-looking statements whenever they appear in this annual report. For these statements, we claim the protection of the safe harbor for forward-looking statements contained in the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company and incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We completed our initial public offering in February 2021, and since that time, we have engaged in discussions with potential business combination target companies; we have not, however, as of yet, reached a definitive agreement with a specific target company with respect to an initial business combination with us. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the private units, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
The issuance of additional ordinary shares in a business combination:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our initial public offering, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions of the Class B ordinary shares resulted in the issuance of Class A ordinary shares on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B ordinary shares;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of Class A ordinary shares if preferred shares are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A ordinary shares;
● could cause a change of control if a substantial number of our ordinary shares are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A ordinary shares and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant indebtedness, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is issued and outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our ordinary shares;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our ordinary shares if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021 we had $39,000 of cash and cash equivalents and an accumulated deficit of $951,000. Although we raised $115 million of gross proceeds, in the aggregate, from our initial public offering in February and March 2021, and additional $3.8 million of gross proceeds, in the aggregate, from our private placements consummated concurrently with the closings of our initial public offering, we expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have not engaged in any revenue-generating operations to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, preparations for our initial public offering and, subsequent to our initial public offering, searching for, and due diligence related to, potential target companies with which to consummate a business combination transaction. We have not and will not generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on funds held in our trust account after our initial public offering. There has been no significant change in our financial or trading position and no material adverse change has occurred since the December 31, 2021 date of our audited financial statements contained in this Annual Report. After our initial public offering, which was consummated in February and March 2021, we have been incurring increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses related to our search for a target company.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In early 2021, prior to the completion of our initial public offering, our liquidity needs were satisfied from the availability of up to $300,000 in loans from our sponsor under an unsecured promissory note, under which we had initially borrowed $150,000 prior to December 31, 2020 and an additional $20,000 in February 2021. The total $170,000 balance owed under the note was repaid in March 2021 following the closings of our initial public offering.
Subsequent to our initial public offering, our working capital needs were initially satisfied primarily by the approximately $1.2 million available to us initially outside our trust account (from the private placements of private units consummated simultaneously with our initial public offering). Subsequently, in August 2021, our sponsor agreed to make available to us up to $1,000,000, which is evidenced by a promissory note that we issued to our sponsor, and which is repayable upon the earlier of February 19, 2023 (the 24-month, liquidation deadline for our company) or our consummation of our initial business combination. Of the amounts available under that promissory note, we borrowed $300,000 in December 2021 and an additional $300,000 in January 2022. The remaining $400,000 is available to us under that note as of the current time.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our financing and acquisition plans. Our management cannot currently determine whether the remaining $400,000 available under the foregoing promissory note will suffice to cover our working capital needs until our initial business combination, as that determination depends on when that business combination is consummated. We furthermore cannot assure you altogether that our plans to consummate an initial business combination will be successful.
The net proceeds from (i) the sale of the units in our initial public offering, after deducting offering expenses of approximately $300,000 and underwriting commissions of $2,300,000 (but excluding an advisory fee of $4,025,000) that have been or will be payable to the representative of the underwriters for services to be performed for us in connection with (and subject to the consummation of) our initial business combination transaction), and (ii) the sale of the private units for a purchase price of $3,800,000 in the aggregate, were $116,200,000. Of this amount, $115,000,000 (including $4,025,000 in potential advisory fees to be payable to the representative of the underwriters for advisory services in connection with our initial business combination transaction) was deposited into a non-interest bearing trust account. The funds in the trust account are invested only in specified U.S. government treasury bills or in specified money market funds. The remaining $1.2 million was not placed in the trust account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account that remain after payments to redeeming shareholders, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (which interest shall be net of taxes payable, and excluding potential fees to be payable to the underwriters for advisory services in connection with our initial business combination transaction), to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw from the trust interest to pay taxes, if any. Our annual income tax obligations depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. To the extent that our ordinary shares or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, or if we are acquired as part of our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account (less any amounts paid out to redeeming shareholders) will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Prior to the completion of our initial business combination, we have available to us proceeds held outside of the trust account (initially, the $1.2 million of proceeds from the sale of our private units concurrently with our IPO, and currently, the remaining $400,000 available under the $1,000,000 of loans committed to by our sponsor). We use these funds primarily towards our primary liquidity requirements, consisting of identifying and evaluating target businesses, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review of corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structuring, negotiating and completing a business combination, paying for administrative and support services, and paying taxes to the extent the interest earned on the trust account is not sufficient to pay our taxes. In addition, we use these funds for payment of legal and accounting fees related to regulatory reporting requirements, including Nasdaq and other regulatory fees, and funds for working capital to cover miscellaneous expenses and reserves.
We may also use a portion of the funds not being placed in trust to pay commitment fees for financing, fees to consultants to assist us with our search for a target business or as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision (a provision designed to keep target businesses from “shopping” around for transactions with other companies on terms more favorable to such target businesses) with respect to a particular proposed business combination, although we do not have any current intention to do so. If we entered into an agreement where we paid for the right to receive exclusivity from a target business, the amount that would be used as a down payment or to fund a “no-shop” provision would be determined based on the terms of the specific business combination and the amount of our available funds at the time. Our forfeiture of such funds (whether as a result of our breach or otherwise) could result in our not having sufficient funds to continue searching for, or conducting due diligence with respect to, prospective target businesses.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us additional funds as may be required. If we complete our initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that our initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside of the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans (including the $1,000,000 of loans committed to by our sponsor under the August 2021 promissory note) may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private warrants (that are part of the private units) issued to our sponsor. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
We may need to raise additional funds (beyond the remaining $400,000 amount available to us under the promissory note that we issued to our sponsor in August 2021) in order to meet the expenditures required up until our initial business combination. Moreover, we will likely need to obtain additional financing in order to complete our initial business combination due to the likelihood that we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, which will reduce the funds from the trust that become available to the surviving company of the business combination. In that case, we will likely need to issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with the business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our initial business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
We cannot assure you that we will be able to raise additional capital if needed in order to operate our company until our initial business combination, or that we will even be able to successfully consummate such an initial business combination. In the absence of such a business combination, our required liquidation date would be less than 12 months after the date of this Annual Report. Those factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a “going concern”. Please see the explanatory paragraph under the heading “Substantial Doubt about the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern” in the opinion of our independent auditor that appears in Item 15 of this Annual Report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as described in Item 303 of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments for capital expenditures or contractual obligations.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Private Warrant Liability
Please refer to Note 6 - Fair Value Measurements of our financial statements included in Item 15 of this Annual Report for the method and level 3 inputs used for the measurement of the Private Warrant Liability. No sensitivity analysis was provided, as the range of reasonably possible inputs would not have a material impact on our financial statements taken as a whole.
Item 7.A Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures about Market Risk
The proceeds of our initial public offering held in the trust account are invested in U.S. government treasury bills with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act, which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Due to the short-term nature of these investments, we believe there will be no associated material exposure to interest rate risk.
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
The information required by this Item 8 appears in Item 15 of this Annual Report and is incorporated herein by reference.
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures
Disclosure controls are procedures that are designed with the objective of ensuring that information required to be disclosed in our reports filed under the Exchange Act, such as this Report, is recorded, processed, summarized, and reported within the time period specified in the SEC’s rules and forms. Disclosure controls are also designed with the objective of ensuring that such information is accumulated and communicated to our management, including the chief executive officer and chief financial officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Our management evaluated, with the participation of our chief executive officer and chief financial officer, whom we refer to as our Certifying Officers, the effectiveness of our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021, pursuant to Rule 13a-15(b) or Rule 15d-15(b) under the Exchange Act. Based upon their evaluation, our chief executive officer and chief financial officer have concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were not effective as of December 31, 2021 because of the material weakness in our internal control over financial reporting. A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting, such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of the company’s annual or interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Specifically, our management has concluded that our control around the interpretation and accounting for certain complex features of our Class A ordinary shares and private placement warrants was not effectively designed or maintained. This material weakness resulted in the restatement of our audited financial statement as of March 3, 2021. Additionally, this material weakness could result in a misstatement of the warrant liability (for our private placement warrants), Class A ordinary shares and related accounts and disclosures that would result in a material misstatement of the financial statements that would not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. We are diligently working to improve our internal control over financial reporting and to thereby remedy this material weakness.
Management’s Annual Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting. Our internal control system was designed to provide reasonable assurance to our management and board of directors regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation and fair presentation of our published financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Our management assessed the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021. In making our assessment, our management used the criteria established in Internal Control-Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on our assessments and those criteria, management determined that our internal controls over financial reporting were not effective as of December 31, 2021, because of material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting. Specifically, our management has concluded that our control around the interpretation and accounting for certain complex features of our Class A ordinary shares and private placement warrants was not effectively designed or maintained. This material weakness resulted in the restatement of our audited financial statement as of March 3, 2021.
Attestation Report of Registered Public Accounting Firm
This Annual Report on Form 10-K does not include an attestation report of internal controls from our independent registered public accounting firm due to our status as an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting (as such term is defined in Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f) of the Exchange Act) during the most recent fiscal quarter that have materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
Item 9.C Disclosure Regarding Foreign Jurisdictions that Prevent Inspections
Not applicable.
PART III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Directors and Executive Officers
Our officers and directors are as follows:
Ilan Levin, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer. Mr. Levin, our co-founder, has been involved, for approximately 25 years, as an executive and venture capital / private equity investor in high tech Israel related ventures. From 2000 to 2018, Mr. Levin was a member of the Board and Executive Committee of Objet Ltd., which as a result of a merger with Stratasys, Inc. in 2012, formed Stratasys Ltd. (NASDAQ: SSYS), the pioneer and global leader in 3D printing. During his tenure at Objet/Stratasys, Mr. Levin held various positions including President, Vice Chairman and from 2016 to 2018, Chief Executive Officer. From 2004 to 2009, Mr. Levin was the Chief Executive Officer of CellGuide, a developer of software-based GPS for mobile devices. Since 1997, Mr. Levin has also served as a member of the board of directors and as an advisor for a wide variety of Israel-based technology-related companies, including currently serving as Chairman of Vision Sigma (TLV: VISN:IT), an Israel-based real estate and investment company. Early in his career, Mr. Levin was a practicing attorney focusing on corporate and securities related matters. In addition to his role as our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Mr. Levin also serves as the sole director and sole equity owner of an Israeli company that serves as the sole general partner of our sponsor. Mr. Levin earned an LL.B. from Tel Aviv University and a B.A.Sc. in Industrial Engineering from the University of Toronto.
Gil Maman, Chief Financial Officer. Mr. Maman has extensive experience in managing and executing global merger and acquisition transactions, joint ventures and other investment transactions in high tech environments, having most recently served from 2018 to February 2020, as Vice President Corporate Development and Strategy at SimilarWeb, a leading Israeli based internet company providing a globally recognized market intelligence platform, where he managed and executed merger and acquisition, partnership and data acquisition transactions. Prior to SimilarWeb, Mr. Maman was at Stratasys (NASDAQ: SSYS) as Director of Corporate Development, managing and executing on mergers and acquisitions, joint venture IP licensing and marketing initiatives valued over $1 billion, and later at MakerBot as Chief Operating Officer. MakerBot is a Brooklyn-based Stratasys subsidiary focused on desktop 3D printing, where Mr. Maman was responsible for overseeing the company’s operations, including corporate development, manufacturing, supply chain and logistics, customer support, data warehouse, and analysis and information systems. Early in his career, Mr. Maman was a strategy consultant at Kesselman & Kesselman, a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited, in Israel, leading a team of associates and interns in merger and acquisition matters, including valuation analysis, accounting matters relating to deal execution and other related services. Mr. Maman has a B.S in Accounting and Economics from Ben-Gurion University, Israel, and he is a CPA (Israel) and has served in the IDF as a second lieutenant in the 8200 unit, an Israeli Intelligence Corps unit responsible for collecting signal intelligence and code decryption of the IDF.
Dan Yalon, Advisor. Mr. Yalon has, for approximately 20 years, held senior management positions at several of Israel’s largest high technology companies. Since August 2020, he has been a Venture Partner at Moringa Capital, an investment and consultancy firm and an affiliate of our sponsor. Since 2018, Mr. Yalon has served as Chief Business Officer at SimilarWeb. From 2012 to 2018, Mr. Yalon served as Executive Vice President at Stratasys (NASDAQ: SSYS). At Stratasys, Mr. Yalon played a key part in executing the Stratasys - Objet merger in 2012, followed by a series of over 10 acquisitions valued at over $1 billion in the aggregate. Previously, Mr. Yalon served as Chief Strategy Officer at NICE Systems (NASDAQ: NICE), a worldwide leader in enterprise software solutions in the customer engagement and financial compliance market segments and as Head of Strategy and New Business Initiatives at Amdocs (NASDAQ: DOX), the global leader in business operations software for communications, cable, satellite and other related service providers. Mr. Yalon is a graduate of Harvard Business School’s AMP program and holds a dual degree of B.A. in Business and LL.B (Law) from the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
Craig J. Marshak, Vice Chairman, and Co Founder. Mr. Marshak has a 25-year track record in investment banking, private equity and venture capital, in each case with a significant Israel-based focus. Since January 2010, Mr. Marshak has served as Managing Director at Israel Venture Partners, or IVP, a platform used by him and investment colleagues to identify opportunistic Israel based global growth enterprises. Previously, Mr. Marshak served as a Managing Director, and the Global Co-Head, of the Nomura Technology Investment Growth Fund, a merchant banking fund operated from within the London offices of Nomura Securities, focused on growth-stage and venture capital investments in Israel, Silicon Valley and North America. Prior to holding that position, he served as a Director, Investment Banking, in the Restructuring and International Corporate Finance and Cross-Border Capital Markets groups at Schroders, for both its New York and London offices. Mr. Marshak started his career at Morgan Stanley’s merchant banking division in New York. Mr. Marshak has played a principal role in many investments in Israeli companies, most notably (while at the Nomura Technology Investment Growth Fund) the first institutional round for Shopping.com (NASDAQ: SHOP) (which was sold to eBay, after its IPO) and organizing the first institutional round for CyberArk (NASDAQ: CYBR). Mr. Marshak currently serves as a director of Nukkleus Inc., a financial technology company whose shares are traded publicly in the U.S. He earned an A.B. in Political Science and Economics from Duke University, as well as a J.D. from Harvard Law School.
Ruth Alon, Director. Ms. Alon is the Founder and Chief Executive Officer of Medstrada, which was started in 2016. From 1997 until 2016, Ms. Alon served as a General Partner in Pitango Venture Capital, where she headed the life sciences activities and helped to facilitate the acquisition of several of the company’s portfolio companies. Currently, Ms. Alon also serves on the board of directors of a number of private and public companies as a member or chairperson, including Vascular Biogenics Ltd. (NASDAQ: VBLT), Brainsgate and KadimaStem. Ms. Alon previously worked on Wall Street where she held senior positions as a senior medical device analyst with Montgomery Securities (from 1981 to 1987) and Kidder Peabody & Co. (from 1987 to 1993). She also managed her own independent consulting business in San Francisco from 1995 to 1996, providing broad-based services to early-stage companies and venture capitalists in the medical devices industry. Ms. Alon was also instrumental in the establishment, in 2005, of Israel Life Science Industry (ILSI), a not-for-profit organization which represented, as of 2005, the mutual goals of approximately 700 Israeli life science companies. She is the Co-Founder of IATI, an umbrella organization established in 2012, representing Israel’s High Tech and Life Sciences industries. Ms. Alon holds a B.A. in Economics from the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, an M.B.A. from Boston University, and an M.Sc. from the Columbia University School of Physicians and Surgeons.
Michael Basch, Director. Mr. Basch has been, since January 2020, the Founder and Managing Partner of Atento Capital, a Tulsa-based investment firm engaged in early stage, direct venture capital and private equity investments, as well as fund investments. Since November 2017, Mr. Basch has also worked as a consultant with the George Kaiser Family Foundation of Tulsa, seeking investment, partnership, and other opportunities to expand Tulsa’s economic footprint. Mr. Basch has over 15 years of operational and investment experience both as an operator and executive of businesses, and as an angel investor. From July 2014 to August 2016, he was the President of Spotad, an Israel-based mobile advertising company, and then continued as an advisor to Spotad from August 2016 to January 2019. Prior to that time, Mr. Basch was a partner and executive of Bamko, a promotional merchandise company, from August 2005 to August 2014. Mr. Basch also serves as an Adjunct Professor at the University of Tulsa. Mr. Basch earned both his BA and MBA from the University of Southern California’s Marshall School of Business.
Eric Brachfeld, Director. Mr. Brachfeld has been, since September 2014, a Founder and Managing Partner of Manhattan Venture Partners, a research-driven asset management firm specializing in the institutionalization of a secondary market for late-stage, venture-backed pre-IPO companies. Manhattan Venture Partners has been an investor in companies such as: Spotify, Docusign, Postmates, Lyft, Pinterest, Cloudera, Palantir, DraftKings, and Airbnb. Mr. Brachfeld has more than 30 years of experience as an investment banker and entrepreneur and has provided financial and strategic advice and has structured transactions for a broad range of companies and investors. Prior to launching Manhattan Venture Partners, he was a Partner at Citizen VC, Inc., a financial technology and investment firm, where he led the firm’s investment banking efforts. Mr. Brachfeld cofounded Gentry New York, which later merged with Gentry Financial Holdings Group. At Gentry, Mr. Brachfeld was head of investment banking and CEO of Gentry Securities, their broker-dealer subsidiary. Previously, Mr. Brachfeld cofounded and led investment banking efforts at Ledgemont Capital Group and Indigo Ventures, firms which raised capital for and invested in early and growth stage companies. Prior to those firms, Mr. Brachfeld was an Associate and then General Partner at McFarland Dewey & Co., a boutique investment banking firm. He began his career at McKinney Advertising. Mr. Brachfeld received a BA in Economics from the University of Pennsylvania and an MBA, with Honors, from the Stern School of Business, New York University. He holds FINRA Series 7, Series 63, Series 24, Series 79 and Series 99 licenses.
Number and Terms of Office of Officers and Directors
Our board of directors consists of five members. Holders of our founders shares appointed each of our directors prior to consummation of our initial public offering for a two-year term, and holders of our public shares will not have the right to vote on the appointment of directors during such term. The provisions of our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association regarding director term may only be amended by a special resolution passed by at least 90% of our ordinary shares voting in a general meeting. Subject to any other special rights applicable to the shareholders, any vacancies on our board of directors may be filled by the affirmative vote of a majority of the directors present and voting at the meeting of our board or by a majority of the holders of our founders shares. Our officers are appointed by the board of directors and serve at the discretion of the board of directors, rather than for specific terms of office. Our board of directors is authorized to appoint persons to the offices set forth in our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association as it deems appropriate. Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that our officers may consist of a Chairman, Chief Executive Officer, President, Chief Financial Officer, Vice Presidents, Secretary, Assistant Secretaries, Treasurer and such other offices as may be determined by the board of directors.
Director Independence
Nasdaq listing standards require that a majority of our board of directors be independent within one year of our initial public offering. An “independent director” is defined generally as a person other than an officer or employee of the company or its subsidiaries or any other individual having a relationship which in the opinion of the company’s board of directors, would interfere with the director’s exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director. Our board of directors has determined that each of Messrs. Basch and Brachfeld, and Ms. Alon, is an “independent director” as defined in the Nasdaq listing standards and applicable SEC rules. Our audit committee and compensation committee are each entirely composed of independent directors meeting Nasdaq’s and the SEC’s additional requirements applicable to members of those committees. Our independent directors have regularly scheduled meetings at which only independent directors are present.
Committees of the Board of Directors
Pursuant to Nasdaq listing rules we have established two standing committees - an audit committee in compliance with Section 3(a)(58)(A) of the Exchange Act and a compensation committee, each comprised entirely of independent directors. In lieu of a standing nominating committee, a majority of our independent directors may recommend a director nominee for selection by the board of directors (as described below under “Nominating Committee”).
Audit Committee
We have established an audit committee of the board of directors. Messrs. Basch and Brachfeld, and Ms. Alon serve as members of our audit committee and Mr. Brachfeld serves as the chairman of the audit committee. Under the Nasdaq listing standards and applicable SEC rules, we are required to have at least three members of the audit committee, all of whom must be independent, subject to certain phase-in provisions. Each such prospective member of our audit committee meets the independent director standard under Nasdaq listing standards and under Rule 10A-3(b)(1) of the Exchange Act.
Each member of the audit committee is financially literate and our board of directors has determined that Mr. Brachfeld qualifies as an “audit committee financial expert” as defined in applicable SEC rules and has accounting or related financial management expertise.
We have adopted an audit committee charter, which details the purpose and principal functions of the audit committee, including:
● the appointment, compensation, retention, replacement, and oversight of the work of the independent auditors and any other independent registered public accounting firm engaged by us;
● pre-approving all audit and non-audit services to be provided by the independent auditors or any other registered public accounting firm engaged by us, and establishing pre-approval policies and procedures;
● reviewing and discussing with the independent auditors all relationships the auditors have with us in order to evaluate their continued independence;
● setting clear hiring policies for employees or former employees of the independent auditors;
● setting clear policies for audit partner rotation in compliance with applicable laws and regulations;
● obtaining and reviewing a report, at least annually, from the independent auditors describing (i) the independent auditor’s internal quality-control procedures and (ii) any material issues raised by the most recent internal quality-control review, or peer review, of the audit firm, or by any inquiry or investigation by governmental or professional authorities, within, the preceding five years respecting one or more independent audits carried out by the firm and any steps taken to deal with such issues;
● meeting to review and discuss our annual audited financial statements and quarterly financial statements with management and the independent auditor, including reviewing our specific disclosures under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations”;
● reviewing and approving any related party transaction required to be disclosed pursuant to Item 404 of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC prior to us entering into such transaction; and
● reviewing with management, the independent auditors, and our legal advisors, as appropriate, any legal, regulatory or compliance matters, including any correspondence with regulators or government agencies and any employee complaints or published reports that raise material issues regarding our financial statements or accounting policies and any significant changes in accounting standards or rules promulgated by the Financial Accounting Standards Board, the SEC or other regulatory authorities.
Compensation Committee
We have established a compensation committee of the board of directors. Ms. Alon and Mr. Brachfeld serve as members of our compensation committee and Ms. Alon serves as the chairperson of the compensation committee. Under the Nasdaq listing standards and applicable SEC rules, we are required to have at least two members of the compensation committee, all of whom must be independent, subject to certain phase-in provisions. Each such member of our compensation committee meets the independent director standard under Nasdaq listing standards and Rule 10C-1 of the Exchange Act applicable to members of the compensation committee.
We have adopted a compensation committee charter, which details the purpose and responsibility of the compensation committee, including:
● reviewing and approving on an annual basis the corporate goals and objectives relevant to our Chief Executive Officer’s compensation (if any is paid by us), evaluating our Chief Executive Officer’s performance in light of such goals and objectives and determining and approving the remuneration (if any) of our Chief Executive Officer based on such evaluation;
● reviewing and making recommendations to our board of directors with respect to the compensation (if any) and any incentive-compensation of all of our other officers;
● reviewing our executive compensation policies and plans;
● implementing and administering our incentive compensation equity-based remuneration plans;
● assisting management in complying with our proxy statement and annual report disclosure requirements;
● approving all special perquisites, special cash payments and other special compensation and benefit arrangements for our officers and employees;
● producing a report on executive compensation to be included in our annual proxy statement; and
● reviewing, evaluating and recommending changes, if appropriate, to the remuneration for directors.
The charter also provides that the compensation committee may, in its sole discretion, retain or obtain the advice of a compensation consultant, legal counsel or other adviser and will be directly responsible for the appointment, compensation and oversight of the work of any such adviser. However, before engaging or receiving advice from a compensation consultant, external legal counsel or any other adviser, the compensation committee will consider the independence of each such adviser, including the factors required by Nasdaq and the SEC.
Nominating Committee
We do not have a standing nominating committee, though we intend to form a corporate governance and nominating committee as and when required to do so by law or Nasdaq rules. In accordance with Rule 5605 of the Nasdaq rules, a majority of the independent directors may recommend a director nominee for selection by the board of directors. The board of directors believes that the independent directors can satisfactorily carry out the responsibility of properly selecting or approving director nominees without the formation of a standing nominating committee. The directors who will participate in the consideration and recommendation of director nominees are Messrs. Basch and Brachfeld, and Ms. Alon. In accordance with Rule 5605 of the Nasdaq rules, all such directors are independent. As there is no standing nominating committee, we do not have a nominating committee charter in place.
Prior to our initial business combination, in the event of a vacancy in our board of directors, the board will also consider director candidates recommended for nomination by holders of our ordinary shares, for appointment by the remaining members of our board then still serving. During the entire period until our initial business combination, only holders of our Class B ordinary shares, and not holders of our Class A ordinary shares, will have the right to appoint members of our board.
We have not formally established any specific, minimum qualifications that must be met or skills that are necessary for directors to possess. In general, in identifying and evaluating nominees for director, the board of directors considers educational background, diversity of professional experience, knowledge of our business, integrity, professional reputation, independence, wisdom, and the ability to represent the best interests of our shareholders.
Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation
None of our officers currently serves, and in the past year has not served, as a member of the board of directors or compensation committee of any entity that has one or more officers serving on our board of directors.
Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership Reporting Compliance
Delinquent Section 16(a) Reports
Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act requires our officers, directors and persons who beneficially own more than ten percent of our ordinary shares to file reports of ownership and changes in ownership with the SEC. These reporting persons are also required to furnish us with copies of all Section 16(a) forms they file.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, each of the officers and directors listed above (other than Craig Marshak) under the table “Directors and Executive Officers”, as well as our sponsor (Moringa Sponsor, LP) and its Delaware subsidiary (Moringa Sponsor US L.P) filed their initial Form 3s belatedly, and our sponsor and its Delaware subsidiary, together with our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ilan Levin also filed jointly their Form 4 belatedly (reporting the purchase of private units concurrently with the closing of our IPO). Our Vice Chairman, Craig Marshak, did not file a Form 3.
Code of Ethics
We have adopted a code of ethics applicable to our directors, officers and employees (our “Code of Ethics”). Our Code of Ethics is available on our website. Our Code of Ethics is a “code of ethics,” as defined in Item 406(b) of Regulation S-K. We will make any legally required disclosures regarding amendments to, or waivers of, provisions of our Code of Ethics on our website.
Conflicts of Interest
Certain of our executive officers and directors have or may have fiduciary and contractual duties to certain companies in which they have invested. These entities may compete with us for acquisition opportunities. If these entities decide to pursue any such opportunity, we may be precluded from pursuing it. However, we do not expect these duties to present a significant conflict of interest with our search for an initial business combination.
Under Cayman Islands law, directors and officers owe the following fiduciary duties:
● duty to act in good faith in what the director or officer believes to be in the best interests of the company as a whole;
● duty to exercise powers for the purposes for which those powers were conferred and not for a collateral purpose;
● duty to not improperly fetter the exercise of future discretion;
● duty not to put themselves in a position in which there is a conflict between their duty to the company and their personal interests; and
● duty to exercise independent judgment.
In addition to the above, directors also owe a duty of care which is not fiduciary in nature. This duty has been defined as a requirement to act as a reasonably diligent person having both the general knowledge, skill and experience that may reasonably be expected of a person carrying out the same functions as are carried out by that director in relation to the company and the general knowledge skill and experience which that director has.
As set out above, directors have a duty not to put themselves in a position of conflict and this includes a duty not to engage in self-dealing, or to otherwise benefit as a result of their position at the expense of the company. However, in some instances what would otherwise be a breach of this duty can be forgiven and/or authorized in advance by the shareholders; provided that there is full disclosure by the directors. This can be done by way of permission granted in the amended and restated memorandum and articles of association or alternatively by shareholder approval at general meetings.
Certain of our officers and directors presently have, and any of them in the future may have additional, fiduciary or contractual obligations to other entities pursuant to which such officer or director is or will be, subject to their fiduciary duties under Cayman Islands law, required to present a business combination opportunity to such entity. Accordingly, if any of our officers or directors becomes aware of a business combination opportunity that is suitable for an entity to which he or she has then-current fiduciary or contractual obligations, he or she may need to honor these fiduciary or contractual obligations to present such business combination opportunity to such entity, subject to their fiduciary duties under Cayman Islands law. We do not believe, however, that the fiduciary duties or contractual obligations of our officers or directors will materially affect our ability to complete our initial business combination. Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law: (i) no individual serving as a director or an officer shall have any duty, except and to the extent expressly assumed by contract, to refrain from engaging directly or indirectly in the same or similar business activities or lines of business as us; and (ii) we renounce any interest or expectancy in, or in being offered an opportunity to participate in, any potential transaction or matter which may be a corporate opportunity for any director or officer, on the one hand, and us, on the other.
Potential investors should also be aware of the following other potential conflicts of interest:
● None of our officers or directors is required to commit his or her full time to our affairs and, accordingly, may have conflicts of interest in allocating his or her time among various business activities.
● In the course of their other business activities, our officers and directors may become aware of investment and business opportunities that may be appropriate for presentation to us as well as the other entities with which they are affiliated. Our management may have conflicts of interest in determining to which entity a particular business opportunity should be presented. For a complete description of our management’s other affiliations, see “-Directors and Executive Officers.”
● Our initial shareholders have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to their founders shares and any public shares held by them in connection with the completion of our initial business combination. Our directors and officers have also entered into the letter agreement, imposing similar obligations on them with respect to public shares acquired by them, if any. Additionally, our initial shareholders have agreed to waive their redemption rights with respect to their founders shares if we fail to consummate our initial business combination within 24 months after the closing of our initial public offering. However, if our initial shareholders or any of our officers, directors or affiliates acquire public shares in or after our initial public offering, they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to such public shares if we fail to consummate our initial business combination within the prescribed time frame. If we do not complete our initial business combination within such applicable time period, the remaining proceeds of the sale of the private units that are held in the trust account will be used to fund the redemption of our public shares, and the private warrants will expire worthless. With certain limited exceptions, the founders shares and private units will be subject to the following transfer restrictions:
o 50% of the founders shares will not be transferable, assignable or salable by our initial shareholders, and will remain in escrow, until the earlier of (i) six months after the date of the consummation of our initial business combination and (ii) the date on which we consummate a liquidation, merger, amalgamation, share exchange, reorganization, or other similar transaction after our initial business combination that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
o The remaining 50% of the founders shares will not be transferred, assigned, sold or released from escrow until six months after the date of the consummation of our initial business combination, or the date on which we consummate a liquidation, merger, amalgamation, share exchange, reorganization, or other similar transaction after our initial business combination that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property, unless the last reported sale price of our Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, rights issuances, subdivisions, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing after our initial business combination, in which case those shares will be released from the lock-up.
o With certain limited exceptions, the private units and underlying securities will not be transferable, assignable or salable by our sponsor until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination. Since our sponsor and officers and directors may directly or indirectly own ordinary shares and warrants following our initial public offering, our officers and directors may have a conflict of interest in determining whether a particular target business is an appropriate business with which to effectuate our initial business combination.
● Our officers and directors may negotiate employment or consulting agreements with a target business in connection with a particular business combination. These agreements may provide for them to receive compensation following our initial business combination and as a result, may cause them to have conflicts of interest in determining whether to proceed with a particular business combination.
● Our officers and directors may have a conflict of interest with respect to evaluating a particular business combination if the retention or resignation of any such officers and directors was included by a target business as a condition to any agreement with respect to our initial business combination.
● Our officers and directors may have a conflict of interest with respect to their involvement in other special purpose acquisition companies seeking business combinations, but have agreed in connection with that potential conflict not to file publicly a registration statement for another such company until our company signs an agreement for an initial business combination transaction without the consent of the representative.
The conflicts described above may not be resolved in our favor.
We are not prohibited from pursuing an initial business combination with a company that is affiliated with our sponsor, officers or directors. In the event we seek to complete our initial business combination with such a company, we would obtain an opinion from an independent investment banking firm or from an independent accounting firm, that such an initial business combination is fair to our company from a financial point of view.
In addition, our sponsor or any of its affiliates may make additional investments in the company in connection with the initial business combination, although our sponsor and its affiliates have no obligation or current intention to do so. If our sponsor or any of its affiliates elects to make additional investments, such proposed investments could influence our sponsor’s motivation to complete an initial business combination.
In the event that we submit our initial business combination to our public shareholders for a vote, our initial shareholders have agreed (and their permitted transferees will agree), pursuant to the terms of a letter agreement entered into with us, to vote their founders shares and any public shares held by them in favor of our initial business combination. Our directors and officers have also entered into the letter agreement, imposing similar obligations on them with respect to public shares acquired by them, if any.
Limitation on Liability and Indemnification of Officers and Directors
Cayman Islands law does not limit the extent to which a company’s memorandum and articles of association may provide for indemnification of officers and directors, except to the extent any such provision may be held by the Cayman Islands courts to be contrary to public policy, such as to provide indemnification against willful default, fraud or the consequences of committing a crime. Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide for indemnification of our officers and directors to the maximum extent permitted by law, including for any liability incurred in their capacities as such, except through their own actual fraud, willful default or willful neglect.
We may purchase a policy of directors’ and officers’ liability insurance that insures our officers and directors against the cost of defense, settlement or payment of a judgment in some circumstances and insures us against our obligations to indemnify our officers and directors. We also intend to enter into indemnity agreements with them.
Our officers and directors have agreed to waive any right, title, interest or claim of any kind in or to any monies in the trust account, and have agreed to waive any right, title, interest or claim of any kind they may have in the future as a result of, or arising out of, any services provided to us and will not seek recourse against the trust account for any reason whatsoever. Accordingly, any indemnification provided will only be able to be satisfied by us if we (i) have sufficient funds outside of the trust account or (ii) consummate an initial business combination. Furthermore, a shareholder’s investment may be adversely affected to the extent we pay the costs of settlement and damage awards against our officers and directors pursuant to these indemnification provisions.
We believe that these provisions, the insurance and the indemnity agreements are necessary to attract and retain talented and experienced officers and directors.
Insofar as indemnification for liabilities arising under the Securities Act may be permitted to directors, officers or persons controlling us pursuant to the foregoing provisions, we have been informed that in the opinion of the SEC such indemnification is against public policy as expressed in the Securities Act and is therefore unenforceable.
Item 11. Executive Compensation.
None of our officers or directors has received any cash compensation for services rendered to us. Each of our independent directors invested, prior to the closing of our initial public offering, as a limited partner holding a minority, non-controlling interest in our sponsor and therefore holds an indirect interest in the founders shares held by our sponsor’s subsidiary. In addition, our sponsor, officers and directors, and any of their respective affiliates, are reimbursed for any bona-fide, documented out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. In addition, we may pay a customary financial consulting fee to an affiliate of our sponsor, which will not be made from the proceeds of our initial public offering held in the trust account prior to the completion of our initial business combination. We may pay such financial consulting fee in the event such party or parties provide us with specific target company, industry, financial or market expertise, as well as insights, relationships, services or resources that we believe are necessary in order to assess, negotiate and consummate an initial business combination. The amount of any such financial consulting fee we pay will be based upon the prevailing market for similar services for comparable transactions at such time, and will be subject to the review of our audit committee pursuant to the audit committee’s policies and procedures relating to transactions that may present conflicts of interest. Our audit committee will also review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsor, officers, directors or our or their affiliates.
After the completion of our initial business combination, directors or members of our management team who remain with us may be paid consulting, management or other fees from the combined company. All of these fees will be fully disclosed to shareholders, to the extent then known, in the tender offer materials or proxy solicitation materials furnished to our shareholders in connection with a proposed business combination. It is unlikely the amount of such compensation will be known at the time such materials are distributed, because the directors of the post-combination business will be responsible for determining officer and director compensation. Any compensation to be paid to our officers will be determined by a compensation committee constituted solely by independent directors.
We do not intend to take any action to ensure that members of our management team maintain their positions with us after the consummation of our initial business combination, although it is possible that some or all of our officers and directors may negotiate employment or consulting arrangements to remain with us after the initial business combination. The existence or terms of any such employment or consulting arrangements to retain their positions with us may influence our management’s motivation in identifying or selecting a target business but we do not believe that the ability of our management to remain with us after the consummation of our initial business combination will be a determining factor in our decision to proceed with any potential business combination. We are not party to any agreements with our officers and directors that provide for benefits upon termination of employment.
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The following table sets forth information regarding the beneficial ownership of our Class A ordinary shares as of the date of this Annual Report by:
● each person known by us to be the beneficial owner of more than 5% of our issued and outstanding Class A ordinary shares;
● each of our officers and directors; and
● all our officers and directors as a group.
Beneficial ownership is presented in accordance with Rule 13d-3 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and generally reflects voting and/or investment power with respect to our ordinary shares. Unless otherwise indicated, we believe that all persons named in the table have sole voting and investment power with respect to all ordinary shares beneficially owned by them. The following table does not reflect record or beneficial ownership of public or private warrants, as those warrants are not exercisable within 60 days of the date of this Annual Report.
* Less than one percent.
(1) Unless otherwise noted, the business address of each of the following entities or individuals is c/o Moringa Partners Ltd., 250 Park Avenue, 7th Floor New York, NY 10177.
(2) Beneficial ownership percentage is calculated on the basis of 11,980,000 Class A ordinary shares issued and outstanding as of March 31, 2022. In addition, as of that date, our sponsor’s wholly-owned subsidiary (Moringa Sponsor US L.P.) holds all 2,875,000 outstanding Class B ordinary shares, which will convert into Class A ordinary shares on a one-for-one basis upon consummation of our initial business combination. Other than the foregoing conversion provisions, Class B ordinary shares have the same rights as Class A ordinary shares, except that only Class B ordinary shares have the right to vote in the election of directors, as described below. Consequently, we have treated the 2,875,000 Class B ordinary shares as part of the Class A ordinary shares solely for the purposes of the presentation of our sponsor (and its wholly-owned subsidiary’s) beneficial ownership herein (whereas for all other 5% or greater shareholders, the Class A ordinary shares that underlie the Class B ordinary shares are not counted as issued and outstanding and do not reduce their beneficial ownership of Class A ordinary shares).
(3) Based solely on a Schedule 1G filed with the SEC on February 15, 2022 by the reporting persons. The shares reported in this row are held of record by Moringa Sponsor US L.P., a Delaware limited partnership and a wholly-owned subsidiary of our sponsor, Moringa Sponsor, LP, a Cayman Islands exempted limited partnership. Moringa Partners Ltd., an Israeli company that is wholly-owned by Mr. Levin, serves as the sole general partner of our sponsor. Mr. Levin, our Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, is the sole director of that Israeli company. As a result of his ownership of that Israeli company, Mr. Levin possesses sole voting and investment authority with respect to the shares of our company indirectly held by our sponsor. The limited partnership interests of our sponsor are held by various individuals and entities. Mr. Levin disclaims beneficial ownership of the securities held by our sponsor other than to the extent of his direct or indirect pecuniary interest in such securities. Each of our officers, directors and director nominees are direct and indirect members of our sponsor, or have direct or indirect economic interests in our sponsor.
(4) These shares consist of 2,875,000 founders shares and 352,857 private shares contained in the private units purchased by the sponsor and/or its affiliates in a private placement that occurred concurrently with the closing of our initial public offering.
(5) Based solely on a Schedule 13G filed with the SEC on February 14, 2022 by Saba Capital Management, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, Saba Capital Management GP, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company, and Mr. Boaz R. Weinstein. Each of these persons may be deemed to be the beneficial owner of all of the reported shares and possess shared voting power with respect to all of these shares. The address for these persons is 405 Lexington Avenue, 58th Floor, New York, New York 10174.
(6) Based solely on a Schedule 13G filed with the SEC on February 14, 2022 by Linden Capital L.P., a Bermuda limited partnership (“Linden Capital”), Linden Advisors LP, a Delaware limited partnership (“Linden Advisors”), Linden GP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Linden GP”), and Mr. Siu Min (Joe) Wong. Each of Linden Advisors and Mr. Wong may be deemed the beneficial owner of all of the reported shares, which consist of 633,011 shares held by Linden Capital and 41,989 shares held by separately managed accounts. Each of Linden GP and Linden Capital may be deemed the beneficial owner of the 633,011 shares held by Linden Capital. Linden Capital and Linden GP possess shared voting power over 633,011 of the reported shares and Linden Advisors and Mr. Wong possess shared voting power over all of the reported shares.
Prior to our initial business combination, only holders of our founders shares will have the right to vote on the appointment of directors, and holders of a majority of our founders shares may remove a member of the board of directors for any reason. In addition, because of their ownership block, our initial shareholders may be able to effectively influence the outcome of all other matters requiring approval by our shareholders, including amendments to our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association and approval of significant corporate transactions.
Concurrently with the closings of our initial public offering (including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option), our sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital purchased, in the aggregate, 380,000 private units at a price of $10 per unit ($3,800,000) in a private placement. Our sponsor purchased 352,857, of those units and EarlyBirdCapital purchased 27,143, of those units. Each private unit is comprised of one Class A ordinary share and one-half warrant (to purchase one-half Class A ordinary share). Each whole private warrant is exercisable to purchase one whole ordinary share at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment as provided herein. The purchase price of the private units was added to the proceeds from our initial public offering held in the trust account pending our completion of our initial business combination. If we do not complete our initial business combination within 24 months from the closing of our initial public offering, the proceeds of the sale of the private units held in the trust account will be used to fund the redemption of our public shares, and the private warrants will expire worthless. The private warrants are subject to the transfer restrictions described below. The private warrants will not be redeemable by us so long as they are held by the sponsor, EarlyBirdCapital or their respective permitted transferees. If the private warrants are held by holders other than our sponsor, EarlyBirdCapital or their respective permitted transferees, the private warrants will be redeemable by us and exercisable by the holders on the same basis as the warrants included in the units being sold in our initial public offering. Otherwise, the private warrants have terms and provisions that are identical to those of the warrants being sold as part of the units in our initial public offering.
Our sponsor and our officers and directors are deemed to be our “promoters” as such term is defined under the federal securities laws. See “Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence” for additional information regarding our relationships with our promoters.
Transfers of Founders Shares and Private Warrants
The founders shares and private units (including Class A ordinary shares and private warrants comprising the private units) and any Class A ordinary shares issued upon conversion or exercise thereof (as applicable) are each subject to transfer restrictions pursuant to lock-up provisions in the letter agreement entered into by our initial shareholders with us. Those lock-up provisions provide that such securities are not transferable or salable:
(i) in the case of the founders shares:
(x) for 50% of those shares, until the earlier of (A) six months after the completion of our initial business combination or (B) subsequent to our initial business combination, when the last sale price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share subdivisions, share consolidations, share capitalizations, rights issuances, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period; and
(y) for the other 50% of those shares, for the six months after the completion of our initial business combination transaction.
(All founders shares will also be released from lock-up, if sooner than the above, on the date on which we consummate a liquidation, merger, amalgamation, share exchange, reorganization, or other similar transaction after our initial business combination that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.)
(ii) in the case of the private shares and private warrants included in the private units, and the Class A ordinary shares underlying such warrants, until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination.
The above-described transfer restrictions are subject to an exception, in each case, for transfers (a) to our officers or directors, any affiliates or family members of our officers or directors, any members of our sponsor, or any affiliates of our sponsor, (b) in the case of an individual, by gift to a member of the individual’s immediate family or to a trust, the beneficiary of which is a member of the individual’s immediate family or an affiliate of such person, or to a charitable organization; (c) in the case of an individual, by virtue of laws of descent and distribution upon death of the individual; (d) in the case of an individual, pursuant to a qualified domestic relations order; (e) by private sales or transfers made in connection with the consummation of a business combination at prices no greater than the price at which the securities were originally purchased; (f) in the event of our liquidation prior to our completion of our initial business combination; (g) by virtue of the laws of the Cayman Islands or our sponsor’s exempted limited partnership agreement, as amended, upon liquidation of our sponsor; or (h) in the event of our completion of a liquidation, merger, amalgamation, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction which results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property subsequent to our completion of our initial business combination; provided, however, that in the case of clauses (a) through (e) or (g) these permitted transferees must enter into a written agreement agreeing to be bound by these transfer restrictions and by the same agreements entered into by our sponsor with respect to such securities (including provisions relating to voting, the trust account and liquidation distributions described elsewhere in this Annual Report).
The holders of the representative shares are subject to a lock-up restriction, which will remain in effect until three months after the completion of our initial business combination.
Registration Rights
The holders of the founders shares, private units (including private warrants), representative shares and warrants that may be issued on conversion of working capital loans (and any ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the private warrants or warrants issued upon conversion of the working capital loans and upon conversion of the founders shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement, dated February 19, 2021, requiring us to register such securities for resale. The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to two registration requests (subject to our reasonable best efforts to effect those registrations), excluding short form registration demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of our initial business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lock-up period. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Equity Compensation Plans
None of our officers or directors has received any cash compensation for services rendered to us. Each of our independent directors invested, prior to the closing of our initial public offering, as a limited partner holding a minority, non-controlling interest in our sponsor and therefore holds an indirect interest in the founders shares held by our sponsor’s subsidiary. In addition, our sponsor, officers and directors, and any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any bona-fide, documented out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. In addition, we may pay a customary financial consulting fee to an affiliate of our sponsor, which will not be made from the proceeds of our initial public offering held in the trust account prior to the completion of our initial business combination. We may pay such financial consulting fee in the event such party or parties provide us with specific target company, industry, financial or market expertise, as well as insights, relationships, services or resources that we believe are necessary in order to assess, negotiate and consummate an initial business combination. The amount of any such financial consulting fee we pay will be based upon the prevailing market for similar services for comparable transactions at such time, and will be subject to the review of our audit committee pursuant to the audit committee’s policies and procedures relating to transactions that may present conflicts of interest. Our audit committee will also review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsor, officers, directors or our or their affiliates.
After the completion of our initial business combination, directors or members of our management team who remain with us may be paid consulting, management or other fees from the combined company. All of these fees will be fully disclosed to shareholders, to the extent then known, in the tender offer materials or proxy solicitation materials furnished to our shareholders in connection with a proposed business combination. It is unlikely the amount of such compensation will be known at the time such materials are distributed, because the directors of the post-combination business will be responsible for determining officer and director compensation. Any compensation to be paid to our officers will be determined by a compensation committee constituted solely by independent directors.
We do not intend to take any action to ensure that members of our management team maintain their positions with us after the consummation of our initial business combination, although it is possible that some or all of our officers and directors may negotiate employment or consulting arrangements to remain with us after the initial business combination. The existence or terms of any such employment or consulting arrangements to retain their positions with us may influence our management’s motivation in identifying or selecting a target business but we do not believe that the ability of our management to remain with us after the consummation of our initial business combination will be a determining factor in our decision to proceed with any potential business combination. We are not party to any agreements with our officers and directors that provide for benefits upon termination of employment.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
In November 2020, our sponsor’s wholly-owned subsidiary purchased 2,875,000 founders shares for an aggregate purchase price of $25,000, or approximately $0.008 per share.
Our sponsor’s wholly-owned subsidiary purchased, in private placements that closed simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering in February and March 2021, an aggregate of 352,857 private units consisting of 352,857 private shares and 176,429 private warrants at a price of $10.00 per unit ($3,528,570 in the aggregate). Each private warrant is exercisable to purchase one whole ordinary share at $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment as provided herein. Our sponsor is permitted to transfer the private units held by it to certain permitted transferees, including our officers and directors and other persons or entities affiliated with or related to them, but the transferees receiving such securities will be subject to the same agreements with respect to such securities as our sponsor. Otherwise, these units will generally not be transferable or salable until 30 days after the completion of our initial business combination. The private warrants will be non-redeemable so long as they are held by our sponsor or its permitted transferees. The private warrants may also be exercised by the sponsor or its permitted transferees for cash or on a cashless basis. Otherwise, the private warrants have terms and provisions that are identical to those of the warrants that were sold as part of the units in our initial public offering.
We have entered into an Administrative Services Agreement pursuant to which we pay our sponsor up to $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services. Upon completion of our initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying any of these monthly fees. Accordingly, in the event the consummation of our initial business combination takes the maximum 24 months, our sponsor will be paid up to $10,000 per month ($240,000 in the aggregate) for office space, administrative and support services and will be entitled to be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses.
If any of our officers or directors becomes aware of a business combination opportunity that falls within the line of business of any entity to which he or she has then-current fiduciary or contractual obligations, subject to their fiduciary duties under Cayman Islands law, he or she may be required to present such business combination opportunity to such entity prior to presenting such business combination opportunity to us, subject to his or her fiduciary duties under Cayman Islands law. Our amended and restated memorandum and articles of association provide that to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law: (i) no individual serving as a director or an officer shall have any duty, except and to the extent expressly assumed by contract, to refrain from engaging directly or indirectly in the same or similar business activities or lines of business as us; and (ii) we renounce any interest or expectancy in, or in being offered an opportunity to participate in, any potential transaction or matter which may be a corporate opportunity for any director or officer, on the one hand, and us, on the other.
Our officers and directors currently have and will in the future have certain relevant fiduciary duties or contractual obligations that may, subject to applicable law, take priority over their duties to us. Our sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, will be reimbursed for any bona-fide, documented out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsor, officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on our behalf.
At the closing of our initial business combination, we may pay a customary financial consulting fee to an affiliate of our sponsor, which will not be made from the proceeds of our initial public offering held in the trust account prior to the completion of our initial business combination. We may pay such financial consulting fee in the event such party or parties provide us with specific target company, industry, financial or market expertise, as well as insights, relationships, services or resources that we believe are necessary in order to assess, negotiate and consummate an initial business combination. The amount of any such financial consulting fee we pay will be based upon the prevailing market for similar services for comparable transactions at such time, and will be subject to the review of our audit committee pursuant to the audit committee’s policies and procedures relating to transactions that may present conflicts of interest.
Pursuant to a promissory note that we issued to our sponsor, the sponsor loaned us a total of $170,000, which we used for a portion of the expenses of our initial public offering. As of the date of this annual report, we had repaid the entirety of that $170,000 amount under the promissory note with our sponsor. These loans were non-interest bearing, unsecured and were due at the earlier of March 31, 2021 or the closing of our initial public offering. The loans were repaid upon the closing of our initial public offering out of the offering proceeds not held in the trust account. The value of our sponsor’s interest in this transaction corresponds to the principal amount issued and outstanding under any such loan.
In addition, in order to finance costs in connection with our pursuit of a prospective initial business combination transaction, our sponsor has agreed to lend us up to an additional $1,000,000 pursuant to a promissory note that we issued to our sponsor in August 2021. As of the date of this annual report, we had borrowed $600,000 under that promissory note with our sponsor. Loans under that note are non-interest bearing, unsecured and are due at the earlier of February 19, 2023 (the liquidation date for our company) or the closing of our initial business combination.
Furthermore, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us additional funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that the initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of those loans may be converted into warrants at a price of $1.00 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private warrants included in the private units to be issued and sold to our sponsor. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. We do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our trust account.
After our initial business combination, members of our management team who remain with us may be paid consulting, management or other fees from the combined company with any and all amounts being fully disclosed to our shareholders, to the extent then known, in the tender offer or proxy solicitation materials, as applicable, furnished to our shareholders. It is unlikely the amount of such compensation will be known at the time of distribution of such tender offer materials or at the time of a general meeting held to consider our initial business combination, as applicable, as it will be up to the directors of the post-combination business to determine executive and director compensation.
We have entered into a registration rights agreement with respect to the founders shares, private units, representative shares and warrants issued upon conversion of working capital loans (if any), which is described in “Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters - Registration Rights.”
We have entered into indemnity agreements with each of our officers and directors, a form of which is filed as an exhibit to this Annual Report. Those agreements require us to indemnify those individuals to the fullest extent permitted under applicable Cayman Islands law and to hold harmless, exonerate and advance expenses incurred as a result of any proceeding against them as to which they could be indemnified.
Related Party Transactions Policies
We have not yet adopted a formal policy for the review, approval or ratification of related party transactions. Accordingly, the transactions discussed above were not reviewed, approved or ratified in accordance with any such policy.
We have adopted a code of ethics requiring us to avoid, wherever possible, all conflicts of interest, except under guidelines or resolutions approved by our board of directors (or the appropriate committee of our board) or as disclosed in our public filings with the SEC. Under our code of ethics, conflict of interest situations include any financial transaction, arrangement or relationship (including any indebtedness or guarantee of indebtedness) involving the company. A form of the code of ethics that we have adopted is filed as an exhibit to this annual report.
Our audit committee, pursuant to a written charter that we adopted upon the consummation of our initial public offering, is responsible for reviewing and approving related party transactions to the extent that we enter into such transactions. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the audit committee present at a meeting at which a quorum is present is required in order to approve a related party transaction. A majority of the members of the entire audit committee will constitute a quorum. Without a meeting, the unanimous written consent of all of the members of the audit committee is required to approve a related party transaction. Our audit committee reviews on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to our sponsor, officers or directors, or our or any of their affiliates.
These procedures are intended to determine whether any such related party transaction impairs the independence of a director or presents a conflict of interest on the part of a director, employee or officer.
To further minimize conflicts of interest, we have agreed not to consummate an initial business combination with an entity that is affiliated with any of our sponsor, officers or directors unless we, or a committee of independent and disinterested directors, have obtained an opinion from an independent investment banking firm or an independent accounting firm that our initial business combination is fair to our company from a financial point of view.
Furthermore, no finder’s fees, reimbursements or cash payments will be made by us to our sponsor, officers or directors, or our or any of their affiliates, for services rendered to us prior to or in connection with the completion of our initial business combination, other than the following payments, none of which will be made from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private units held in the trust account prior to the completion of our initial business combination:
● Repayment of an aggregate of $170,000 in loans that were provided to us by our sponsor to cover offering-related and organizational expenses, which repayment already occurred;
● Repayment of up to $1,000,000 in loans that may be provided to us by our sponsor to cover expenses related to our pursuit of a business combination transaction under a promissory note that we issued to the sponsor;
● Payment to our sponsor of up to $10,000 per month for office space, administrative and support services;
● Payment of consulting, success or finder fees to our sponsor, officers, directors, initial shareholders or their affiliates in connection with the consummation of our initial business combination;
● Reimbursement for any out-of-pocket expenses related to identifying, investigating and completing an initial business combination;
● Repayment of additional loans which may be made by our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, the terms of which have not been determined nor have any written agreements been executed with respect thereto; and
● At the closing of our initial business combination, we may pay a customary financial consulting fee to an affiliate of our sponsor. We may pay such financial consulting fee in the event such party or parties provide us with specific target company, industry, financial or market expertise, as well as insights, relationships, services or resources that we believe are necessary in order to assess, negotiate and consummate an initial business combination. The amount of any such financial consulting fee we pay will be based upon the prevailing market for similar services for comparable transactions at such time, and will be subject to the review of our audit committee pursuant to the audit committee’s policies and procedures relating to transactions that may present conflicts of interest.
The above payments may be funded using the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private units not held in the trust account or, upon completion of the initial business combination, from any amounts remaining from the proceeds of the trust account released to us in connection therewith.
Our audit committee reviews on a quarterly basis all payments that are made to our sponsor, officers or directors, or our or their affiliates.
Director Independence
Nasdaq listing standards require that a majority of our board of directors be independent within one year of our initial public offering. An “independent director” is defined generally as a person other than an officer or employee of the company or its subsidiaries or any other individual having a relationship which in the opinion of the company’s board of directors, would interfere with the director’s exercise of independent judgment in carrying out the responsibilities of a director. Our board of directors has determined that each of Messrs. Basch and Brachfeld, and Ms. Alon, is an “independent director” as defined in the Nasdaq listing standards and applicable SEC rules. Our audit committee and compensation committee is entirely composed of independent directors meeting Nasdaq’s and the SEC’s additional requirements applicable to members of those committees. Our independent directors have regularly scheduled meetings at which only independent directors are present.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The following is a summary of fees paid or to be paid to Kesselman & Kesselman (“PwC Israel”), for services rendered for the year ended December 31, 2021 and the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020:
(1) Audit fees consist of fees that we paid for professional services rendered by PwC Israel in connection with the audit of our consolidated annual financial statements and services that would normally be provided by PwC Israel in connection with statutory and regulatory filings or engagements.
(2) Audit-related fees consist of fees billed for assurance and related services that are reasonably related to performance of the audit or review of our financial statements and are not reported under “Audit Fees.” These services include attest services that are not required by statute or regulation and consultations concerning financial accounting and reporting standards. For 2021, these fees consisted of financial due diligence services provided to us by PwC Israel in respect of potential target companies for our initial business combination.
Pre-Approval Policy
Our audit committee was formed upon the consummation of our initial public offering. As a result, the audit committee did not pre- approve all of the foregoing services, although any services rendered prior to the formation of our audit committee were approved by our board of directors. Since the formation of our audit committee, and on a going-forward basis, the audit committee has and will pre- approve all auditing services and permitted non-audit services to be performed for us by our auditors, including the fees and terms thereof (subject to the de minimis exceptions for non-audit services described in the Exchange Act which are approved by the audit committee prior to the completion of the audit).
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a) The following documents are filed as part of this Form 10-K:
(1) Financial Statements:
(2) Financial Statement Schedules:
None.
(3) Exhibits
We hereby file as part of this Report the exhibits listed in the attached Exhibit Index.
(1)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 1.1 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(2)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 1.2 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(3)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 3.2 of the Registrant’s Registrant Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-252615) filed with the SEC on February 1, 2021
(4)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Registrant’s Registrant Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-252615) filed with the SEC on February 1, 2021
(5)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.2 of the Registrant’s Registrant Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-252615) filed with the SEC on February 1, 2021
(6)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.3 of the Registrant’s Registrant Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-252615) filed with the SEC on February 1, 2021
(7)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.1 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(8)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 4.5 of the Registrant’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 31, 2021
(9)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.1 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(10)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.2 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(11)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.3 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(12)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.4 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(13)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5.1 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(14)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.5.2 of the Registrant’s Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on February 22, 2021
(15)
Incorporated herein by reference to Exhibit 10.7 of the Registrant’s Registrant Statement on Form S-1 (Registration No. 333-252615) filed with the SEC on February 1, 2021
* Filed herewith.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
Not applicable.
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Act of 1934, as amended, the registrant has duly caused this Annual Report on Form 10-K to be signed on its behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on March 31, 2022.
Moringa Acquisition Corp
By: /s/ Ilan Levin
Name: Ilan Levin
Title: Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been signed by the following persons in the capacity and on the dates indicated.
Name
Position
Date
/s/ Ilan Levin
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
March 31, 2022
Ilan Levin (Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Gil Maman
Chief Financial Officer
March 31, 2022
Gil Maman (Principal Financial and Accounting Officer)
/s/ Craig Marshak
Vice Chairman
March 31, 2022
Craig Marshak
/s/ Ruth Alon
Director
March 31, 2022
Ruth Alon
/s/ Michael Basch
Director
March 31, 2022
Michael Basch
/s/ Eric Brachfeld
Director
March 31, 2022
Eric Brachfeld
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
AS OF AND FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021
U.S. DOLLARS
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
AS OF AND FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021
U.S. DOLLARS
INDEX
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of Moringa Acquisition Corp
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of Moringa Acquisition Corp (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the related statements of operations, changes in capital deficiency and cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2021 and for the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) to December 31, 2020, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Substantial Doubt about the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As discussed in Note 1(e) to the financial statements, the Company has limited cash and has incurred losses since inception. The Company will need to rely on the unwithdrawn amounts under the Sponsor promissory notes as well as future financial support (of which the Sponsor is not obligated to provide), in order to finance its operational needs in its search for a business combination. Moreover, if the Company is unable to complete a business combination by February 19, 2023 then the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. Management’s plans in regard to these matters are also described in Note 1(e). The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements are the responsibility of the Company’s management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits of these financial statements in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. The Company is not required to have, nor were we engaged to perform, an audit of its internal control over financial reporting. As part of our audits we are required to obtain an understanding of internal control over financial reporting but not for the purpose of expressing an opinion on the effectiveness of the Company's internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we express no such opinion.
Our audits included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Kesselman & Kesselman
Certified Public Accountants (lsr.)
A member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited
Tel-Aviv, Israel
March 31, 2022
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 2020.
Kesselman & Kesselman, 146 Derech Menachem Begin, Tel-Aviv 6492103, Israel,
P.O Box 7187 Tel-Aviv 6107120, Telephone: +972 -3- 7954555, Fax:+972 -3- 7954556, www.pwc.com/il
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
BALANCE SHEETS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN CAPITAL DEFICIENCY
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these financial statements.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
NOTE 1 - DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS:
a. Organization and General
Moringa Acquisition Corp (hereafter - the Company) is a blank check company, incorporated on September 24, 2020 as a Cayman Islands exempted company, formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination (hereafter - the Business Combination). The Company is an emerging growth company, as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), as modified by the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”).
All activity for the period from September 24, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to the Company’s formation, its initial public offering (the “Public Offering”) described below and its search for a target company. The Company will generate interest income on proceeds held in the trust account derived from the Public Offering.
The Company has selected December 31 as its fiscal year end.
b. Sponsor and Financing
The Company’s sponsor is Moringa Sponsor, L.P., a Cayman exempted limited partnership (which is referred to herein, together with its wholly-owned subsidiary, Moringa Sponsor (US) LP, a Delaware limited partnership, as the “Sponsor”).
The registration statement relating to the Company’s Public Offering was declared effective by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission (the “SEC”) on February 16, 2021. The initial stage of the Company’s Public Offering- the sale of 10,000,000 Units - closed on February 19, 2021 (hereafter - the Closing of the Public Offering). Upon that closing and the concurrent closing of the initial stage of the Private Placement (as defined below in Note 3). $100,000,000 was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) (discussed in (c) below). On March 3, 2021, upon the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option for the Public Offering, the second stage of the Public Offering - the sale of 1,500,000 Units - closed. Upon that closing and the concurrent closing of the second stage of the Private Placement, an additional $15,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. The Company intends to finance its initial Business Combination with the net proceeds from the Public Offering and the Private Placement.
c. The Trust Account
The proceeds held in the Trust Account will be invested in money market funds registered under the Investment Company Act and compliant with Rule 2a-7 thereof that maintain a stable net asset value of $1.00.
The Company’s complies with the provisions of ASU 2016-18, under which changes in proceeds held in the Trust Account are accounted for as Changes in Cash, Cash Equivalents and Investments Held in a Trust Account in the Company’s Statements of Cash Flows.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 1 - DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS (continued):
d. Initial Business Combination
The Company’s management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Public Offering, although substantially all of the net proceeds of the Public Offering and the Private Placement are intended to be generally applied toward consummating an initial Business Combination. The initial Business Combination must occur with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value equal to at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding taxes payable on the income accrued in the Trust Account). There is no assurance that the Company will be able to successfully consummate an initial Business Combination.
The Company, after signing a definitive agreement for an Initial Business Combination, will provide its public shareholders the opportunity to redeem all or a portion of their shares upon the completion of the initial Business Combination, either (i) in connection with a shareholder meeting called to approve the business combination or (ii) by means of a tender offer. However, in no event will the Company redeem its public shares in an amount that would cause its net tangible assets to be less than $5,000,001 following such redemptions. In such case, the Company would not proceed with the redemption of its public shares and the related initial Business Combination, and instead may search for an alternate initial Business Combination.
If the Company holds a shareholder vote or there is a tender offer for shares in connection with an initial Business Combination, a public shareholder will have the right to redeem its shares for an amount in cash equal to its pro rata share of the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, calculated as of two days prior to the general meeting or commencement of the Company’s tender offer, including interest but less taxes payable. As a result, the Company’s Public Class A ordinary shares are classified as temporary equity upon the completion of the Public Offering, in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.”
Pursuant to the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association, if the Company is unable to complete the initial Business Combination within 24 months from the Closing of the Public Offering, the Company will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest (which interest shall be net of taxes payable, and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the Company’s remaining shareholders and the Company’s board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in each case to the Company’s obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 1 - DESCRIPTION OF ORGANIZATION AND BUSINESS OPERATIONS (continued):
The Sponsor and the Company’s officers and directors have entered into a letter agreement with the Company, pursuant to which they have waived their rights to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to any Class B ordinary shares (as described in Note 7) held by them if the Company fails to complete the initial Business Combination within 24 months of the Closing of the Public Offering or during any extended time that the Company has to consummate an initial Business Combination beyond 24 months as a result of a shareholder vote to amend its amended and restated memorandum and articles of association. However, if the Sponsor or any of the Company’s directors or officers acquire any Class A ordinary shares, they will be entitled to liquidating distributions from the Trust Account with respect to such shares if the Company fails to complete the Initial Business Combination within the prescribed time period.
In the event of a liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company after an initial Business Combination, the Company’s shareholders are entitled to share ratably in all assets remaining available for distribution to them after payment of liabilities and after provision is made for each class of stock, if any, having preference over the ordinary shares. The Company’s shareholders have no preemptive or other subscription rights. There are no sinking fund provisions applicable to the ordinary shares, except that the Company will provide its shareholders with the opportunity to redeem their public shares for cash equal to their pro rata share of the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, under the circumstances, and, subject to the limitations, described herein.
e. Substantial Doubt about the Company’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had approximately $39 thousand of cash and an accumulated deficit of $951 thousand. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standard Codification 205-40, “Going Concern”, the Company will need to obtain additional funds in order to satisfy its liquidity needs in its search for an Initial Business Combination. Since its inception date and through the issuance date of these financial statements, the Company’s liquidity needs were satisfied through an initial capital injection from the Sponsor, followed by net Private Placement proceeds, as well as several withdrawals of the Sponsor promissory notes. Management has determined that it will need to continue to rely and is significantly dependent on the unwithdrawn amounts under the outstanding Sponsor promissory notes, as well as on future promissory notes or other forms of financial support (of which the Sponsor is not obligated to provide). Moreover, the Company has until February 19, 2023 (hereafter - the Mandatory Liquidation Date) to consummate an Initial Business Combination. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. The Company intends to complete an Initial Business Combination before the Mandatory Liquidation Date. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate any business combination ahead of the Mandatory Liquidation Date, nor that they will be able to raise sufficient funds to complete an Initial Business Combination. These matters raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern, for the subsequent twelve months following the issuance date of these financial statements.
No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company fail to obtain financial support in its search for an Initial Business Combination, nor if it is required to liquidate after the Mandatory Liquidation Date.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES:
a. Basis of Presentation
The Company’s financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“U.S. GAAP”) and the rules and regulations of the SEC.
b. Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards.
The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard.
This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible, because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
c. Cash and cash equivalents
The Company considers as cash equivalents all short-term, highly liquid investments, which include short-term bank deposits with original maturities of three months or less from the date of purchase that are not restricted as to withdrawal or use and are readily convertible to known amounts of cash.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company held its cash and cash equivalents in an SVB bank account, and its investments Held in Trust Account in Goldman Sachs money market funds. Money market funds are characterized as Level I investments within the fair value hierarchy under ASC 820.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued):
d. Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption
As discussed in Note 1, all of the 11,500,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares sold as parts of the Units in the Public Offering contain a redemption feature. In accordance with the Accounting Standards Codification 480-10-S99-3A “Classification and Measurement of Redeemable Securities”, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of ASC 480. The Company has classified all of the shares sold under the Public Units as subject to possible redemption.
Immediately upon the Closing of the Public Offering, the Company recognized the accretion from the offering costs allocated to the Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption.
As of December 31, 2021, the shares of Class A Ordinary Shares subject to possible redemption reflected on the balance sheet are reconciled in the following table:
e. Net loss per share
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, Earnings Per Share. Net loss per share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. The Company applies the two-class method in calculating net loss per each share - Class A ordinary share subject to possible redemption, non-redeemable Class A and Class B ordinary shares. Accretion associated with the Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption is excluded from Net Loss per Share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had outstanding warrants to purchase up to 5,940,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares. The weighted average of these shares was excluded from the calculation of diluted net loss per share since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into shares and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued):
f. Concentration of credit risk
Financial instruments that potentially subject the Company to concentrations of credit risk consist of cash accounts in a financial institution, which, at times, may exceed the Federal Depository Insurance Coverage of $250,000. The Company has not experienced losses on these accounts and management believes the Company is not exposed to significant risks on such accounts.
g. Public Warrants
The Company applied the provisions of ASC 815-40 and classified its public warrants, issued as part of the Public Units as detailed in Note 3, as equity securities.
g. Private Warrant liability
The Company accounts for the warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in Accounting Standards Codification 815 (“ASC 815”), “Derivatives and Hedging”, under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as derivative liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjusts the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of the Private Warrants (as defined in Note 3) has been estimated using a Black-Scholes-Merton model.
h. Financial instruments
The fair value of the Company’s assets and liabilities, which qualify as financial instruments under the FASB ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures”, approximates the carrying amounts represented in the balance sheet, primarily due to their short-term nature.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 2 - SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES (continued):
i. Use of estimates in the preparation of financial statements
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results may differ from those estimates and such differences may have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
j. Offering Costs
The Company complies with the requirements of the Accounting Standards Codification 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering”. The Company incurred offering costs in connection with its Public Offering of $334,345. These costs, together with the upfront underwriter discount, of $2,300,000 were allocated between the sale of the Public Units and the Private Units.
Out of the total amount of offering costs, an amount of $7,599 was allocated to the Private Warrant Liability, and therefore charged as an expense.
k. Income tax
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes (hereafter - ASC 740). ASC 740 prescribes the use of the liability method whereby deferred tax asset and liability account balances are determined based on differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. The Company provides a valuation allowance, if necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to their estimated realizable value if it is more likely than not that a portion or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized, based on the weight of available positive and negative evidence. Deferred tax liabilities and assets are classified as non-current in accordance with ASU 2015-17.
The Company accounts for uncertain tax positions in accordance with ASC 740-10. ASC 740-10 contains a two-step approach to recognizing and measuring uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, on an evaluation of the technical merits, the tax position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% (cumulative probability) likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement. The Company accrues interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits under taxes on income (tax benefit).
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 3 - PUBLIC OFFERING AND PRIVATE PLACEMENTS:
l. Recent accounting pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
In the Initial Public Offering, the Company issued and sold 11,500,000 units (including 1,500,000 units sold at a second closing pursuant to the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full) at an offering price of $10.00 per unit (the “Units”). The Sponsor and EarlyBirdCapital, Inc. (the representative of the underwriters) purchased, in a private placement that occurred simultaneously with the two closings of the initial Public Offering (the “Private Placement”), an aggregate of 352,857 and 27,143 Units, respectively, at a price of $10.00 per Unit.
Each Unit (both those sold in the initial Public Offering and in the Private Placement) consists of one Class A ordinary share, $0.0001 par value, and one-half of one warrant, with each whole warrant exercisable for one Class A ordinary share (each, a “Public Warrant” and a “Private Warrant”, and collectively, the “Warrants”). Each Warrant entitles the holder thereof to purchase one whole Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment. No fractional shares will be issued upon exercise of the Warrants and only whole Warrants will trade. Each Warrant will become exercisable 30 days after the completion of the Company’s initial Business Combination and will expire at 5:00 p.m., New York City time, five years after the completion of the initial Business Combination or earlier upon redemption (only in the case of the Warrants sold in the Public Offering, or the “Public Warrants”) or liquidation.
Once the Public Warrants become exercisable, the Company may redeem them in whole and not in part at a price of $0.01 per Warrant upon a minimum of 30 days’ prior written notice of redemption, if and only if the last reported sale price of the Company’s Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $18.00 per share (as adjusted) for any 20 trading days within a 30-trading day period ending on the third trading day prior to the date on which the Company sends the notice of redemption to the Warrant holders.
The Warrants included in the Units sold in the Private Placement (the “Private Warrants”) are identical to the Public Warrants except that the Private Warrants, for so long as they are held by the Sponsor, EarlyBirdCapital, Inc. or their respective affiliates: (1) will not be redeemable by the Company; (2) may not (including the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise of those warrants), subject to certain limited exceptions, be transferred, assigned or sold by the holders thereof until 30 days after the completion of the Company’s initial Business Combination; (3) may be exercised by the holders thereof on a cashless basis; and (4) they (including the Class A ordinary shares issuable upon exercise thereof) are entitled to registration rights.
The Company paid an underwriting commission of 2.0% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering and the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment, or $2,300,000, in the aggregate, to the underwriters at the two closings of the Public Offering. Refer to Note 5 for more information regarding an additional fee payable to the underwriters upon the consummation of an Initial Business Combination.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 4 - RELATED PARTY TRANSACTIONS:
a. Promissory Notes
On December 9, 2020, the Company signed a promissory note, under which it could borrow up to a $300 thousand principal amount from the Sponsor. Amounts drawn by the Company under the note were to be used to cover finance costs and expenses related to its formation and capital raise.
The entire unpaid balance was payable on the earlier of (i) March 31, 2021, or (ii) the date of a capital raise (i.e., the closing of the initial Public Offering). Any drawn amounts could be prepaid at any time. The promissory note did not bear any interest on the principal amount outstanding thereunder.
The Company borrowed $170 thousand under the promissory note, $150 thousand prior to December 31, 2020 and an additional $20 thousand on February 2021. The total $170 thousand owed under the promissory note was repaid in March 2021, following the Closing of the Public Offering.
On August 9, 2021 the Company and the Sponsor have entered into an additional Promissory Note agreement (hereafter - the Second Promissory Note), according to which the Company may withdraw up to $1 million to fulfil its ongoing operational needs or preparations towards an Initial Business Combination.
The entire unpaid balance shall be payable on the earlier of (i) February 19, 2023, or (ii) the date on which the Company consummates its Initial Business Combination. Any drawn amounts could be prepaid at any time. The promissory note does not bear any interest on the principal amount outstanding thereunder.
On December 23, 2021, the Company borrowed $300 thousand under the promissory note. Refer to Note 9 - Subsequent Events, for information regarding amounts borrowed after the issuance date of these financial statements.
b. Administrative Services Agreement
On December 16, 2020, the Company signed an agreement with the Sponsor, under which the Company shall pay the Sponsor a fixed $10 thousand per month for office space, utilities and other administrative expenses. The monthly payments under this administrative services agreement commenced on the effective date of the registration statement for the initial Public Offering and will continue until the earlier of (i) the consummation of the Company’s initial Business Combination, or (ii) the Company’s liquidation. As of December 31, 2021 the Company accrued for approximately $10 thousand with regards to this agreement, recorded under the Related Party balance.
The composition of the Related Party balance as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 5 - COMMITMENTS AND CONTINGENCIES:
Underwriters’ Deferred Discount
Under the Business Combination Marketing Agreement, the Company shall pay an additional fee (hereafter - the Deferred Discount) of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the Public Offering (or $4,025,000) payable upon the Company’s completion of the initial Business Combination. The Deferred Discount will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event the Company completes the Initial Business Combination.
NOTE 6 - FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS:
The fair value of a financial instrument is the amount that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date (i.e., the exit price).
The fair value hierarchy under ASC 820 prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements). The three levels of the fair value hierarchy are as follows:
Basis for Fair Value Measurement
Level 1: Unadjusted quoted prices in active markets that are accessible at the measurement date for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities;
Level 2: Quoted prices in markets that are not active or financial instruments for which significant inputs to models are observable (including but not limited to quoted prices for similar securities, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, volatility and credit risk), either directly or indirectly;
Level 3: Prices or valuations that require significant unobservable inputs (including the Management’s assumptions in determining fair value measurement).
The following table presents information about the Company’s assets and liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at December 31, 2021 by level within the fair value hierarchy:
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 6 - FAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS (continued):
The estimated fair value of the Private Placement Warrants was determined using a binomial model to extract the market’s implied probability for an Initial Business Combination, using the Public Warrant’s market price. Once probability was extracted, a Black-Scholes-Merton model with Level 3 inputs was used to calculate the Private Warrants’ fair value. Inherent in a Black-Scholes-Merton model are assumptions related to expected life (term), expected stock price, volatility, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. The Company estimates the volatility of its warrants based on implied volatility from the Company’s traded warrants and from historical volatility of selected peer companies’ Class A ordinary shares that matches the expected remaining life of the warrants. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the warrants is assumed to be equivalent to their remaining contractual term. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates remaining at zero.
The following table provides quantitative information regarding Level 3 fair value measurements inputs:
The change in the fair value of the Warrants measured with Level 3 inputs for the period from March 3, 2021 (Initial Measurement) through December 31, 2021 is summarized as follows:
NOTE 7 - CAPITAL DEFICIENCY:
a. Ordinary Shares
Class A Ordinary Shares
On November 20, 2020 the Company issued 100,000 Class A ordinary shares of $0.0001 par value each to designees of the Representative (hereafter - the Representative Shares) for a consideration equal to the par value of the shares. The Representative Shares are deemed to be underwriters’ compensation by FINRA pursuant to Rule 5110 of the FINRA Manual.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 7 - CAPITAL DEFICIENCY (continued):
The Company accounted for the issuance of the Representative Shares as compensation expenses amounting to $860, with a corresponding credit to Additional Paid-In Capital, for the excess value over the consideration paid. The Company estimated the fair value of the issuance based upon the price of Class B Ordinary Shares that were issued to the Sponsor.
Pursuant to the initial Public Offering and the concurrent Private Placement that were each effected in two closings- on February 19, 2021 and March 3, 2021- the Company issued and sold an aggregate of 11,500,000 and 380,000 Class A ordinary shares as part of the Units sold in those respective transactions. The Units (which also included Warrants) were sold at a price of $10 per Unit, and for an aggregate consideration of $115 million and $3.8 million in the Public Offering and Private Placement, respectively. See Note 3 above for further information regarding those share issuances.
The Company classified its 11,500,000 Public Class A ordinary shares as temporary equity. The remaining 480,000 Private Class A ordinary shares were classified as permanent equity.
Class B Ordinary Shares
On November 20, 2020 the Company issued 2,875,000 Class B ordinary shares of $0.0001 par value each for a total consideration of $25 thousand to the Sponsor’s wholly-owned Delaware subsidiary. Out of the 2,875,00 Class B ordinary shares, up to 375,000 were subject to forfeiture if the underwriters were to not exercise their over-allotment in full or in part. Because the underwriters exercised their over-allotment option in full on March 3, 2021, that potential forfeiture did not occur.
Class B ordinary shares are convertible into non-redeemable Class A ordinary shares, on a one-for-one basis, at any time and from time to time at the option of the holder, or automatically on the day of the Business Combination. Class B ordinary shares also possess the sole right to vote for the election or removal of directors, until the consummation of an initial Business Combination.
b. Preferred shares
The Company is authorized to issue up to 5,000,000 Preferred Shares of $0.0001 par value each. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has no preferred shares issued and outstanding.
MORINGA ACQUISITION CORP
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS (CONTINUED)
NOTE 8 - GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE:
The formation and other operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows:
NOTE 9 - SUBSEQUENT EVENTS:
On January 27, 2022 the Company borrowed an additional $300 thousand from the promissory note given by the Sponsor.
00-0000000
false FY
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2022-03-01
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2022-03-01
2021-06-30
2021-12-31
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2020-12-31
2020-09-24 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-09-24 2020-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-09-24 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-09-24 2020-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-09-24 2020-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-09-23
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2020-09-23
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2020-09-23
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2020-09-23
2020-09-23
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember us-gaap:CommonStockMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:AdditionalPaidInCapitalMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:RetainedEarningsMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-02-19 2021-02-19
us-gaap:PrivatePlacementMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:OverAllotmentOptionMember
2021-03-03 2021-03-03
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
us-gaap:OverAllotmentOptionMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
maca:PromissoryNoteMember
2020-12-09
us-gaap:IPOMember
2020-12-31
us-gaap:IPOMember
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:IPOMember
2021-02-01 2021-02-21
maca:PromissoryNoteMember
2021-03-01 2021-03-31
2021-08-09
2021-12-23
maca:AdministrativeServicesAgreementMember
2020-12-01 2020-12-16
maca:AdministrativeServicesAgreementMember
2021-12-31
us-gaap:FairValueInputsLevel1Member
2021-12-31
us-gaap:FairValueInputsLevel3Member
2021-12-31
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2020-11-20
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2021-02-01 2021-02-19
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2021-02-25 2021-03-03
us-gaap:CommonClassAMember
2021-03-03
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2020-11-20
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2020-11-01 2020-11-20
us-gaap:CommonClassBMember
2021-01-01 2021-12-31
2020-01-01 2020-12-31
us-gaap:SubsequentEventMember
2022-01-27
xbrli:shares
iso4217:USD
iso4217:USD
xbrli:shares
xbrli:pure
iso4217:USD
compsci:item