Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Mission Advancement Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a Delaware corporation structured as a blank check company formed for the purpose of effecting our initial business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, the Company is subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial business combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering and identifying a target company for our initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held in the trust account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $11,066,748. We incurred $2,288,173 of formation and operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses and offering expense related to warrants of $864,511. We had investment income of $18,988 on our amounts held in the trust account and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $14,200,444.
For the period from December 22, 2020 (Inception) to December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $761. We incurred $761 of formation and operating costs consisting mostly of general and administrative expenses.
We reclassified a portion of the offering costs associated with the initial public offering originally charged to stockholders’ equity, to an expense in the statement of operations in the amount of $864,511 based on a relative fair value basis. The change in fair value of warrants was a decrease in the liability of $14,200,444 and $0, respectively, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash outside the trust account of $612,101 available for working capital needs. All remaining cash held in the trust account is generally unavailable for the Company’s use, prior to an initial business combination, and is restricted for use either in a business combination or to redeem common stock. As of December 31, 2021, none of the amount in the trust account was available to be withdrawn as described above.
Through December 31, 2021, the Company’s liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $25,000 from the sale of the founder shares, and the remaining net proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of private placement warrants.
On December 1, 2021, we issued the Promissory Note to our sponsor in the principal amount of up to $1,500,000. The Promissory Note was issued in connection with advances the sponsor has made, and may make in the future, to us for working capital expenses. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of the Promissory Note was $550,000. See “Conversion Feature of Promissory Note” below and “Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence” for more information regarding the Promissory Note.
Going Concern
The Company anticipates that the $612,101 outside of the trust account as of December 31, 2021, might not be sufficient to allow the Company to operate until March 5, 2023, the period it has to consummate an initial business combination, assuming that a business combination is not consummated during that time. Until consummation of our business combination, the Company will be using the funds not held in the trust account, and any additional Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 6 to our financial statements) from the initial stockholders, the Company’s officers and directors, or their respective affiliates (which is described in Note 6 to our financial statements), for identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates, performing business due diligence on prospective target businesses, traveling to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses, reviewing corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, selecting the target business to acquire and structuring, negotiating and consummating the business combination.
The Company can raise additional capital through Working Capital Loans from the initial stockholders, the Company’s officers, directors, or their respective affiliates (which is described in Note 6 to our financial statements) or through loans from third parties. None of the sponsor, officers or directors are under any obligation to advance funds to, or to invest in, the Company. If the Company is unable to raise additional capital, it may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of its business plan, and reducing overhead expenses. The Company cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to it on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time, which is considered to be one year from the issuance date of the financial statements.
The Company has until March 5, 2023, 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, to consummate a business combination (the “Combination Period”). However, if the Company is unable to complete a business combination within the Combination Period, the Company will redeem 100% of the outstanding public shares for a pro rata portion of the funds held in the trust account, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to the Company, divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, subject to applicable law and as further described in the registration statement, and then seek to dissolve and liquidate. There is a possibility that a business combination might not happen within the Combination Period.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any long-term debt, capital or operating lease obligations.
We entered into an administrative support agreement pursuant to which we pay our sponsor for office space and secretarial and administrative services provided to members of our management team, in an amount not to exceed $10,000 per month. Since March 5, 2021, we have paid the sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space and administrative support services. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees. We incurred $99,677 in such fees in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” and ASC Topic 815-15. The classification of derivative instruments, including whether such instruments should be recorded as liabilities or as equity, is reassessed at the end of each reporting period.
Derivative Warrant Liabilities
We issued an aggregate of 17,433,333 warrants in connection with our initial public offering and private placement, which, are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC Topic 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrants as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. At initial public offering, the Company utilized a Monte Carlo simulation model to determine the initial value of the public warrants and private warrants. At December 31, 2021, the Company used the quoted stock price in the active market to value the public warrants and a Monte Carlo simulation model to value the private warrants with changes in fair value charged to the statement of operations.
Conversion Feature of Promissory Note
On December 1, 2021, we issued the Promissory Note to our sponsor. The Promissory Note was issued in connection with advances the sponsor has made, and may make in the future, to us for working capital expenses. The lender may elect to convert up to $1,500,000 of the unpaid principal balance of the Promissory Note into warrants, each warrant exercisable for one share of our Class A common stock upon the consummation of an initial business combination. This embedded conversion feature is subject to remeasurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. It is valued using the Geske compound valuation model and at both issuance date and December 31, 2021, its value was de minimis.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standard Update (“ASU”) Topic 2020-06, “Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. ASU 2020-06 also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. The Company adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
The Company’s management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards if currently adopted would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.