Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes to those financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve significant risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth in Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, which are incorporated herein by reference, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company based in Cambridge, Massachusetts that is entitled to receive up to $450.0 million in contingent milestone payments related to our sale of ONIVYDE® to Ipsen S.A., or Ipsen, in April 2017 and up to $54.5 million in contingent milestone payments related to our sale of MM-121 and MM-111 to Elevation Oncology, Inc. (formerly known as 14ner Oncology, Inc.), or Elevation, in July 2019. We do not have any ongoing research or development activities and are seeking potential acquirers for our remaining preclinical and clinical assets. We do not have any employees and instead use external consultants for the operation of our company.
On April 3, 2017, we completed the sale of ONIVYDE and MM-436 (the “commercial business”) to Ipsen (the “Ipsen sale”). In connection with the Ipsen sale, we are eligible to receive up to $450.0 million in additional regulatory approval-based milestone payments. We entered into a license and collaboration agreement, or the Servier agreement, between Ipsen and Les Laboratoires Servier SAS, or Servier (as assignee from Shire plc) in 2014, and on April 3, 2017, the Servier agreement was assigned to Ipsen in connection with the completion of the Ipsen sale. We have received all $33.0 million in milestone payments under the Servier agreement.
The remaining up to $450.0 million in potential milestone payments resulting from the Ipsen sale consist of:
•
$225.0 million upon approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, of ONIVYDE for the first-line treatment of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, subject to certain conditions;
•
$150.0 million upon approval by the FDA of ONIVYDE for the treatment of small-cell lung cancer after failure of first-line chemotherapy; and
•
$75.0 million upon approval by the FDA of ONIVYDE for an additional indication unrelated to those described above.
Our non-commercial assets, including our clinical and preclinical development programs, were not included in the Ipsen sale and remain assets of ours.
On May 30, 2019, we announced the completion of our review of strategic alternatives, following which our board of directors implemented a series of measures designed to extend our cash runway into 2027 and preserve our ability to capture the potential milestone payments resulting from the Ipsen sale. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our financial resources sooner than we currently expect. In connection with that announcement, we discontinued the discovery efforts on our remaining preclinical programs: MM-401, an agonistic antibody targeting a novel immuno-oncology target, TNFR2; and MM-201, a highly stabilized agonist-Fc fusion protein targeting death receptors 4 and 5. We are seeking potential acquirers for our remaining preclinical and clinical assets.
The termination of our executive management team and all other employees was substantially completed by June 28, 2019 and fully completed by July 12, 2019. As of July 12, 2019, we did not have any employees. We have engaged external consultants to run our day-to-day operations. We have also entered into consulting agreements with certain former members of our executive management team who are supporting our relationship with current partners, assisting with the potential sale of remaining preclinical and clinical assets, and assisting with certain legal and regulatory matters and the continued wind-down of operations.
On July 12, 2019, we completed the sale to Elevation, or the Elevation sale, of our anti-HER3 antibody programs, MM-121 (seribantumab) and MM-111. In connection with the Elevation sale, we received an upfront cash payment of $3.5 million and are eligible to receive up to $54.5 million in additional potential development, regulatory approval and commercial-based milestone payments, consisting of:
•
$3.0 million for achievement of the primary endpoint in the first registrational clinical study of either MM-121 or MM-111;
•
Up to $16.5 million in total payments for the achievement of various regulatory approval and reimbursement-based milestones in the United States, Europe and Japan; and
•
Up to $35.0 million in total payments for achieving various cumulative worldwide net sales targets between $100.0 million and $300.0 million for MM-121 and MM-111.
We previously devoted substantially all of our resources to our drug discovery and development efforts, including conducting clinical trials for our product candidates, protecting our intellectual property and providing general and administrative support for these operations. We have financed our operations primarily through private placements of convertible preferred stock, collaborations, public offerings of our securities, secured debt financings, sales of ONIVYDE and the Ipsen sale.
On March 27, 2020, we entered into the Celator Agreement, pursuant to which Celator agreed to purchase certain assets (the “transferred assets”), relating to certain of our preclinical nanoliposome programs, (the “Celator sale”). We completed the Celator sale simultaneously with the execution of the Celator Agreement. Under the terms of the Celator Agreement, Celator paid to us a cash payment of $2.3 million, reimbursed us for $0.2 million related to certain specified expenses and assumed certain liabilities with respect to the transferred assets. We incurred $0.4 million expenses related to the Celator sale as of December 31, 2020.
On September 15, 2021, we entered into an Asset Purchase Option Agreement (the “Asset Purchase Option Agreement”) with a third party (the “Purchaser”), pursuant to which the Purchaser agreed to obtain an exclusive option (the “Option”), to purchase one of our preclinical programs with a consideration of an additional $0.5 million. Under the terms of the Asset Purchase Option Agreement, the Purchaser paid to us $0.1 million. The Purchaser may exercise the Option within 24 months from September 15, 2021. We recognized a gain of $0.1 million related to the Option fee payment for the year ended December 31, 2021. On March 1, 2022, the Purchaser exercised the Option and the additional consideration of $0.5 million was payable to us.
As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $14.2 million. We expect that our cash and cash equivalents as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to continue our operations into 2027, when we estimate the longest-term potential Ipsen milestone may be achieved.
We have a history of losses from our continuing operations. We do not expect to be profitable from our continuing operations in the future. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $546.1 million. Our net loss from our continuing operations was $2.5 million and $3.0 million for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We do not expect to incur any research and development expenses going forward. We do not expect to be profitable from our continuing operations in the future.
Financial Operations Overview
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of stock-based compensation expenses, legal, intellectual property, business development, finance, information technology, corporate communications and investor relations. Other general and administrative expenses include costs for board of director’s costs, insurance expenses, legal and professional fees, and accounting and information technology services fees.
Interest income
Interest income consists primarily of interest income associated with our money market fund.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net primarily represents the costs related to the delayed repayment of tax incentives under the Life Science Tax Incentive Program for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or the SEC, and generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported expenses during the reporting periods. We evaluate our estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for
making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1, “Nature of the Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Accrued expenses
As part of the process of preparing financial statements, we are required to estimate accrued expenses. This process involves identifying services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of services performed and the associated costs incurred for such services where we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual cost. We record these estimates in our consolidated financial statements as of each balance sheet date.
In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be provided and the level of effort in each period. If the actual timing of the provision of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. In the event that we do not identify costs that have been incurred or we under or overestimate the level of services performed or the costs of such services, our actual expenses could differ from such estimates. The date on which some services commence, the level of services performed on or before a given date and the cost of such services are often subjective determinations. We make estimates based on the facts and circumstances known to us at the time and in accordance with GAAP. There have been no material changes in estimates for the periods presented.
Stock-based compensation expense
We account for our stock-based compensation awards in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. ASC 718 requires all share-based payments to employees, including grants of employee stock options, to be recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss based on their grant date fair values. For stock options granted to employees and to members of our board of directors for their service on the board of directors, we estimate the grant date fair value of each option award using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. The use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model requires us to make assumptions with respect to the expected term of the option, the expected volatility of our common stock consistent with the expected term of the option, the risk-free interest rate consistent with the expected term of the option and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. Stock-based compensation expense related to employee stock options is measured using the fair value of the award at the grant date and is adjusted quarterly to reflect actual forfeitures. Stock-based compensation expense is then recognized on a straight-line basis over the vesting period, which is also the requisite service period.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
General and administrative expenses
General and administrative expenses were $2.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $5.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $2.4 million, or 48%. This decrease was primarily attributable to the decrease in both share-based compensation expense and consulting fees.
Gain on sales of assets
Gain on sales of assets was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, attributable to the Option fee to purchase one of our preclinical programs paid by the Purchaser and sale of our certain of our preclinical programs to a third party. Gain on sales of assets was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily attributable to the Celator sale.
Interest income
Interest income was less than $0.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, primarily attributable to the decrease of our interest bearing cash and cash equivalents accounts.
Other income (expense), net
Other income (expense), net was $0.2 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily represents the costs related to the delayed repayment of tax incentives under the Life Science Tax Incentive Program.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of liquidity
We have financed our operations from inception through December 31, 2021 primarily through private placements of convertible preferred stock, collaborations, public offerings of our securities, secured debt financings, sales of ONIVYDE and the Ipsen sale. Through December 31, 2021, we have received $580.7 million from the Ipsen sale, $268.2 million from the sale of convertible preferred stock and warrants, $126.7 million of net proceeds from the sale of common stock in our initial public offering and a July 2013 follow-on underwritten public offering, $38.6 million of net proceeds from our 2015 “at the market offering” program, or the ATM offering, $39.6 million of net proceeds from a secured debt financing, $120.6 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the convertible notes in our July 2013 underwritten public offering, $168.5 million of net proceeds from the issuance of the 2022 notes, $492.5 million of upfront license fees, milestone payments, reimbursement of research and development costs and manufacturing services and other payments from our collaborations, $68.9 million of cash receipts related to ONIVYDE sales, $33.0 million in milestone payments related to the development and commercialization of ONIVYDE and $14.7 million in net borrowings pursuant to the loan agreement with Hercules. As of December 31, 2021, we had unrestricted cash and cash equivalents of $14.2 million.
In December 2020, we repaid tax incentives under the Life Science Tax Incentive Program of $1.3 million and related costs of $0.2 million due to delayed repayment.
Cash flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating activities
Cash used in operating activities was $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash used in operating activities was primarily a result of our $2.5 million net loss from continuing operations and net decrease in assets and liabilities of $0.2 million. The net loss was adjusted by a net decrease in assets and liabilities of $2.0 million, which was primarily driven by decreases in prepaid expenses and other assets of $2.2 million, partially offset by a decrease in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other of
$0.2 million. This decrease included non-cash adjustments of $0.1 million gain on the sale of in-process research and development assets, offset by $0.4 million of stock-based compensation expense.
Cash used in operating activities was $4.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The cash used in operating activities was primarily a result of our $3.0 million net loss from continuing operations and net decrease in assets and liabilities of $1.2 million. The net decrease in operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was $1.2 million, which was primarily driven by decreases in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other of $1.9 million, partially offset by a decrease in prepaid expenses and other assets of $0.8 million. This decrease included non-cash adjustments of $2.1 million gain on sale of an in-process research and development asset, offset by $1.7 million of stock-based compensation expense.
Investing activities
Cash provided by investing activities of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to proceeds from the Option fee received during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash provided by investing activities of $2.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to net proceeds on the Celator sale of in-process research and development totaling $2.1 million.
Financing activities
Cash provided by financing activities of $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Cash used in financing activities of $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the repayment of other liability in July 2020.
Funding requirements
We have incurred significant expenses and operating losses to date. On May 30, 2019, we announced the completion of our review of strategic alternatives, following which our board of directors implemented a series of measures designed to extend our cash runway into 2027 and preserve our ability to capture the potential milestone payments resulting from the Ipsen sale. In connection with that announcement, we discontinued the discovery efforts on our remaining preclinical programs and implemented a reduction in headcount resulting in the termination of all remaining employees as of July 12, 2019. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•
the timing and amount of potential milestone payments related to ONIVYDE that we may receive from Ipsen;
•
the timing and amount of potential milestone payments that we may receive from Elevation;
•
the timing and amount of any special dividend to our stockholders that our board of directors may declare;
•
the timing and amount of general and administrative expenses required to continue to operate our company;
•
the extent to which we owe any taxes for current, future or prior periods, including as a result of any audits by taxing authorities;
•
the extent to which we invest in any future research or development activities of our product candidates;
•
the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications and maintaining, enforcing and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•
the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies; and
•
the costs associated with operating as a public company and maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements.
We do not believe that we will be able to raise a material amount of capital through the sale of our equity securities or debt financing. Rather, our goal is to judiciously expend our remaining cash until such time, if ever, as we receive additional milestone payments from Ipsen and Elevation. There can be no assurance as to the timing, terms or consummation of any financing or divestiture of our few remaining intellectual property assets. We do not have any committed external sources of funds. In the unlikely event that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our stockholders. Debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our
ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our future revenue streams or product candidates.
Certain Contractual Obligations and Commitments
In May 2014, the Massachusetts Life Sciences Center, or the MLSC, awarded us an additional $0.6 million of tax incentives under its Life Science Tax Incentive Program, which allowed us to monetize approximately $0.6 million of state research and development tax credits. In exchange for these incentives, we pledged to hire an incremental 31 employees and to maintain the additional headcount through at least December 31, 2018. In March 2015, the MLSC awarded us an additional $1.4 million of tax incentives under its Life Science Tax Incentive Program, which allowed us to monetize approximately $1.2 million of state research and development tax credits. In exchange for these incentives, we pledged to hire an incremental 75 employees and to maintain the additional headcount through at least December 31, 2019.
Due to our failure to meet this headcount target as of December 31, 2016 as a result of our October 2016 corporate restructuring activities, we repaid approximately $1.5 million of this award and related expenses during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Tax Loss Carryforwards
At December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal and state income tax purposes of $209.5 million and $294.8 million, respectively. Our existing federal and state net operating loss carryforwards begin to expire in 2033. We also had available research and development credits for federal and state income tax purposes of approximately $28.8 million and $20.3 million, respectively. The federal and state research and development credits will begin to expire in 2022 and 2025, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we also had available investment tax credits for state income tax purposes of less than $0.1 million which do not expire. We have orphan drug credits of $122.7 million, which begin to expire in 2031.
We have evaluated the positive and negative evidence bearing upon the realizability of our deferred tax assets, which are comprised principally of net operating loss carryforwards and research and development credits. Under the applicable accounting standards, we have considered our history of losses and concluded that it is more likely than not that we will not recognize the benefits of federal and state deferred tax assets. Accordingly, a full valuation allowance has been established against the deferred tax assets.
Utilization of the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to a substantial annual limitation under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code due to ownership change limitations that have occurred previously or that could occur in the future. These ownership changes may limit the amount of net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards that can be utilized annually to offset future taxable income and tax. We completed an evaluation of ownership changes through November 15, 2019 to assess whether utilization of the our net operating loss or tax credit carryforwards would be subject to an annual limitation under Section 382 of the Internal Revenue Code. We believe we can utilize our tax attributes generated through November 15, 2019 as a result of the analysis. To the extent an ownership change has occurred after November 15, 2019 or occurs in the future, the net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards may be subject to limitation.
We have not, as of yet, conducted a study of our domestic research and development credit carryforwards and Orphan Drug Credits. This study may result in an increase or decrease to our credit carryforwards; however, until a study is completed and any adjustment is known, no amounts are being presented as an uncertain tax position. A full valuation allowance has been provided against our credits, and if an adjustment is required, this adjustment would be offset by an adjustment to the valuation allowance. As a result, there would be no impact to the statement of operations and comprehensive loss, balance sheet or cash flows if an adjustment were required.
382 Rights Agreement
On December 3, 2019, we entered into a Section 382 Rights Agreement, or the Rights Agreement, with Computershare Trust Company, N.A., a federally chartered trust company, as Rights Agent. Pursuant to the Rights Agreement, on December 13, 2019, we issued a dividend of one preferred share purchase right, or a Right, for each share of our common stock to the stockholders of record on that date. Each Right entitles the registered holder to purchase from us one one-thousandth of a share of Series Z Junior Preferred
Stock, par value $0.01 per share, or the Preferred Shares, at a price of $18.00 per one one-thousandth of a Preferred Share represented by a Right, subject to adjustment. The description and terms of the Rights are set forth in the Rights Agreement.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1, “Nature of the Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.