Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to Maquia Capital Acquisition Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward-looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on our behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Results of Operations
We have not generated any revenues to date, and we will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial business combination. Our entire activity up to December 31, 2021 was related to our formation, our initial public offering and, since the closing of our initial public offering, a search for an initial business combination target. We have, and expect to continue to generate, non-operating income in the form of interest income and unrealized gains on investments held in the trust account. We expect to continue to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with the search for an initial business combination target.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $6,382,877, which consisted of change in fair value of the derivative liabilities of $7,320,644 and unrealized gains on investment held in trust account of $25,391, partially offset by offering costs allocated to the public warrants and placement warrants totaling $494,344 and general and administrative expenses of 468,814.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Prior to the consummation of our initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was the initial sale of the Founder Shares to our Sponsor and advances under the promissory note with our sponsor.
Pursuant to our initial public offering, which was consummated in May 2021, the Company sold 17,309,719 units, which includes underwriters’ over-allotment, at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit generating gross proceeds to us in the amount of $173.1 million. Each unit consists of one share of our Class A common stock, par value $0.0001 per share, and one-half of one public warrant, with each whole warrant entitling the holder thereof to purchase one whole share of Class A common stock at a price of $11.50 per share, subject to adjustment.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, the Company consummated the private placement of an aggregate of 583,743 placement units, which includes underwriters’ over-allotment, to our sponsor at a purchase price of $10.00 per placement unit, generating gross proceeds to us in the amount of $5,837,430.
A portion of the proceeds from the placement units was added to the proceeds from our initial public offering held in the trust account. If we do not complete an initial business combination May 7, 2022 (or by November 7, 2022 if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by the full amount of time), the proceeds from the sale of the placement units held in the trust account will be used to fund the redemption of the public shares (subject to the requirements of applicable law) and the placement units will be worthless.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had $475,500 in cash, and working capital of $306,564.
We presently have no operating revenue. Our net income was $6,382,877 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and consisted primarily change in fair value of the derivative liabilities of $7,320,644 partially offset by offering costs allocated to the public warrants and placement warrants totaling $494,344. Through December 31, 2021, our liquidity needs were satisfied through receipt of $475,500 held outside of the trust account from the sale of the placement warrants upon the closing of our initial public offering. In the future, a portion of interest income on the funds held in the trust account may be released to us to pay tax obligations.
In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of an initial business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of notes and any other loans made by our sponsor or its affiliates (including the loans made to effectuate extensions as described below), our officers and directors, or our company and its affiliates prior to or in connection with an initial business combination may be converted upon consummation of an initial business combination into additional placement units at a price of $10.00 per placement unit. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the trust account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the trust account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
We may also need to obtain additional financing either to complete a business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of shares of our Class A common stock upon completion of the business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with the business combination.
Based on the foregoing, management does not believe that we will have sufficient working capital to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this Report. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the trust account for paying existing accounts payable and accrued liabilities, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination. We believe we may need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating the business. Furthermore, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate the business prior to the initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete the initial business combination or to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of the initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination. Our sponsor, officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. The factors, among others, raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that result from our inability to continue as a going concern.
There is no assurance that our plans to consummate an initial business combination will be successful by May 7, 2022 (or by November 7, 2022 if we extend the period of time to consummate a business combination by the full amount of time). The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Use of Estimates
The preparation of the financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires our management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance enumerated in ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of the common stock subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of the common stock (including shares of the common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the issuer’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of the common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. The Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered by the Company to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, the shares of the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in the amount of $175,693,636 are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net income per share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income per share of common stock is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding for the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating income per share of common stock. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) initial public offering, and (ii) the private placement since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 8,946,731 shares of Class A common stock in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of our company. As a result, diluted net income per common share is the same as basic net income per common share for the periods presented.
Founder shares subject to forfeiture are not included in weighted average shares outstanding until the forfeiture restrictions lapse.
Financial Instruments
We determine fair value based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability in the principal or most advantageous market. When considering market participant assumptions in fair value measurements, the following fair value hierarchy distinguishes between observable and unobservable inputs, which are categorized in one of the following levels:
Level 1 Inputs: Unadjusted quoted prices for identical assets or instruments in active markets.
Level 2 Inputs: Quoted prices for similar instruments in active markets and quoted prices for identical or similar instruments in markets that are not active and model derived valuations whose inputs are observable or whose significant value drivers are observable.
Level 3 Inputs: Significant inputs into the valuation model are unobservable.
We do not have any recurring Level 2 assets or liabilities, see Note 9 for recurring Level 3 liabilities. The carrying value of our financial instruments including its cash and accrued liabilities approximate their fair values principally because of their short-term nature.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging.” Our derivative instruments are recorded at fair value as of the closing date of our initial public offering (i.e., May 7, 2021) and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within twelve (12) months of the balance sheet date. We have determined that the public warrants and the placement warrants are derivative instruments. As the public warrants and the placement warrants meet the definition of a derivative, the public warrants and the placement warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement,” with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Warrant Instruments
We account for the public warrants and the placement warrants issued in connection with our initial public offering and the private placement, respectively, in accordance with the guidance contained in FASB ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging,” whereby under that provision the public warrants and the placement warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, the Company classifies the warrant instrument as a liability at fair value and adjusts the instrument to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the public warrants and the placement warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the public warrants and the placement warrants will be estimated using an internal valuation model. Our valuation model utilizes inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period.
Recently issued accounting pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity” (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current U.S. GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We early adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.