Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for year-end 2020 compared to year-end 2019 can be found in Part II, Item 7, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K/A for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, as filed with the SEC on April 2, 2021 (“2020 Form 10-K”).
BUSINESS AND OVERVIEW
Overview
We are a worldwide operator, franchisor, and licensor of hotel, residential, and timeshare properties in 139 countries and territories under 30 brand names. Under our asset-light business model, we typically manage or franchise hotels, rather than own them. We discuss our operations in the following reportable business segments: U.S. & Canada and International.
We earn base management fees and, under many agreements, incentive management fees from the properties that we manage, and we earn franchise fees on the properties that others operate under franchise agreements with us. In most markets, base management and franchise fees typically consist of a percentage of property-level revenue, or certain property-level revenue in the case of franchise fees, while incentive management fees typically consist of a percentage of net house profit after a specified owner return. For our hotels in the Middle East and Africa, Asia Pacific excluding China, and Greater China regions, incentive management fees typically consist of a percentage of gross operating profit without adjustment for a specified owner return. Net house profit is calculated as gross operating profit (also referred to as “house profit”) less non-controllable expenses such as property insurance, real estate taxes, and furniture, fixtures, and equipment (FF&E) reserves. Additionally, we earn franchise fees for use of our intellectual property, including fees from our co-brand credit card, timeshare, and residential programs.
On September 23, 2016, we completed the acquisition of Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide, LLC, formerly known as Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide, Inc. (“Starwood”), through a series of transactions, after which Starwood became an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. We refer to the Starwood business and brands that we acquired as “Legacy-Starwood.”
Performance Measures
We believe Revenue per Available Room (“RevPAR”), which we calculate by dividing room sales for comparable properties by room nights available for the period, is a meaningful indicator of our performance because it measures the period-over-period change in room revenues for comparable properties. RevPAR may not be comparable to similarly titled measures, such as revenues, and should not be viewed as necessarily correlating with our fee revenue. We also believe occupancy and average daily rate (“ADR”), which are components of calculating RevPAR, are meaningful indicators of our performance. Occupancy, which we calculate by dividing occupied rooms by total rooms available (including rooms in hotels temporarily closed due to issues related to COVID-19), measures the utilization of a property’s available capacity. ADR, which we calculate by dividing property room revenue by total rooms sold, measures average room price and is useful in assessing pricing levels. Comparisons to prior periods are on a constant U.S. dollar basis. We calculate constant dollar statistics by applying exchange rates for the current period to the prior comparable period.
We define our comparable properties as our properties that were open and operating under one of our brands since the beginning of the last full calendar year (since January 1, 2020 for the current period) and have not, in either the current or previous year: (1) undergone significant room or public space renovations or expansions, (2) been converted between company-operated and franchised, or (3) sustained substantial property damage or business interruption, with the exception of properties closed or otherwise experiencing interruptions related to COVID-19, which we continue to classify as comparable. For 2021 compared to 2020, we had 4,906 comparable U.S. & Canada properties and 1,510 comparable International properties. The RevPAR, ADR, and occupancy comparisons between 2021 and 2019, which we discuss under the “Impact of COVID-19” caption below, reflect properties that are defined as comparable as of December 31, 2021, even if in 2019 they were not open and operating for the full year or did not meet all the other criteria listed above.
Impact of COVID-19
COVID-19 continues to have a material impact on our business and industry. However, the recovery of both global demand and ADR continued in 2021, led primarily by robust leisure demand, which we expect to continue in 2022, and travelers who continue to embrace multi-purpose trips, mixing remote work and vacation time. The spread of COVID-19 variants, such as Delta and Omicron, constrained the pace of the recovery in the latter half of 2021 and continues to constrain the pace of recovery in the beginning of 2022. Business transient and group demand continued to slowly improve in 2021 when
compared to 2020, though this demand still remains meaningfully below pre-pandemic 2019 levels. Although we have seen delays in the recovery of business transient and group demand as a result of the emergence of COVID-19 variants, we expect this demand to gradually strengthen from current levels as more workers return to the office and travel again. We have been encouraged by the swift improvement in ADR, which in the 2021 second half returned to pre-pandemic 2019 levels in certain U.S. and International markets and are optimistic about sustaining strong ADR in 2022. However, we believe COVID-19 will continue to have a material negative impact on our future results for a period of time that we are currently unable to predict.
Comparable systemwide constant dollar RevPAR in 2021 compared to 2020 improved 67.7 percent in our U.S. & Canada segment, 40.6 percent in our International segment, and 60.4 percent worldwide. Comparable systemwide constant dollar RevPAR in 2021 compared to pre-pandemic 2019 levels declined 32.5 percent in our U.S. & Canada segment, 46.6 percent in our International segment, and 36.5 percent worldwide, with improvement in the decline each succeeding quarter during 2021 for each of our segments and worldwide. Worldwide comparable systemwide occupancy and constant dollar ADR were down only 11.9 percentage points and 2.3 percent, respectively, in the 2021 fourth quarter compared to the 2019 fourth quarter, leading to RevPAR 19.0 percent below pre-pandemic 2019 levels.
In the U.S. & Canada, demand continued to recover in 2021, driven by strong leisure demand particularly at our luxury and resort hotels and in tertiary markets. Occupancy peaked in the 2021 third quarter before decreasing slightly in the 2021 fourth quarter primarily due to seasonality. Urban destinations, where we have a large presence in the U.S. & Canada, experienced meaningful improvement in demand in 2021, though they continue to lag the recovery. In other parts of the world, RevPAR continues to vary greatly by geographic market, and demand is heavily impacted by the number of COVID-19 cases, vaccination rates, and the nature and degree of government restrictions. In the 2021 fourth quarter, the decline of comparable systemwide constant dollar RevPAR when compared to pre-pandemic 2019 levels improved compared to the decline seen in the 2021 third quarter in all our International regions except for Greater China, which remained flat as a result of strict government restrictions in response to COVID-19 outbreaks in several regions.
We continue to take measures to mitigate the negative financial and operational impacts of COVID-19 for our hotel owners and our own business. At the corporate level, we remain focused on managing our corporate general and administrative costs and are being disciplined with respect to our capital expenditures and other investment spending. Share repurchases and cash dividends remain suspended until our leverage ratios further improve, although assuming there is no meaningful setback in the global recovery from COVID-19, we could restart some level of capital returns in the second half of 2022 and more meaningful levels of capital returns in 2023 and beyond. In 2021, we substantially completed restructuring plans to achieve cost savings specific to our company-operated properties. In addition, we continue to work with owners and franchisees by adjusting renovation requirements for certain properties, deferring certain hotel initiatives, and supporting owners and franchisees who are working with their lenders to utilize FF&E reserves to meet working capital needs.
We continue to evaluate the availability of stimulus tax credits under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020 enacted as part of the Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (“ARPA”), and other legislation. As of February 1, 2022, we have received Employee Retention Tax Credit (“ERTC”) refunds from the U.S. Treasury totaling $170 million, including $119 million in 2020 and $51 million in 2021, of which we passed through $94 million and $48 million, respectively, to the related hotels that we manage on behalf of owners. We have received from the U.S. Treasury substantially all expected ERTC refunds based on applications that we have submitted as of February 1, 2022. Additionally, as of December 31, 2021, we have received or expect to receive, through Medicare tax offsets and payments from the U.S. Treasury pursuant to ARPA, a total of $35 million as reimbursement for the cost of health coverage continuation provided to eligible former associates and furloughed or part-time associates (and their eligible enrolled dependents) in accordance with requirements under the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 for the period of April 1, 2021 to September 30, 2021. Finally, in 2021, we received subsidies totaling $28 million from German government COVID-19 assistance programs for certain of our leased hotels and equity method investments in Germany.
The impact of COVID-19 on the Company remains fluid, as does our corporate and property-level response. We expect to continue to assess the situation and may implement additional measures to adapt our operations and plans to address the implications of COVID-19 on our business. The overall operational and financial impact is highly dependent on the breadth and duration of COVID-19 and could be affected by other factors we are not currently able to predict.
Starwood Data Security Incident
On November 30, 2018, we announced a data security incident involving unauthorized access to the Starwood reservations database (the “Data Security Incident”). The Starwood reservations database is no longer used for business operations.
We are currently unable to estimate the range of total possible financial impact to the Company from the Data Security Incident in excess of the expenses already incurred. However, we do not believe this incident will impact our long-term financial health. Although our insurance program includes coverage designed to limit our exposure to losses such as those related to the Data Security Incident, that insurance may not be sufficient or available to cover all of our expenses or other losses (including fines and penalties) related to the Data Security Incident. In addition, certain expenses by their nature (such as, for example, expenses related to enhancing our cybersecurity program) are not covered by our insurance program. We expect to incur significant expenses associated with the Data Security Incident in future periods, primarily related to legal proceedings and regulatory investigations (including possible additional fines and penalties), increased expenses and capital investments for information technology and information security and data privacy, and increased expenses for compliance activities and to meet increased legal and regulatory requirements. See Note 7 for additional information related to expenses incurred in 2021, insurance recoveries, and legal proceedings and governmental investigations related to the Data Security Incident.
System Growth and Pipeline
In 2021, our system grew from 7,642 properties (1,423,044 rooms) at year-end 2020 to 7,989 properties (1,479,179 rooms) at year-end 2021, reflecting gross additions of 517 properties (86,372 rooms) and deletions of 171 properties (30,236 rooms), including 88 properties from a primarily select-service portfolio which left our system in the 2021 first quarter. Approximately 50 percent of our 2021 gross room additions are located outside U.S. & Canada, and 21 percent were conversions from competitor brands.
At year-end 2021, we had roughly 485,000 rooms in our development pipeline, which includes more than 202,000 hotel rooms under construction and approximately 19,000 hotel rooms approved for development but not yet under signed contracts. Over half of the rooms in our development pipeline are outside U.S. & Canada. In 2021, we signed management and franchise agreements for 599 properties, representing approximately 92,000 rooms, of which more than half of the rooms are located outside U.S. & Canada. Contracts signed in 2021 reflected the Company’s strength in the luxury tier, with 40 properties signed (resulting in a total of nearly 50,000 luxury rooms in our development pipeline at year-end 2021), as well as strong momentum in all-inclusive resort signings, with 22 properties signed in 2021. In addition, in 2021, longer stay brands, which include Element Hotels, Residence Inn, and TownePlace Suites, accounted for 37 percent of the Company's rooms signings in U.S. & Canada. Conversions accounted for 27 percent of rooms signings in 2021.
In 2022, we expect total gross rooms growth to approach 5.0 percent and net rooms growth of 3.5 to 4.0 percent.
Properties and Rooms
At year-end 2021, we operated, franchised, and licensed the following properties and rooms:
Lodging Statistics
The following tables present RevPAR, occupancy, and ADR statistics for comparable properties for 2021 and 2021 compared to 2020. Systemwide statistics include data from our franchised properties, in addition to our company-operated properties.
(1)Includes Greater China, Asia Pacific excluding China, Caribbean & Latin America, Europe, and Middle East & Africa.
(2)Includes U.S. & Canada and International - All.
CONSOLIDATED RESULTS
Our results in 2021 continued to be impacted by COVID-19. See the “Impact of COVID-19” section above for more information about the impact to our business during 2021, and the discussion below for additional analysis of our consolidated results of operations for 2021 compared to 2020.
Fee Revenues
The increase in base management fees primarily reflected higher RevPAR due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19.
The increase in franchise fees primarily reflected higher RevPAR due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19, higher co-brand credit card fees ($102 million), unit growth ($89 million), and higher residential branding fees ($39 million).
The increase in incentive management fees primarily reflected higher profits at certain managed hotels due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19. In 2021, we earned incentive management fees from 47 percent of our managed properties worldwide, compared to 37 percent in 2020. We earned incentive management fees from 13 percent of our U.S. & Canada managed properties and 63 percent of our International managed properties in 2021, compared to 3 percent in U.S. & Canada and 56 percent in International in 2020. In addition, 71 percent of our total incentive management fees in 2021 came from our International managed properties versus 92 percent in 2020.
Contract investment amortization changed primarily due to lower impairments of investments in management and franchise contracts.
Owned, Leased, and Other
* Percentage change is not meaningful.
Owned, leased, and other revenue, net of direct expenses increased primarily due to net stronger results at our owned and leased properties driven by the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19, higher termination fees of $20 million, and $18 million of subsidies under German government COVID-19 assistance programs for certain of our leased hotels.
Cost Reimbursements
* Percentage change is not meaningful.
Cost reimbursements, net (cost reimbursement revenue, net of reimbursed expenses) varies due to timing differences between the costs we incur for centralized programs and services and the related reimbursements we receive from hotel owners and franchisees. Over the long term, our centralized programs and services are not designed to impact our economics, either positively or negatively. See Note 2 for more information about the accounting for cost reimbursements, including our Loyalty Program.
The increase in cost reimbursements, net primarily reflects higher revenues, net of expenses, for our centralized programs and services. This increase is partially offset by higher expenses for our Loyalty Program.
Other Operating Expenses
Depreciation, amortization, and other expenses decreased primarily due to lower impairment charges. See Note 8 for more information about the operating lease impairment charges.
General, administrative, and other expenses increased primarily due to higher compensation costs compared to our 2020 cost reduction measures, which included reducing compensation, implementing reduced work weeks for many of our corporate associates, and furloughing a substantial number of associates, as well as higher legal expenses ($34 million). The increase was partially offset by a lower provision for credit losses ($76 million) and a favorable litigation settlement ($18 million).
Restructuring and merger-related charges decreased primarily due to the prior year increase to the put option liability discussed in Note 7 ($243 million) and 2020 restructuring charges ($56 million), partially offset by the 2020 partial reversal of the liability related to the ICO fine, which was reduced to £18.4 million in October 2020 ($39 million).
Non-Operating Income (Expense)
* Percentage change is not meaningful.
In the 2021 third quarter, we recorded a loss on extinguishment of debt due to the Tender Offer discussed in Note 9.
Interest expense changed, primarily due to lower Credit Facility and commercial paper average borrowings and interest rates, partially offset by higher interest on Senior Note issuances, net of maturities.
Equity in losses changed, primarily due to 2020 impairment losses ($77 million) and the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19.
Income Taxes
Our tax provision in 2021, compared to our tax benefit in 2020, primarily reflected the increase in operating income ($256 million), lower tax benefit from impairment charges ($64 million) and the prior year tax benefit from the Sheraton Grand Chicago put option reserve ($61 million). The change was partially offset by the current year release of tax reserves due to favorable audit resolutions during 2021 ($43 million) and a current year tax benefit from the loss on extinguishment of debt ($42 million).
BUSINESS SEGMENTS
Our segment results in 2021 continued to be impacted by COVID-19. See the “Impact of COVID-19” section above for more information about the impact to our business during 2021 and the discussion below for additional analysis of the operating results of our reportable business segments.
U.S. & Canada
U.S. & Canada segment profit increased primarily due to the following:
•$666 million of higher gross fee revenues, primarily reflecting higher comparable systemwide RevPAR driven by increases in both occupancy and ADR as well as higher profits at certain managed hotels due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19, unit growth, and higher residential branding fees, partially offset by lower fees from properties that were terminated;
•$131 million of higher cost reimbursement revenue, net of reimbursed expenses;
•$117 million of lower depreciation, amortization, and other expenses, primarily reflecting lower operating lease impairment charges;
•$84 million of lower equity in losses, primarily reflecting prior year impairment charges ($60 million) and lower losses recorded by investees due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19;
•$62 million of higher owned, leased, and other revenue, net of direct expenses, primarily reflecting net stronger results at owned and leased properties due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19;
•$55 million of lower general, administrative, and other expenses, primarily reflecting lower provision for credit losses ($34 million) and a favorable litigation settlement ($18 million);
•$53 million of lower contract investment amortization costs, primarily reflecting lower contract impairment charges; and
•$28 million of lower restructuring and merger-related charges.
International
International 2021 segment profit, compared to the 2020 segment loss, primarily reflected:
•$230 million of higher gross fee revenues, primarily reflecting higher comparable systemwide RevPAR driven by increases in both occupancy and ADR as well as higher profits at certain managed hotels due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19, unit growth, and higher residential branding fees;
•$108 million of higher owned, leased, and other revenue, net of direct expenses, primarily reflecting net stronger results at owned and leased properties due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19, subsidies under German government COVID-19 assistance programs for certain of our leased hotels, and higher termination fees;
•$69 million of higher cost reimbursement revenue, net of reimbursed expenses;
•$27 million of lower general, administrative, and other expenses primarily reflecting lower provision for credit losses; and
•$18 million of lower equity in losses primarily due to the ongoing recovery in lodging demand from the impacts of COVID-19.
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
See Note 5 for more information.
NEW ACCOUNTING STANDARDS
We do not expect that accounting standard updates issued to date and that are effective after December 31, 2021 will have a material effect on our Financial Statements.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our long-term financial objectives include diversifying our financing sources, optimizing the mix and maturity of our long-term debt, and reducing our working capital. At year-end 2021, our long-term debt had a weighted average interest rate of 3.4 percent and a weighted average maturity of approximately 6.5 years. Including the effect of interest rate swaps, the ratio of our fixed-rate long-term debt to our total long-term debt was 0.8 to 1.0 at year-end 2021.
In response to the negative impact COVID-19 had on our cash from operations in 2021 and 2020, which we expect to continue to be negatively impacted, we remain focused on preserving our financial flexibility and managing our debt maturities. We also remain focused on managing our corporate general and administrative costs and our capital expenditures and other investment spending. Share repurchases and dividends remain suspended until our leverage ratios further improve, although assuming there is no meaningful setback in the global recovery from COVID-19, we could restart some level of capital returns in the second half of 2022 and more meaningful levels of capital returns in 2023 and beyond. In 2021, we issued $1.8 billion aggregate principal amount of senior notes, redeemed all $400 million aggregate principal amount of our Series N Notes, and repurchased and retired $1 billion aggregate principal amount of our Series EE Notes maturing in 2025, which we discuss further under the “Sources of Liquidity - Senior Notes Issuances, Redemptions, and Repurchases” section below and in Note 9.
We monitor the status of the capital markets and regularly evaluate the effect that changes in capital market conditions may have on our ability to fund our liquidity needs. We currently believe the Credit Facility, our cash on hand, and our access to capital markets remain adequate to meet our liquidity requirements.
Sources of Liquidity
Our Credit Facility
Our Credit Facility provides for up to $4.5 billion of aggregate borrowings for general corporate needs, including working capital, capital expenditures, letters of credit, acquisitions, and to support our commercial paper program if and when we resume issuing commercial paper. Borrowings under the Credit Facility generally bear interest at LIBOR (the London Interbank Offered Rate) plus a spread, based on our public debt rating. We also pay quarterly fees on the Credit Facility at a rate based on our public debt rating. We classify outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility and outstanding commercial paper borrowings (if any) as long-term based on our ability and intent to refinance the outstanding borrowings on a long-term basis. The Credit Facility expires on June 28, 2024. As of December 31, 2021, we had total outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility of $1.1 billion and remaining borrowing capacity of $3.4 billion.
We entered into amendments to the Credit Facility in April 2020 and January 2021 (the “Credit Facility Amendments”), as described in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, as amended. The debt leverage covenant in the Credit Facility, which is tested each quarter and was waived pursuant to the Credit Facility Amendments through and including the fourth quarter of 2021, resumes beginning with the quarter ending March 31, 2022. The Credit Facility Amendments adjusted the required leverage levels for this covenant when it is re-imposed (starting at 5.50 to 1.00 for the test period ending on March 31, 2022 and gradually stepping down to 4.00 to 1.00 over the succeeding five fiscal quarters, as further described in the Credit Facility). The Credit Facility Amendments also amended certain other terms of the Credit Facility, including reducing the rate floor for the LIBOR Daily Floating Rate and the Eurocurrency Rate.
Our outstanding public debt does not contain a corresponding financial covenant or a requirement that we maintain certain financial ratios. We currently satisfy the covenants in our Credit Facility.
Senior Notes Issuances, Redemptions, and Repurchases
In January 2022, we made a $404 million cash payment of principal and interest to retire, at maturity, all of our outstanding Series Q Notes.
In September 2021, we completed a tender offer (the “Tender Offer”) and purchased and retired $1 billion aggregate principal amount of our 5.750 percent Series EE Notes maturing May 1, 2025. We used the net proceeds from our Series II Notes offering described below and cash on hand to complete the repurchase of such Series EE Notes, including the payment of accrued interest and other costs incurred. As a result of the Tender Offer, in the 2021 third quarter, we recorded a loss of $164 million in the “Loss on extinguishment of debt” caption of our Income Statements.
In September 2021, we issued $700 million aggregate principal amount of 2.750 percent Series II Notes due October 15, 2033 (the “Series II Notes”). We will pay interest on the Series II Notes in April and October of each year, commencing in April 2022. We received net proceeds of approximately $693 million from the offering of the Series II Notes, after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated expenses. We used the net proceeds to fund the Tender Offer, as further described above.
In August 2021, we redeemed all $400 million aggregate principal amount of our Series N Notes due in October 2021.
In March 2021, we issued $1.1 billion aggregate principal amount of 2.850 percent Series HH Notes due April 15, 2031 (the “Series HH Notes”). We pay interest on the Series HH Notes in April and October of each year. We received net proceeds of approximately $1,089 million from the offering of the Series HH Notes, after deducting the underwriting discount and estimated expenses, which were made available for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of a portion of our outstanding borrowings under the Credit Facility.
Commercial Paper
Due to changes to our credit ratings as a result of the impact of COVID-19 on our business, we currently are not issuing commercial paper. As a result, we have had to rely more on borrowings under the Credit Facility and issuance of senior notes, which carry higher interest costs than commercial paper.
Uses of Cash
Cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash totaled $1,421 million at December 31, 2021, an increase of $527 million from year-end 2020, primarily due to net cash provided by operating activities ($1,177 million) and Credit Facility borrowings, net of repayments ($150 million), partially offset by Senior Notes repayments, net of issuances ($368 million), capital and technology expenditures ($183 million), cash paid for debt extinguishment costs associated with the Tender Offer ($155 million), and financing outflows for employee stock-based compensation withholding taxes ($90 million).
Cash from Operations
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $462 million in 2021 compared to 2020, primarily due to net cash inflow from our Loyalty Program in 2020 and higher cash paid for income taxes, partially offset by higher net income recorded in 2021 (adjusted for non-cash items and the loss on extinguishment of debt). Cash inflow from our Loyalty Program in 2020 included $920 million of cash received from the prepayment of certain future revenues under the amendments to our existing U.S.-issued co-brand credit card agreements, which reduced in 2021 and will in the future reduce the amount of cash we receive from these card issuers.
Our ratio of current assets to current liabilities was 0.6 to 1.0 at year-end 2021 and 0.5 to 1.0 at year-end 2020. We have significant borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility should we need additional working capital.
Investing Activities Cash Flows
Capital Expenditures and Other Investments. We made capital and technology expenditures of $183 million in 2021 and $135 million in 2020. Capital expenditures in 2021 increased by $48 million compared to 2020, primarily reflecting higher spending on our new headquarters.
We expect capital expenditures and other investments will total approximately $600 million to $700 million for 2022, including capital and technology expenditures, loan advances, contract acquisition costs, and other investing activities (including approximately $250 million for maintenance capital spending and our new headquarters).
Over time, we have sold lodging properties, both completed and under development, subject to long-term management agreements. The ability of third-party purchasers to raise the debt and equity capital necessary to acquire such properties depends in part on the perceived risks in the lodging industry and other constraints inherent in the capital markets. We monitor the status of the capital markets and regularly evaluate the potential impact of changes in capital market conditions on our business operations. We have made, and expect to continue making, selective and opportunistic investments to add units to our lodging business, which may include property acquisitions and renovations, new construction, loans, guarantees, and equity investments. Over time, we seek to minimize capital invested in our business through asset sales subject to long-term management or franchise agreements.
Dispositions. Property and asset sales generated $12 million cash proceeds in 2021 and $260 million in 2020.
Loan Activity. From time to time, we make loans to owners of hotels that we operate or franchise. Loan collections, net of loan advances, amounted to $27 million in 2021, compared to net advances of $33 million in 2020. At year-end 2021, we had $153 million of senior, mezzanine, and other loans outstanding, compared to $163 million outstanding at year-end 2020.
Financing Activities Cash Flows
Debt. Debt decreased by $238 million in 2021, to $10,138 million at year-end 2021 from $10,376 million at year-end 2020. See “Sources of Liquidity,” caption in this “Liquidity and Capital Resources” section and Note 9 for additional information on the Senior Note and Credit Facility transactions in 2021.
Share Repurchases and Dividends. We did not repurchase any shares of our common stock in 2021. At year-end 2021, 17.4 million shares remained available for repurchase under Board approved authorizations. We also did not declare any cash dividends in 2021. We do not anticipate repurchasing additional shares or declaring cash dividends until our leverage ratios further improve. Assuming there is no meaningful setback in the global recovery from COVID-19, we could restart some level of capital returns in the second half of 2022 and more meaningful levels of capital returns in 2023 and beyond.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual obligations and off-balance sheet arrangements.
•At year-end 2021, we had $12,169 million of debt, including principal and future interest payments, of which $1,134 million is payable within the next 12 months from year-end 2021. See Note 9 for further information about our long-term debt.
•We enter into operating and finance leases primarily for hotels, offices, and equipment, which are discussed in Note 8.
•At December 31, 2021, projected Deemed Repatriation Transition Tax payments under the U.S. tax legislation enacted on December 22, 2017, commonly referred to as the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, totaled $349 million, of which $43 million is payable within the next 12 months from year-end 2021.
•The Company also had guarantees, a contingent purchase obligation, commitments, and letters of credit as of year-end 2021, which are discussed in Note 7. The majority of our guarantee commitments are not expected to be funded within the next 12 months from year-end 2021. In addition to the purchase obligations discussed in Note 7, in the normal course of business, we enter into purchase commitments and incur other obligations to manage the daily operating needs of the hotels that we manage. Since our contracts with owners require reimbursement for these amounts, these obligations are expected to have minimal impact on our net income and cash flow.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts and related disclosures. Management considers an accounting policy and estimate to be critical if: (1) we must make assumptions that were uncertain when the estimate was made; and (2) changes in the estimate, or selection of a different estimate methodology could have a material effect on our consolidated results of operations or financial condition. Management has discussed the development and selection of its critical accounting policies and estimates with the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors.
While we believe that our estimates, assumptions, and judgments are reasonable, they are based on information available when the estimate or assumption was made. Actual results may differ significantly. Additionally, changes in our assumptions, estimates or assessments due to unforeseen events or otherwise could have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations.
See Note 2 for further information related to our critical accounting policies and estimates, which are as follows:
Loyalty Program, including how we estimate the breakage of hotel points, credit card points, and free night certificates, the volume of points and free night certificates that will be issued under our co-brand credit card agreements, the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled under our co-brand credit card agreements, and the stand-alone selling prices of goods and services provided under our co-brand credit card agreements. Changes in these estimates could result in material changes to our liability for guest loyalty program and Loyalty Program revenue. Based on the conditions existing at December 31, 2021 and holding other factors constant, a one percent decrease in our estimate of the breakage of points could result in an increase in the liability for guest loyalty program of approximately $40 million. The breakage impact may vary significantly depending on the specific Loyalty Program points for which the anticipated breakage changes.
Goodwill, including how we evaluate the fair value of reporting units and when we record an impairment loss on goodwill. During the 2021 fourth quarter, we conducted our annual goodwill impairment test and no impairment charges were recorded. The estimated fair values of all our reporting units significantly exceeded their carrying values at the date of their most recent estimated fair value determination.
Intangibles and Long-Lived Assets, including how we evaluate the fair value of intangibles and long-lived assets and when we record impairment losses on intangibles and long-lived assets. During 2021, we evaluated our intangibles and long-lived asset groups for impairment and did not record any material impairment charges. The estimated fair values of all our indefinite-lived intangible assets significantly exceeded their carrying values at the date of their most recent estimated fair value determination.
Investments, including information on how we evaluate the fair value of investments and when we record impairment losses on investments. During 2021, we evaluated our investments for impairment and did not record any material impairment charges.