ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and notes thereto set forth in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Such discussion and analysis includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and that are not historical facts, including statements about our beliefs and expectations. You should also read Business, Risk Factors and Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
We and the VIEs that we consolidate constitute a diversified global technology business with leading AI and data-analytics, as well as a portfolio of digital media properties.
Corporate Structure
We are a holding company incorporated in Delaware and not a Chinese operating company. As a holding company, we conduct a significant part of our operations through our subsidiaries and through contractual arrangements with the VIEs based in China. We use the VIE structure to address challenges resulting from laws, policies and practices that may disfavor foreign-owned entities that operate within industries deemed sensitive by the Chinese government. We own 100% of the equity of a WFOE, which has entered into contractual arrangements with the VIEs, which are owned by members of our management team in China and/or by third parties.
We fund the registered capital and operating expenses of the VIEs on behalf of the shareholders of the VIEs by making advances to the VIEs. We believe that we are the primary beneficiary of the VIEs because the contractual arrangements governing the relationship between the VIEs and our WFOE, which include an exclusive call option agreement, exclusive business cooperation agreement, a proxy agreement and an equity pledge agreement, enable us to (i) exercise effective control over the VIEs, (ii) receive substantially all of the economic benefits of the VIEs, and (iii) have an exclusive call option to purchase, at any time, all or part of the equity interests in and/or assets of the VIEs to the extent permitted by Chinese laws. Because these contractual arrangements with the VIEs provide us with the power to direct the activities of the VIEs, for
accounting purposes we are the primary beneficiary of the VIEs and we have consolidated the financial results of the VIEs in our consolidated financial statements in accordance with U.S. GAAP.
The agreements governing the VIE contractual arrangements have not been tested in a court of law. However, an article published in China Business Law Journal indicated that a China International Economic and Trade Arbitration Commission Shanghai tribunal ruled in 2010 and 2011 in two related cases involving the contractual arrangement of an online game operating company that the contractual arrangement was void on the grounds that such arrangement violated the mandatory administrative regulations prohibiting foreign investors from investing in the online game operation business and constituted “concealing illegal intentions with a lawful form.” According to publicly available information, while the agreements entered into by the parties in the aforementioned CIETAC cases are typical VIE agreements, the PRC domestic company involved in such cases was mainly engaged in online game operation. Although the PRC foreign investment regime restricts or prohibits foreign investment in certain industries, online game operation is one of few industries where there are rules specifically prohibiting foreign investors from controlling and participating in the business indirectly through contractual or technical support arrangements. Though the agreements in the CIETAC cases are similar to our contractual arrangements with the VIEs, we and the VIEs do not operate in the online game operation industry and, to our knowledge, the business conducted by the VIEs is not prohibited from investment from foreign investors in China. We also note that the rulings in the CIETAC cases are not binding on Chinese courts or other arbitration tribunals.
The following diagram illustrates our corporate structure, including our significant subsidiaries, and the relationship between our WFOE and the VIEs as of the date of this Form 10-K. The diagram omits certain entities which are immaterial to our results of operations and financial condition. Equity interests depicted in this diagram are 100% owned. The relationships between each of Chengdu Remark Technology Co., Ltd., Hangzhou Shufeng Technology Co., Ltd., Remark Data Technology Co., Ltd. and Bonet (Beijing) Technology LLC, which constitute the VIEs, on the one hand, and KanKan Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., our WFOE, on the other hand, as illustrated in the following diagram are governed by contractual arrangements and do not constitute equity ownership.
Financial Statement Index
Because we do not directly hold equity interests in the VIEs, we are subject to risks and uncertainties of the interpretations and applications of Chinese laws and regulations, including but not limited to, the validity and enforcement of the contractual arrangements among the WFOE, the VIEs and the shareholders of the VIEs. We are also subject to the risks and uncertainties about any future actions of the Chinese government in this regard that could disallow the VIE structure, which would likely result in a material change in our operations and may cause the value of our common stock to depreciate significantly or become worthless.
Financial Statement Index
The contractual arrangements may not be as effective as direct ownership in providing operational control and we face contractual exposure in such arrangements. For instance, the VIEs and their shareholders could breach their contractual arrangements with us by, among other things, failing to conduct their operations in an acceptable manner or taking other actions that are detrimental to our interests. The shareholders of the VIEs may not act in the best interests of our Company or may not perform their obligations under these contracts. Such risks exist throughout the period in which we intend to operate certain portions of our business through the contractual arrangements with the VIEs. In the event that the VIEs or their shareholders fail to perform their respective obligations under the contractual arrangements, we may have to incur substantial costs and expend additional resources to enforce such arrangements. In addition, even if legal actions are taken to enforce such arrangements, there is uncertainty as to whether Chinese courts would recognize or enforce judgments of U.S. courts against us or such persons predicated upon the civil liability provisions of the securities laws of the United States or any state.
Risks of Doing Business in China
We are subject to certain legal and operational risks associated with having a significant portion of our operations in China. Chinese laws and regulations governing our current business operations, including the enforcement of such laws and regulations, are sometimes vague and uncertain and can change quickly with little advance notice. The Chinese government may intervene or influence our operations and the operations of the VIEs at any time and may exert more control over offerings conducted overseas and/or foreign investment in China-based issuers, which could result in a material change in our operations and/or the value of our securities. In addition, any actions by the Chinese government to exert more oversight and control over offerings that are conducted overseas and/or foreign investment in China-based issuers could significant limit or completely hinder our ability to offer or continue to offer our securities to investors and cause the value of such securities to significantly decline or become worthless. Recently, the Chinese government adopted a series of regulatory actions and issued statements to regulate business operations in China, including those related to the use of variable interest entities, data security and anti-monopoly concerns. As of the date of this Form 10-K, neither we nor the VIEs have been involved in any investigations on cybersecurity review initiated by any Chinese regulatory authority, nor has any of them received any inquiry, notice or sanction. As of the date of this Form 10-K, no relevant laws or regulations in China explicitly require us to seek approval from the CSRC for any securities listing. As of the date of this Form 10-K, neither we nor the VIEs have received any inquiry, notice, warning or sanctions regarding our planned overseas listing from the CSRC or any other Chinese governmental authorities relating to securities listings. However, since these statements and regulatory actions are newly published, official guidance and related implementation rules have not been issued. It is highly uncertain what potential impact such modified or new laws and regulations will have on our ability to conduct our business, accept investments or list or maintain a listing on a U.S. or foreign exchange.
As of the date of this 10-K, we and the VIEs are not required to seek permissions from the CSRC, the CAC, or any other entity that is required to approve of the operations of the VIEs. Nevertheless, Chinese regulatory authorities may in the future promulgate laws, regulations or implement rules that require us, our subsidiaries or the VIEs to obtain permissions from such regulatory authorities to approve the operations of the VIEs or any securities listing.
Transfer of Cash or Assets
Dividend Distributions
As of the date of this Form 10-K, none of our subsidiaries or any of the consolidated VIEs have made any dividends or distributions to us.
We have never declared or paid dividends or distributions on our common equity. We currently intend to retain all available funds and any future consolidated earnings to fund our operations and continue the development and growth of our business; therefore, we do not anticipate paying any cash dividends.
Under Delaware law, a Delaware corporation’s ability to pay cash dividends on its capital stock requires the corporation to have either net profits or positive net assets (total assets less total liabilities) over its capital. If we determine to pay dividends on any of our common stock in the future, as a holding company, we may rely on dividends and other distributions on equity from our WFOE for cash requirements, including the funds necessary to pay dividends and other cash contributions to our stockholders.
Financial Statement Index
Our WFOE’s ability to distribute dividends is based upon its distributable earnings. Current Chinese regulations permit our WFOE to pay dividends to their shareholders only out of its registered capital amount, if any, as determined in accordance with Chinese accounting standards and regulations, and then only after meeting the statutory reserve equal to 50% of registered capital. If our WFOE incurs debt in the future, the instruments governing the debt may restrict its ability to pay dividends or make other payments to us. Any limitation on the ability of our WFOE to distribute dividends or other payments to us could materially and adversely limit our ability to grow, make investments or acquisitions that could be beneficial to our businesses, pay dividends or otherwise fund and conduct our business. In addition, any cash dividends or distributions of assets by our WFOE to its stockholder are subject to a Chinese withholding tax of as much as 10%.
The Chinese government also imposes controls on the conversion of RMB into foreign currencies and the remittance of currencies out of China. Therefore, we may experience difficulties in completing the administrative procedures necessary to obtain and remit foreign currency for the payment of dividends from our profits, if any. If we are unable to receive all of the revenues from our operations through the current VIE contractual arrangements, we may be unable to pay dividends on our common stock.
For us to pay dividends to our stockholders, we will rely on payments made from the VIEs to our WFOE in accordance with the VIE contractual arrangements, and the distribution of payments from the WFOE to the Delaware holding company as dividends. Certain payments from the VIEs to the WFOE pursuant to the VIE contractual arrangements are subject to Chinese taxes, including a 6% VAT and 25% enterprise income tax.
Our Company’s Ability to Settle Amounts Owed under the VIE Contractual Arrangements
Under the VIE contractual arrangements, the VIEs are obligated to make payments to our WFOE, in cash or in kind, at the WFOE’s request. We will be able to settle amounts owed under the VIE contractual arrangements through dividends paid by our WFOE to our Company. Such ability may be restricted or limited as follows:
First, any payments from the VIEs to our WFOE are subject to Chinese taxes, including a 6% VAT and 25% enterprise income tax.
Second, current Chinese regulations permit our WFOE to pay dividends to their shareholders only out of its registered capital amount, if any, as determined in accordance with Chinese accounting standards and regulations, and then only after meeting the statutory reserve equal to 50% of registered capital. In addition, if our WFOE incurs debt in the future, the instruments governing the debt may restrict its ability to pay dividends or make other payments to the Delaware holding company.
Third, the Chinese government also imposes controls on the conversion of RMB into foreign currencies and the remittance of currencies out of China. Therefore, we may experience difficulties in completing the administrative procedures necessary to obtain and remit foreign currency for the payment of dividends from profits, if any.
AI Business
Through the proprietary data and AI software platform we co-developed with one of the VIEs, our Remark AI business in the U.S. and the KanKan AI business operated by the VIEs in the Asia-Pacific region generate revenue by delivering AI-based computer vision products, computing devices and software-as-a-service solutions for businesses in many industries. In addition to the other work that we and the VIEs have ramped up, we and the VIEs continue partnering with top universities on research projects targeting algorithm, artificial neural network and computing architectures which we believe keeps us among the leaders in technology development. Our research team continues to participate in various computer vision competitions at which it wins or ranks near or at the top.
We continue to market Remark AI’s innovative AI-based solutions to customers in the retail, urban life cycle and workplace and food safety markets. We have also begun to expand our AI-based safety solutions to railway customers in the transportation market.
Financial Statement Index
Retail Solutions. Utilizing a client’s existing cameras and IoT devices placed throughout the store, Remark AI’s retail solutions swiftly analyze real-time customer shopping behavior, such as time of store entry and shelf-browsing habits, and provide managers with a customer heatmap that reflects traffic patterns. Purchase history is also analyzed, leading to relevant offers for future purchase conversions, and customers for their continued loyalty through a special VIP status that brings customized promotions and coupons along with attentive customer service. Remark AI’s retail solutions allow retailers and store managers to make better data-driven decisions regarding store layout, item placement, and pricing strategy, all while anonymizing customers’ identities to protect their privacy.
Urban Life Cycle Solutions. We offer and have installed several solutions in what we call the urban life cycle category. Our urban life cycle solutions include our AI community system which assists in building “smart” communities by enhancing community security and safety. We also have AI solutions that help to make schools “smart” by (i) providing an accurate and convenient method for student check-in and check-out, (ii) providing an autonomous method of campus monitoring that enhances students’ safety by, for example, monitoring students for elevated body temperatures that could indicate viral infections such as influenza or COVID-19, detecting trespassers, detecting dangerous behaviors or physical accidents that could result in injury, and (iii) monitoring the school kitchen for safety violations.
In traffic management, our solutions assist in monitoring traffic for various violations by automatically detecting, capturing, and obtaining evidence regarding violations such as speeding, running red lights, driving against the flow of traffic and even using counterfeit registration plates. Additionally, our solutions provide constant road-condition monitoring, providing control centers with real-time information on traffic conditions such as areas of congestion or other traffic anomalies.
Workplace and Food Safety Solutions. The monitoring and detection capabilities of our solutions ensure that workers are practicing established food safety protocols, wearing the proper personal protective equipment, and complying with local health codes. From commercial kitchens to factories to construction work zones, our safety-compliance algorithms manage regulatory functions, review hygienic and equipment status while checking and alerting management regarding violations.
Railway Safety Solutions. In railway settings, our product known as the Smart Sentry uses the SSP (safety and security platform) software, a specialized version of the software platform we developed with one of the VIEs, to provide intrusion-detection capabilities that allow customers to monitor railroad tracks, rail yards and other sensitive areas around the clock, in all weather conditions and at varying distances. The Smart Sentry, which customers can deploy as an individual unit or as a system of units, detects when pedestrians or vehicles are crossing a railway or entering the railway tracks as a train is approaching, and then alerts customer personnel to the situation so action can be taken to prevent hazardous incidents from happening. When deployed in multiple-unit systems, each Smart Sentry unit works in concert with the other units to relay warnings that give train operators sufficient time to respond to the track intrusions from miles away. Using the Smart Sentry’s high-end cameras and other hardware, the SSP also gathers and analyzes data on railway traffic and weather conditions along various railways to provide valuable, actionable information to railway personnel. In the near future, we expect to add more safety features to Smart Sentry, such as the ability to detect worn or otherwise damaged track and the ability to identify stationary obstacles like fallen rocks or trees.
Biosafety Solutions. With help from one of the VIEs, we repurposed and improved our existing urban life cycle solution that we were selling to make schools in China “smart” schools to build a product line of high-quality, highly-effective thermal imaging solutions that leverage our innovative software.
We sell our Remark AI Thermal Kits to customers needing the ability to scan crowds and areas of high foot traffic for indications that certain persons with elevated temperatures may require secondary screening. Though the kits are semi-customizable, they generally consist primarily of a thermal imaging camera, a calibrating device, a computer to monitor the video feed, supporting equipment and our AI software. Once set up and calibrated, the kits scan a large number of people each minute, providing both thermally enhanced and standard video feeds that allow our customers to evaluate high volumes of people at large gatherings.
Our Remark AI rPad thermal imaging devices, usually mounted on a wall or a single-post stand, are designed for customers needing the ability to scan individuals on a one-by-one basis in situations where rapid, high-volume scanning is not necessary, such as at a customer’s office entrances where employees can be scanned as they enter for indications of an elevated temperature that may require secondary screening. In addition to thermal scanning, we can customize our AI software embedded in the rPad to perform additional safety and security functions including identifying persons for authorized entry.
Financial Statement Index
Other Businesses
In addition to our AI and data analytics solutions, we maintain a digital media portfolio which, in addition to operating businesses, includes an approximately 2.8 percent ownership in the issued stock of Sharecare, an established health and wellness platform with more than 100 million users. We continue to evaluate opportunities to monetize and maximize the value of this asset for our shareholders. In addition to Data Platform Services revenue from our AI business, activities such as online merchandise sales generated from Bikini.com, our e-commerce website selling swimwear and accessories in the latest styles, also contributed to our consolidated revenue in the current-year and prior-year periods, while advertising also contributed to revenue.
Overall Business Outlook
The innovative AI and data analytics solutions we and the VIEs sell continue to gain worldwide awareness and recognition through media exposure, comparative testing, product demonstrations and word of mouth resulting from positive customer experiences. We intend to expand our business not only in the Asia-Pacific region, where we believe there still are fast-growth AI market opportunities for our solutions, but also in the United States and Europe, where we see a tremendous number of requests for AI products and solutions in the workplace and public safety markets. However, the COVID-19 pandemic may also present challenges to our business, as could economic and geopolitical conditions in some international regions, and we do not yet know what will be the ultimate effects on our business. We continue to pursue large business opportunities, but anticipating when, or if, we can close these opportunities is difficult. Quickly deploying our software solutions in the market segments we have identified, in which we may face a number of large, well-known competitors, is also difficult.
Business Developments During 2021
During the 2021, we continued working to expand our biosafety business within the U.S., and though we expected to do so quickly, the rise in COVID-19 vaccination rates and significant decrease in new reported COVID-19 cases had a negative impact on demand for our AI-driven thermal imaging solutions. Also, the absence of a regulatory mandate for businesses to buy and implement solutions such as ours contributed to the substantial slowing of what originally was steady growth in our biosafety business.
We also stepped into the daily fantasy sports market during the second quarter of 2021 with our AI-driven data intelligence offering. Though our software helped our new customer reduce customer acquisition cost and increase its conversion rate, the customer has indefinitely ceased the marketing activities for which it used our data intelligence offering. We continue, however, to work with the VIEs to refine our product offering in expectation of new projects in this market going forward.
The initial outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our business, as well as many others, and it has caused a broad shift towards remote working arrangements for many businesses worldwide and injected uncertainty and delay into decision-making processes for such businesses. With the spread of new variants causing renewed implementations of preventative measures including travel restrictions, closures of non-essential businesses and other quarantine measures, our business and financial results may still be adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and we are unable to predict the duration or degree of such impact with any certainty, including whether existing or new variants could lead to prolonged, more stringent or entirely new preventative measures.
The following table presents our revenue categories as a percentage of total consolidated revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Financial Statement Index
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Management’s discussion and analysis of our results of operations and liquidity and capital resources is based upon our financial statements. We prepare our financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP. Certain of our accounting policies require that we apply significant judgment in determining the estimates and assumptions for calculating estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. We use, in part, our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, observance of trends in the industry and information obtained from independent valuation experts or other outside sources to make our judgments. We cannot assure you that our actual results will conform to our estimates. We regularly evaluate these estimates and assumptions, particularly in areas we consider to be critical accounting estimates, where changes in estimates and assumptions could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position and, generally to a lesser extent, cash flows.
Senior management and the Audit Committee of the Board of Directors have reviewed the disclosures included herein about our critical accounting estimates, and have reviewed the processes to determine those estimates.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions which affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expense during the period. Estimates incorporated into our consolidated financial statements include the estimated useful lives for depreciable and amortizable assets, the fair value of the liabilities related to certain stock warrants we issued, the fair value of stock options issued under our equity incentive plans, and the estimated cash flows we use in assessing the recoverability of long-lived assets. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Accounting for Share-Based Compensation
For grants of restricted stock or restricted stock units, we measure fair value using the closing price of our stock on the measurement date, while we use the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model (the “BSM Model”) to estimate the fair value of stock options and similar instruments awarded.
The BSM Model requires the following inputs:
•Expected volatility of our stock price. We analyze the historical volatility of our stock price utilizing daily stock price returns, and we also review the stock price volatility of certain peers. Using the information developed from such analysis and our judgment, we estimate how volatile our stock price will be over the period we expect the stock options will remain outstanding.
•Risk-free interest rate. We estimate the risk-free interest rate using data from the Federal Reserve Treasury Constant Maturity Instruments H.15 Release (a table of rates downloaded from the Federal Reserve website) as of the valuation date for a security with a remaining term that approximates the period over which we expect the stock options will remain outstanding.
•Stock price, exercise price and expected term. We use an estimate of the fair value of our common stock on the measurement date, the exercise price of the option, and the period over which we expect the stock options will remain outstanding.
We do not currently issue dividends, but if we did so, then we would also include an estimated dividend rate as an input to the BSM model. Generally speaking, the BSM model tends to be most sensitive to changes in stock price, volatility or expected term.
Financial Statement Index
We measure compensation expense as of the grant date for granted equity-classified instruments and as of the settlement date for granted liability-classified instruments (meaning that we re-measure compensation expense at each balance sheet date until the settlement date occurs).
Once we measure compensation expense, we recognize it over the requisite service period (generally the vesting period) of the grant, net of forfeitures as they occur.
Impairments
Long-Lived Assets Other Than Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets. When events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of a long-lived asset may not be recoverable, we evaluate long-lived assets for potential impairment. We estimate the future undiscounted cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposition and, if the sum of the expected undiscounted future cash flows is less than the carrying value of the asset, we recognize an impairment loss for the difference between the carrying value of the asset and its fair value.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements which may affect us.
Financial Statement Index
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following tables summarize our operating results for the year ended December 31, 2021, and the discussion following the table explains material changes in such operating results compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue and Cost of Revenue. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the primary driver of the increase in revenue was the VIEs’ completion of more AI-related projects, including projects associated with the VIEs’ collaboration with an unrelated entity (the “China Business Partner”) to which one of the VIEs advanced $2.4 million in 2021, than they completed in the comparable period of 2020, resulting in $4.3 million more revenue. Our completion of an AI data intelligence project with a new customer in the U.S. also contributed $2.8 million to the increase in revenue. A decrease of approximately $1.1 million of revenue from our biosafety business partially offset the increases from the AI data intelligence project and from China.
An increase in cost of revenue resulting from the AI data intelligence project with a new customer in the U.S. was almost entirely offset by a decrease in cost of revenue resulting from the decline in demand related to our biosafety solutions, but the primary cause of the cost of revenue increase during the year ended December 31, 2021 was the VIEs’ completion of more large projects, including projects associated with the VIE’s collaboration with the China Business Partner, than they completed in the comparable period of 2020. Our recording of a reserve for inventory of $0.6 million related to our AI-related business in the U.S. also contributed to the increase in cost of revenue.
Sales and marketing. The decrease in sales and marketing expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from changes in activity in our e-commerce business that resulted in a $0.3 million decrease in advertising and marketing, a $0.3 million decrease in miscellaneous expense not related to any ongoing business trends, and a $0.2 million decrease in payroll and benefits.
Marketing expense (recovery) - China Business Partner activity. One of the VIEs advanced approximately $1.5 million to our China Business Partner during the year ended December 31, 2020 which the VIE recorded as marketing expense because its ability to collect the amounts advanced was uncertain. As a result of the VIE’s collection, subsequent to December 31, 2021, of all amounts it advanced to the China Business Partner, the VIE recorded a recovery of marketing expense during 2021.
Technology and development. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we and the VIEs increased activities to continue to improve the biosafety product line and to develop new products, including the new Smart Sentry product that we expect will first be used by railway customers, leading to a $0.6 million increase in technology and development expense.
General and administrative. The increase in general and administrative expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily the result of a $3.5 million increase in share-based compensation resulting almost entirely from the recognition of the stock option issuances made in July 2020 for which an accounting grant date did not occur until July 2021. Also contributing to the increase was a $0.4 million rent expense increase mainly resulting from short-term rentals in Los Angeles, CA and Miami, FL, a $0.3 million increase in payroll and benefits, and a $02 million increase in insurance premiums reflective of industry-wide rate increases for most coverage types that we buy.
Impairments. During 2020, we impaired the investment in Beijing All-in-one Cloud Net Technology, Co. Ltd. made by one of the VIEs, resulting in an impairment charge of $0.4 million, and we also recorded a $0.3 million impairment of the intangible asset representing the bikini.com domain name. No impairments have been recorded during 2021.
Interest expense. We executed a note payable in February 2021 and incurred interest on such note payable through the beginning of December 2021, contributing to the increase in interest expense. In early December 2021, we executed another note payable, with a different lender, which also contributed to the increase in interest expense. Proceeds from the December 2021 note payable were used, in part, to repay the February 2021 note payable in full. The year ended December 31, 2020 included interest on debt principal that we repaid in the second quarter of 2020, resulting in a decrease in interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2021 that partially offset the increase in interest expense resulting from the new notes payable executed in 2021.
Gain on investment in marketable securities. On July 1, 2021, as the result of a business combination involving Legacy Sharecare and New Sharecare, our equity in Legacy Sharecare converted into cash and shares of publicly traded common stock of New Sharecare (see Note 7 in Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements). As a result of our ownership of publicly-traded shares, we were able to remeasure our investment at fair value, resulting in a gain of $43.6 million.
Gain on debt extinguishment. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received notification during the third quarter of 2021 that our previously-outstanding loan under the Paycheck Protection Program had been forgiven, resulting in a gain of approximately $0.4 million.
Gain on lease termination. During August 2020, we entered into a settlement agreement relating to the lease for our former office space in Las Vegas which we vacated during March 2020. During March 2020, we reduced right of use assets and operating lease liabilities relating to this lease, which resulted in a gain on lease termination of $1.5 million. In addition, we recognized a further gain of $2.0 million during August 2020, when we entered into the settlement agreement. We did not have any lease terminations during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Change in fair value of warrant liability. The change in the fair value of our warrant liability maintained a direct relationship with the change in the price of our common stock as of the balance sheet date and the expected volatility in the price of our common stock. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the decline in our stock price during the year-to-date period ending August 31, 2021, the date when we reclassified the warrants to equity, caused a large decrease in our estimate of the fair value of the warrants, but such decrease was mostly offset by an increase in our estimate of the fair value of the warrants that resulted when we increased our estimate of the expected stock price volatility input to the model we use to estimate fair value. The increase in our common stock price between December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2020 caused an increase in the fair value of our warrant liability during such period.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Overview
During the year ended December 31, 2021, and in each fiscal year since our inception, we have incurred net losses which have resulted in an accumulated deficit of $(333.0) million within stockholders’ equity as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, our operations have historically used more cash than they have provided. Net cash used in operating activities was $20.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our cash balance was $14.2 million.
On April 12, 2017, we issued a short-term note payable in the principal amount of $3.0 million to a private lender in exchange for cash in the same amount. The agreement, which did not have a stated interest rate, required us to repay the note plus a fee of $115 thousand on the maturity date of June 30, 2017. The note was accruing interest at $500 per day on the unpaid principal until we repaid the note in full. On December 6, 2021, we repaid in full the $1.5 million principal that remained outstanding as of that date, plus accrued interest of $0.6 million.
On April 15, 2020, we entered into a loan agreement (the “PPP Loan”) with our bank under the U.S. Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program. Under the PPP Loan, we borrowed $0.4 million with a stated interest rate of one percent for a term of two years from the initial disbursement date of April 15, 2020. On July 23, 2021, the lender of our PPP Loan notified us that the U.S. Small Business Administration had forgiven our $0.4 million PPP Loan, plus a de minimis amount of accrued interest thereon, effective as of July 21, 2021.
On December 30, 2020, we executed a promissory note with a private lender (the “Private Lender Loan”) under which we borrowed $1.0 million. The Private Lender Loan bore interest at 10% per annum. The entire principal balance, as well as any interest accrued thereon, was due and payable in full on December 30, 2023, or such earlier date as the principal may become due and payable pursuant to the terms of the Private Lender Loan. Effective August 5, 2021, we entered into an amendment (the “Note Amendment”) to the Private Lender Loan. The Note Amendment provided that effective as of August 5, 2021 (the “Conversion Date”), the outstanding principal amount of the Private Lender Loan plus all accrued but unpaid interest thereon through the Conversion Date was automatically converted into shares of our common stock at a conversion price of $1.21 per share, resulting in the issuance of 876,493 shares of our common stock with a fair value of $1.1 million and the recording of less than $0.1 million of additional interest expense.
On February 10, 2021, we entered into a senior secured promissory note with Jefferson Remark Funding LLC (“JRF”), pursuant to which JRF extended credit to us consisting of a one-year term loan in the principal amount of $5.0 million. The Note bore interest at 15% per annum, which was payable on the last business day of each calendar quarter commencing on March 31, 2021. The entire principal balance, as well as any unpaid accrued interest thereon, was due and payable in full on February 10, 2022. On December 6, 2021, we repaid in full all outstanding obligations under the note payable to JRF.
On September 29, 2021, we issued and sold to Armistice Capital 4,237,290 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $1.18 per share together with the Armistice Warrants to purchase as many as 4,237,290 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.35 per share, subject to certain customary anti-dilution adjustments, pursuant to the terms of the Armistice Purchase Agreement. We received net proceeds of $4.6 million from such sale. Concurrently with the entry into the Armistice Purchase Agreement, we also entered into the Financial Advisor Agreement with A.G.P. pursuant to which we agreed to pay A.G.P. a cash fee of $350,000 and to reimburse A.G.P. for certain legal and escrow expenses. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Financial Advisor Agreement, on September 29, 2021, we issued to A.G.P. and its designees the Financial Advisor Warrants to purchase as many as an aggregate of 127,118 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $1.35 per share, subject to certain customary anti-dilution adjustments.
On December 3, 2021, we entered into the Mudrick Loan Agreements pursuant to which we incurred the Mudrick Loans in the aggregate principal amount of $30.0 million. The Mudrick Loans bear interest at 16.5% per annum, which shall be payable on the last business day of each month commencing on December 31, 2021. All amounts outstanding under the Mudrick Loans, including all accrued and unpaid interest, will be due and payable in full on July 31, 2022. To secure the payment and performance of the obligations under the Mudrick Loan Agreements, we, together with the Guarantors, have granted to TMI Trust Company, as the collateral agent for the benefit of Mudrick, a first priority lien on, and security interest in, all assets of Remark and the Guarantors, subject to certain customary exceptions. The Mudrick Loan Agreements contain representations, warranties, events of default, indemnifications and other provisions customary for financings of this type. The occurrence of any event of default under the Mudrick Loan Agreements may result in the principal amount outstanding and unpaid interest thereon becoming immediately due and payable. In connection with our entry into the Mudrick Loan Agreements, we paid to Mudrick an upfront fee equal to 5.0% of the amount of the Mudrick Loans, which was netted against the drawdown of the Mudrick Loans and recorded as a discount of $1.5 million, and recorded debt issuance cost totaling $1.1 million. We are amortizing the discount on the Mudrick Loans and the debt issuance cost over the life of the Mudrick Loans.
Since 2009, we have held an interest in Legacy Sharecare. On July 1, 2021, Legacy Sharecare completed a business combination as a result of which the shares of common stock of Legacy Sharecare that we held immediately prior to the business combination converted into approximately $2.3 million in cash and approximately 9.4 million shares of publicly-traded common stock of New Sharecare. As part of the business combination, we signed a lock-up agreement with New Sharecare, pursuant to which we have agreed not to, subject to certain exceptions, transfer, assign or sell any of our New Sharecare common stock until the earlier to occur of: (i) one year after the effective time of the business combination, and (ii) subsequent to the effective time, if the closing price of New Sharecare common stock equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for stock splits, stock capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the effective time of the business combination (the “Lock-up Period”). Notwithstanding the foregoing, we are permitted under the lock-up agreement to sell our shares of New Sharecare common stock (x) beginning on the 180th day after the effective time of the business combination until the 269th day following the effective time, the greater of 5% of our shares as of the effective time and 750,000 shares, and (y) beginning on the 270th day after the effective time until the expiration of the Lock-up Period, the greater of 5% of our shares as of the effective time and 750,000 shares, plus any shares that were permitted to be, but not, transferred pursuant to clause (x) above.
Our history of recurring operating losses, working capital deficiencies and negative cash flows from operating activities give rise to substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
We intend to fund our future operations and meet our financial obligations through revenue growth from our AI offerings, as well as through sales of our thermal-imaging products. We cannot, however, provide assurance that revenue, income and cash flows generated from our businesses will be sufficient to sustain our operations in the twelve months following the filing of this Form 10-K. As a result, we are actively evaluating strategic alternatives including debt and equity financings and potential sales of investment assets or operating businesses.
Conditions in the debt and equity markets, as well as the volatility of investor sentiment regarding macroeconomic and microeconomic conditions (in particular, as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, global supply chain disruptions, inflation and other cost increases, and the geopolitical conflict in Ukraine), will play primary roles in determining whether we can successfully obtain additional capital. We cannot be certain that we will be successful at raising additional capital.
A variety of factors, many of which are outside of our control, affect our cash flow; those factors include the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory issues, competition, financial markets and other general business conditions. Based on financial projections, we believe that we will be able to meet our ongoing requirements for at least the next 12 months with existing cash, cash equivalents and cash resources, and based on the probable success of one or more of the following plans:
•develop and grow new product line(s)
•monetize existing assets
•obtain additional capital through equity issuances.
However, projections are inherently uncertain and the success of our plans is largely outside of our control. As a result, there is substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern, and we may fully utilize our cash resources prior to March 31, 2023.
Cash Flows - Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $2.1 million more cash in operating activities than we did during the same period of the prior year. The increase in cash used in operating activities is primarily the result of the timing of payments related to elements of working capital.
Cash Flows - Investing Activities
Investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 provided $2.3 million in proceeds from the transaction in which Sharecare became a public company on July 1, 2021.
Cash Flows - Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we received $5.7 million of cash proceeds from common stock issuances, whereas the same period of 2020 included stock sale proceeds of $32.1 million. We also received debt proceeds of $32.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, while we only issued $1.4 million of debt in the same period of the prior year. The prior year period’s financing activity also included repayment of $13.8 million of debt, as well as the payment of $0.9 million of contingent consideration related to a business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We currently have no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Please refer to Note 2 in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report for a discussion regarding recently issued accounting pronouncements which may affect us.