ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
You should read this discussion together with the financial statements, related notes and other financial information included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion may contain predictions, estimates and other forward-looking statements that involve a number of risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under Item 1A - “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks could cause our actual results to differ materially from any future performance suggested below.
Executive Overview
We are a global medical technology company that develops, manufactures and markets a variety of noninvasive monitoring technologies and hospital automation™ solutions. Our mission is to improve patient outcomes and reduce the cost of patient care. Our patient monitoring solutions generally incorporate a monitor or circuit board, proprietary single-patient use or reusable sensors, software and/or cables. We provide our products to hospitals, emergency medical service (EMS) providers, home care providers, long-term care facilities, physician offices, veterinarians and consumers through our direct sales force, distributors and original equipment manufacturers (OEM) partners. We were incorporated in California in May 1989 and reincorporated in Delaware in May 1996.
Our core business is Measure-through Motion and Low Perfusion™ pulse oximetry, known as Masimo Signal Extraction Technology® (SET®) pulse oximetry. Our product offerings have expanded significantly over the years to also include noninvasive monitoring of blood constituents with an optical signature, optical regional oximetry monitoring, electrical brain function monitoring, acoustic respiration monitoring and exhaled gas monitoring. In addition, we have developed the Root® patient monitoring and connectivity platform, the Radical-7® and Rad-97® bedside and portable patient monitors and the Radius-7® wearable wireless patient monitor. We have also developed hospital automation™ and connectivity solutions, such as the Masimo Patient SafetyNet™ supplemental remote patient surveillance and monitoring system, which currently allows up to 200 patients to be monitored and viewed simultaneously and remotely through a PC-based monitor or by care providers through their pagers, voice-over-IP phones or smartphones; Iris® and Iris® Gateway, which allow the transfer of data from Masimo and third-party devices to hospital electronic medical records; and UniView™, which provides an integrated display of real-time data from Masimo and third-party devices. Please see Part I, Item 1 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to our business, products and technologies.
COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has created significant uncertainty in the U.S. and around the globe, resulting in both challenges and opportunities for our business. We are committed to being as transparent as possible with our investors, employees, customers, suppliers and business partners as we collectively work to respond to this crisis. In response to this situation, we have implemented a number of precautionary measures at our facilities, including requiring certain personnel to work remotely from home and enacting social distancing, requiring face masks and mandatory screening for symptoms associated with COVID-19 for critical personnel that are required to report to our facilities to work. We have introduced new products, such as Masimo SafetyNet™, Masimo SafetyNet-Open™ and Masimo SafetyNet Alert™, to help combat the COVID-19 pandemic, and continue to make charitable pledges to various global health organizations to support global COVID-19 relief efforts.
Given the uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot predict the extent to which the fluctuations in product demand we have experienced will continue or any resulting changes in our product mix, as well as the associated gross margin impact from those fluctuations in boards and instruments sales. In addition, the fluctuations in demand could result in potential reductions in future demand if our customers have over purchased our products and need to consume their excess inventory before purchasing additional products. Furthermore, we continue to be exposed to potential disruptions to our manufacturing operations, disruptions in the manufacturing supply chain of critical components and in our workforce as circumstances surrounding the global impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continue to change. Please see “Risks Related to Our Revenues” and “Risks Related to our Business and Operations” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information on potential negative impacts to us resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Stock Repurchase Program
In October 2021, our Board approved a stock repurchase program, authorizing us to purchase up to 3.0 million shares of our common stock over a period of up to three years (2021 Repurchase Program). The 2021 Repurchase Program may be carried out at the discretion of a committee comprised of our CEO and CFO through open market purchases, one or more Rule 10b5-1 trading plans, block trades and in privately negotiated transactions. For additional information regarding our current and prior stock repurchase programs, see Part II, Item 5 and Note 17 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cercacor
Cercacor Laboratories, Inc. (Cercacor) is an independent entity spun off from us to our stockholders in 1998. Joe Kiani, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer (CEO), is also the Chairman and CEO of Cercacor. We are a party to a cross-licensing agreement with Cercacor, which was amended and restated effective January 1, 2007 (the Cross-Licensing Agreement), which governs each party’s rights to certain intellectual property held by the two companies. See Note 3 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to Cercacor.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth, for the periods indicated, our results of operations expressed as U.S. Dollar amounts and as a percentage of revenue (dollars in thousands).
Comparison of the Year ended January 1, 2022 to the Year ended January 2, 2021
Revenue. Product revenue increased $95.4 million, or 8.3%, to $1,239.2 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, from $1,143.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. The following table details our total product revenues by the geographic area to which the products were shipped for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 (dollars in thousands):
This increase was primarily due to higher revenue from consumables, parameters and services, as well as the impact of approximately $8.2 million of favorable foreign exchange rate movements from the prior year that increased the U.S. Dollar translation of foreign sales that were denominated in various foreign currencies. During the year ended January 1, 2022, we shipped approximately 289,000 noninvasive technology boards and monitors.
Product revenue generated through our direct and distribution sales channels increased $140.3 million, or 14.6%, to $1,099.1 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, compared to $958.8 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Revenues from our OEM channel decreased $44.9 million, or 24.3%, to $140.1 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 as compared to $185.0 million for the year ended January 2, 2021.
Gross Profit. Gross profit consists of product revenue less cost of goods sold. Our gross profit for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Cost of goods sold includes labor, material, overhead and other similar costs related to the production, supply, distribution and support of our products. Cost of goods sold increased $30.1 million to $430.8 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, from $400.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, primarily due to higher material, manufacturing and distribution costs associated with the mix of products sold.
Gross profit as a percentage of revenues increased to 65.2% for the year ended January 1, 2022 from 65.0% for the year ended January 2, 2021, primarily due to an increase in product revenue and favorable revenue mix.
Selling, General and Administrative. Selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation and related expenses for sales, marketing and administrative personnel, sales commissions, advertising and promotion costs, professional fees related to legal, accounting and other outside services, public company costs and other corporate expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $26.2 million, or 7.1%, to $395.3 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 from $369.1 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to higher compensation and other employee-related costs of approximately $20.4 million, higher legal and professional fees of approximately $16.7 million, higher occupancy and other office-related costs of approximately $5.2 million and higher travel costs of approximately $2.1 million, which were partially offset by a reduction in advertising and marketing-related expenses of approximately $19.2 million, and a reduction in contributions of approximately $0.9 million.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries, stock-based compensation and related expenses for engineers and other personnel engaged in the design and development of our products. These expenses also include third-party fees paid to consultants, prototype and engineering supply expenses and the costs of clinical trials. Research and development expenses for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased $18.6 million, or 15.7%, to $137.2 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 from $118.7 million for the year ended January 2, 2021, primarily due to higher compensation-related costs of approximately $12.3 million, higher engineering project costs of approximately $3.9 million and higher occupancy and office fees of $2.6 million, which were partially offset by lower professional fees of approximately $0.7 million.
Non-operating (Loss) Income. Non-operating (loss) income consists primarily of interest income, interest expense and foreign exchange gains and losses. Non-operating (loss) income for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Non-operating (loss) was $1.4 million for the year ended January 1, 2022, as compared to $7.9 million of non-operating income for the year ended January 2, 2021. This net decrease of approximately $9.4 million was primarily due to approximately
$4.6 million in lower interest income and approximately $4.5 million of net realized and unrealized loss on foreign currency denominated transactions during the year ended January 1, 2022.
Provision for Income Taxes. Our provision for income taxes for the years ended January 1, 2022 and January 2, 2021 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Our provision for income taxes was $44.7 million for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to $23.5 million for the year ended January 2, 2021. Our effective tax rate was 16.3% for the year ended January 1, 2022 compared to 8.9% for the year ended January 2, 2021. This increase in our effective tax rate for the year ended January 1, 2022 resulted primarily from an decrease in the amount of excess tax benefits realized from stock-based compensation pursuant to Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016-09, Compensation-Stock Compensation (Topic 718): Improvements to Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting (ASU 2016-09), of approximately $13.7 million compared to the year ended January 2, 2021.
We have made no provision for U.S. income taxes or foreign withholding taxes on approximately $180.6 million in accumulated earnings from our foreign subsidiaries as we expect that such amounts will continue to be indefinitely reinvested in operations outside the U.S. Our effective tax rate was lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate primarily due to a portion of our earnings being generated from countries other than the U.S., where such earnings are generally subject to lower tax rates than the U.S., excess tax benefits from U.S. stock-based compensation and research and development tax credits. While we expect our worldwide consolidated effective tax rate will continue to be lower than the U.S. federal statutory rate, our actual future effective income tax rate will depend on various factors, including the geographic composition of our pre-tax income, the amount of excess tax benefits realized from U.S. stock-based compensation, the amount of our research and development tax credits, the deductibility of executive compensation, changes in tax laws, changes in deferred tax asset valuation allowances and the recognition and derecognition of tax benefits associated with uncertain tax positions.
Comparison of the Year ended January 2, 2021 to the Year ended December 28, 2019
For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended January 2, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 28, 2019, refer to the discussion under the heading “Comparison of the Year ended January 2, 2021 to the Year ended December 28, 2019” in Item 7, which should be read in conjunction with Item 6, in each case, of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 2, 2021, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission on February 23, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Cash. Our principal sources of liquidity consist of our existing cash and cash equivalent balances, future funds expected to be generated from operations and available borrowing capacity under our Credit Facility. As of January 1, 2022, we had approximately $970.7 million in working capital, of which approximately $745.3 million was cash and cash equivalents. In addition to net working capital, we had approximately $148.3 million of available borrowing capacity (net of outstanding letters of credit) under our Credit Facility as compared to approximately $867.3 million in working capital and approximately $641.4 million in cash and cash equivalents at January 2, 2021.
We currently maintain a Credit Facility with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (as Administrative Agent and a Lender, and Bank of the West, as a Lender, collectively, the Initial Lenders). The Credit Facility provides for up to $150.0 million of unsecured borrowings, with an option, subject to certain conditions, for us to increase the aggregate borrowing capacity to up to $550.0 million in the future with the Initial Lenders and additional Lenders, as required. The Credit Facility also provides for a sublimit of up to $25.0 million for the issuance of letters of credit and a sublimit of $75.0 million for borrowings in specified foreign currencies. Proceeds from the Credit Facility are expected to be used for general corporate, capital investment and expenditures and working capital needs. For additional information regarding the Credit Facility, see Note 15 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In managing our day-to-day liquidity and capital structure, we generally do not rely on foreign earnings as a source of funds. As of January 1, 2022, we had cash totaling $102.6 million held outside of the U.S., of which approximately $59.8 million was accessible without additional tax cost and approximately $42.8 million was accessible at an incremental estimated tax cost of up to $0.4 million. We currently have sufficient funds on-hand and cash held outside the U.S. that is available without additional tax cost to fund our global operations. In the event funds that are treated as permanently reinvested are repatriated, we may be required to accrue and pay additional U.S. taxes to repatriate these funds.
Uses of Cash. Our cash requirements depend on numerous factors, including but not limited to market acceptance of our technologies, our continued ability to commercialize new products and to create or improve our technologies and applications, expansion of our global footprint through acquisitions and/or strategic investments in technologies or technology companies, investments in property and equipment, the renewal of our Credit Facility, the impact of disruptions to the manufacturing industry supply chain for key components resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, inflation, repurchases of our stock under our authorized stock repurchase program, costs related to our domestic and international regulatory requirements and other long-term commitment and contingencies. For further details regarding our commitment and contingencies, see Note 21 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Despite these investment requirements and potential expenditures, we anticipate that our existing cash and cash equivalents, amounts available under our Credit Facility and cash provided by operations will be sufficient to meet our working capital requirements, capital expenditures and other operational funding needs for the next 12 months and beyond.
In connection with the proposed acquisition of Sound United announced on February 15, 2022, we received a debt commitment letter in the amount of $800 million and we expect to secure this financing in the event the proposed acquisition closes. We intend to fund this acquisition through a combination of cash on hand and borrowings under a new credit facility. The acquisition is expected to close in the middle of 2022.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended January 1, 2022 was $264.8 million and was primarily driven by net income of $229.6 million. This was increased by non-cash activities, including stock-based compensation of $44.6 million, and depreciation and amortization of $35.6 million, partially offset by a deferred income tax benefit of $15.1 million. Additional increases in operating cash resulted from decreases in inventory, accounts payable, accrued liabilities, deferred revenue and other contract-related liabilities, other current assets and income tax payable of $13.5 million, $11.0 million, $7.8 million, $7.1 million, $6.9 million and $6.4 million, respectively, primarily due to the timing of payments. Additional increases to net income were changes in operating assets, including an increase in accounts receivable, lease receivables, and deferred cost and other contract assets of $60.8 million, $16.1 million and $6.9 million, respectively.
Cash provided by operating activities for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $211.0 million and was primarily driven by net income of $240.3 million. This was increased by non-cash activities, including stock-based compensation of $42.2 million and depreciation and amortization of $29.3 million, partially offset by a deferred income tax benefit of $5.0 million. Additional increases in operating cash resulted from increases in accrued compensation, deferred revenue and other contract-related liabilities, accrued liabilities and accounts payable of $15.5 million, $10.9 million, $9.4 million and $7.6 million, respectively, primarily due to the timing of payments. Partially offsetting this was $94.4 million of purchases of inventory to both increase finished goods days on hand as well as secure raw material supply to ensure we are able to support higher customer demand during the COVID-19 pandemic, and to support product launches. Additional reductions to net income including were changes in operating assets, including an increase in other current assets of $30.0 million, primarily due to the timing of various tax payments and refunds, and an increase in lease receivables of $7.7 million.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities for the year ended January 1, 2022 was $37.5 million, consisting primarily of $25.5 million for purchases of property and equipment, $9.4 million for intangible assets related to capitalized patent and trademark costs and $2.6 million related to the acquisition of a strategic investment.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $82.8 million, consisting primarily of $120.0 million for maturities of short-term investments, $112.7 million of business combinations, $72.5 million for purchases of property and
equipment, of which $16.4 million related to the purchase of a building, $7.4 million for intangible assets related to capitalized patent and trademark costs and $6.8 million related to the acquisition of a strategic investment.
Financing Activities. Cash used in financing activities for the year ended January 1, 2022 was $122.4 million, resulting primarily from cash paid for common stock repurchase transactions that settled during the year of $128.9 million, which were partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock (upon exercise of options) of $23.2 million.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended January 2, 2021 was $54.3 million, resulting primarily from cash paid for common stock repurchase transactions that settled during the year of $110.5 million, which were partially offset by proceeds from the issuance of common stock (upon exercise of options) of $58.4 million.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgements that affect the reported amounts of net revenues, expenses, assets and liabilities. These estimates and judgements are based on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, and form the basis for making management’s most difficult, subjective or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Although we regularly evaluate these estimates and assumptions, changes in judgments and uncertainties relating to these estimates could potentially result in materially different results under different assumptions and conditions. If these estimates differ significantly from actual results, the impact to the consolidated financial statements may be material. We believe that the critical accounting policies that are the most significant for purposes of fully understanding and evaluating our reported financial results include the following:
Revenue Recognition, Deferred Revenue and Other Contract Liabilities
We derive the majority of our product revenue from four primary sources: (i) direct sales under deferred equipment agreements with end-user hospitals where we provide up-front monitoring equipment at no up-front charge in exchange for a multi-year sensor purchase commitment; (ii) other direct sales of noninvasive monitoring solutions to end-user hospitals, emergency medical response organizations and other direct customers; (iii) sales of noninvasive monitoring solutions to distributors who then typically resell to end-user hospitals, emergency medical response organizations and other customers; and (iv) sales of integrated circuit boards to OEM customers who incorporate our embedded software technology into their multiparameter monitoring devices. Subject to customer credit considerations, the majority of such sales are made on open account using industry standard payment terms based on the geography within which the specific customer is located.
We generally recognize revenue following a single, principles-based five-step model to be applied to all contracts with customers and generally provide for the recognition of revenue in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled, net of allowances for estimated returns, discounts or sales incentives, as well as taxes collected from customers that are remitted to government authorities, when control over the promised goods or services are transferred to the customer. Revenue related to equipment supplied under sales-type lease arrangements is recognized once control over the equipment is transferred to the customer, while revenue related to equipment supplied under operating-type lease arrangements is generally recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
While the majority of our sales transactions contain standard business terms and conditions, there are some transactions that contain non-standard business terms and conditions. As a result, contract interpretation and analysis is required to determine the appropriate accounting, including: (i) the amount of the total consideration, including variable consideration, (ii) whether the arrangement contains an embedded lease, and if so, whether such embedded lease is a sales-type lease or an operating lease, (iii) the identification of the distinct performance obligations contained within the arrangement, (iv) how the arrangement consideration should be allocated to each performance obligation when multiple performance obligations exist, including the determination of standalone selling price, and (v) when to recognize revenue on the performance obligations. Changes in judgments on these assumptions and estimates could materially impact the timing of revenue recognition.
We enter into agreements to sell our monitoring solutions and services, sometimes as part of arrangements with multiple performance obligations that include various combinations of distinct product sales, equipment leases and services. In the case of contracts with multiple performance obligations, the authoritative guidance provides that the total consideration be allocated to each performance obligation on the basis of relative standalone selling prices. When a standalone selling price is not readily observable, we estimate the standalone selling price by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, features and functionality of the product, geographies, type of customer, contractual prices pursuant to Group Purchasing Organization (GPO) contracts, our pricing and discount practices, and other market conditions.
Sales under deferred equipment agreements are generally structured such that we agree to provide certain monitoring-related equipment, software, installation, training and/or warranty support at no up-front charge in exchange for the customer’s commitment to purchase sensors over the term of the agreement, which generally ranges from three to six years. We allocate contract consideration under deferred equipment agreements containing fixed annual sensor purchase commitments to the underlying lease and non-lease components at contract inception. In determining whether any underlying lease components are related to a sales-type lease or an operating lease, we evaluate the customer’s rights and ability to control the use of the underlying equipment throughout the contract term, including any equipment substitution rights retained by us, as well as our expectations surrounding potential contract/lease extensions or renewals and the customer’s likelihood to exercise any purchase options. Revenue allocable to non-lease components is generally recognized as such non-lease components are satisfied. Revenue allocable to lease components under sales-type lease arrangements is generally recognized when control over the equipment is transferred to the customer. Revenue allocable to lease components under operating lease arrangements is generally recognized over the term of the operating lease. We generally do not expect to derive any significant value in excess of such asset’s unamortized book value from equipment underlying our operating leases arrangements.
Revenue from direct sales of our products to end-user hospitals, emergency medical response organizations, other direct customers, distributors and OEM customers is generally recognized by us when control of such products transfer to the customer based upon the terms of the contract or underlying purchase order. Revenue related to OEM rainbow® parameter software licenses is recognized by us upon the OEM’s shipment of its product to its customer, as reported to us by the OEM.
We provide certain customers with various sales incentives that may take the form of discounts or rebates. We estimate and provide allowances for these programs as a reduction to revenue at the time of sale. In general, customers do not have a right of return for credit or refund. However, we allow returns under certain circumstances. At the end of each period, we estimate and accrue for these returns as a reduction to revenue. We estimate the revenue constraints related to these forms of variable consideration based on various factors, including expected purchasing volumes, prior sales and returns history, and specific contractual terms and limitations.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using a standard cost method, which approximates FIFO (first-in, first-out). Inventory valuation reserves are recorded for materials that have become obsolete or are no longer used in current production and for inventory that has a net realizable value less than the carrying value in inventory. We generally purchase raw materials in quantities that we anticipate will be fully used within one year. However, changes in operating strategy and customer demand, and frequent unpredictable fluctuations in market values for such materials, can limit our ability to effectively utilize all of the raw materials purchased and sold through resulting finished goods to customers for a profit. We regularly monitor potential inventory excess, obsolescence and lower market values compared to standard costs and, when necessary, reduce the carrying amount of our inventory to its market value.
We determine any required inventory valuation adjustments based on an evaluation of the expected future use of our inventory on an item by item basis. We apply historical obsolescence rates to estimate the loss on inventory expected to have a recovery value below cost. Our historical obsolescence rates are developed from our company specific experience for major categories of inventory, which are then applied to excess inventory on an item by item basis. We also record other specific inventory valuation adjustments when we become aware of other unique events that result in a known recovery value below cost. For inventory items that have been written down, the reduced value becomes the new cost basis. If our assumptions, judgements or estimates for potential inventory losses prove to be too low, our future earnings will be affected when any related additional inventory losses are recorded.
Stock-Based Compensation
Our stock-based compensation awards are currently comprised of stock options, restricted stock units (RSUs) and performance share units (PSUs), all of which are equity-classified awards. For equity-classified awards granted on or after January 1, 2006, we estimate the fair value of the award on the date of grant and expense stock-based compensation over the requisite service period. In the case of PSUs, the amount of expense recognized is also dependent upon the expected achievement level for the specified performance criteria. The fair value of RSU and PSU awards is the closing price of our common stock on the grant date. To calculate the fair value of stock option awards, we use the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which, in addition to the closing price of our stock on the grant date and the option strike price, requires the input of subjective assumptions. These assumptions include the estimated length of time employees will retain their stock options before exercising them (the expected term), the estimated volatility of our stock price over the expected term and the dividend yield on our common stock. We estimate expected term based on both our specific historical option exercise experience, as well as expected term information available from a peer group of companies with similar vesting schedules. The estimated volatility is based on both the historical and implied volatilities of our share price.
Changes in the types and quantity of equity awards, as well as the fair market value of our stock may impact the cost of future stock option grants. In general, to the extent that the fair market value of our stock increases, the overall cost of granting these options will also increase. Any changes in the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could cause our actual stock-based compensation expense to vary, resulting in changes to future earnings. For further details regarding our stock-based compensation see Note 18 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Accounting for Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which we recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and for net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. A tax position that meets a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is recognized in the first reporting period that it becomes more-likely-than-not such tax position will be sustained upon examination. A tax position that meets this more-likely-than-not recognition threshold is recorded at the largest amount of tax benefit that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Previously recognized income tax positions that fail to meet the recognition threshold in a subsequent period are derecognized in that period. Differences between actual results and our assumptions, or changes in our assumptions in future periods, are recorded in the period they become known. We record potential accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense.
As a multinational corporation, we are subject to complex tax laws and regulations in various jurisdictions. The application of tax laws and regulations is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment and uncertainty. Tax laws themselves are subject to change as a result of changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, evolution of regulations and court rulings. We have concluded all U.S. federal income tax matters for years through 2017 and all material state, local and foreign income tax matters for years through 2014. Given the foregoing, our actual liability for U.S. or foreign taxes may be materially different from our estimates, which could result in the need to record additional liabilities or potentially to reverse previously recorded tax liabilities.
Deferred tax assets (DTA) and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in the period that includes the enactment date. A valuation allowance is recorded against any deferred tax assets when, in the judgment of management, it is more likely than not that all or part of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all positive and negative evidence, including recent financial performance, scheduled reversals of temporary differences, projected future taxable income, availability of taxable income in carryback periods and tax planning strategies.
Income taxes are highly susceptible to changes from period to period, requiring management to make assumptions about our future income over the lives of our DTAs and the impact of changes in valuation allowances. Any difference in the assumptions, judgments and estimates mentioned above could results in changes to our results of operations.
Litigation Costs and Contingencies
We record a charge equal to at least the minimum estimated liability for a loss contingency or litigation settlement when both of the following conditions are met: (i) information available prior to issuance of the financial statements indicates that it is probable that a liability had been incurred at the date of the financial statements and (ii) the range of loss can be reasonably estimated. The determination of whether a loss contingency or litigation settlement is probable or reasonably possible involves a significant amount of management judgment, as does the estimation of the range of loss given the nature of contingencies. Liabilities related to litigation settlements with multiple elements are recorded based on the fair value of each element. Legal and other litigation related expenses are recognized as the services are provided. We record insurance and other indemnity recoveries for litigation expenses when both of the following conditions are met: (i) the recovery is probable and (ii) collectability is reasonably assured. The insurance recoveries recorded are only to the extent the litigation costs have been incurred and recognized in the financial statements; however, it is reasonably possible that the actual recovery may be significantly different from our estimates. There are many uncertainties associated with any litigation, and we cannot provide assurance that any actions or other third-party claims against us will be resolved without costly litigation or substantial settlement charges. If any of those events were to occur, our business, financial condition and results of operations could be materially and adversely affected.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires that once control is obtained, all the assets acquired, liabilities assumed and noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity, if applicable, are recorded at their respective fair values at the date of acquisition. The determination of fair values of identifiable assets and liabilities requires estimates and the use of valuation techniques when market value is not readily available. For intangible assets acquired in a business combination, we typically use the income method. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, the amount and timing of future cash flows, growth rates, discount rates and useful lives. The excess of the purchase price over fair values of identifiable assets, liabilities, and noncontrolling interest in the acquired entity, if applicable, is recorded as goodwill. Should any of the assumptions, judgements or estimates associated with the valuation components change, the fair value of the assets acquired could vary.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For details regarding any recently adopted and recently issued accounting standards, see Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements included in Part IV, Item 15(a) of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.