ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following plan of operation provides information which management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. The discussion should be read along with our financial statements and notes thereto. This section includes a number of forward-looking statements that reflect our current views with respect to future events and financial performance. Forward-looking statements are often identified by words like believe, expect, estimate, anticipate, intend, project and similar expressions, or words which, by their nature, refer to future events. You should not place undue certainty on these forward-looking statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from our predictions.
Overview
We were incorporated in the State of Delaware as of December 9, 2005 as 43010, Inc. to engage in any lawful corporate undertaking, including, but not limited to, locating and negotiating with a business entity for combination in the form of a merger, stock-for-stock exchange or stock-for-assets exchange. On October 7, 2008, pursuant to the terms of a stock purchase agreement, Mr. Greg Halpern purchased a total of 100,000 shares of our common stock from Michael Raleigh for an aggregate of $30,000 in cash. The total of 100,000 shares represents 100% of our issued and outstanding common stock at the time of the transfer. As a result, Mr. Halpern became our sole shareholder. As part of the acquisition, and pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement, Michael Raleigh, our then President, CEO, CFO, and Chairman resigned from all the positions he held in the company, and Mr. Halpern was appointed as our President, CEO CFO and Chairman. The current business model was developed by Mr. Halpern in September of 2008 and began when he joined the company on October 7, 2008. In October 2008, we became a development stage company focused on creating an Internet search engine and networking web site.
In May of 2010, we acquired the world-wide rights to all fields of use for Max Sound HD Audio Technology. In November of 2010, we opened our post-production facility for Max Sound HD Audio in Santa Monica California. In February of 2012, after several successful demonstrations to multi-media industry company executives, we decided to shift the focus of the Company to the marketing of the Max Sound HD Audio Technology and commenced the name change from So Act Network, Inc. to Max Sound Corporation and the symbol from SOAN to MAXD.
On December 3, 2012, the Company completed the purchase of the assets of Liquid Spins, Inc., a Colorado corporation (“Liquid Spins”). Pursuant to the Asset Purchase Agreement, the assets of Liquid Spins were exchanged for 24,752,475 shares of common stock of the Company (the “Shares”), equal to $10,000,000 and a purchase price of $.404 per share. The assets of Liquid Spins purchased included: record label distribution agreements; Liquid Spins technology inventory; independent arts programs; retail contracts for music distribution; physical inventory and office equipment; design and retail ready concepts; brand value; records; publishing catalog; and web assets. During 2016, the Company reviewed the intangible asset for impairment and determined that certain items had been impaired due to obsolescence. As a result of this review, the Company recorded an impairment loss of $ 15,703,617 that is recorded as impairment loss on intangible asset.
No later than June 20, 2014, MAXD entered into a representation agreement with VSL Communications, Inc., making MAXD the exclusive agent to VSL to enforce all rights with respect to patented technology owned and controlled by VSL. In particular, the Company announced that it had acquired a worldwide license and representation rights to a patented video and data technology “Optimized Data Transmission System and Method” which enables end-user licensees to transport 100% of data bandwidth content in only 3% of the bandwidth with the identical lossless quality. Significantly, this represents thirty-three times reduction associated with transport cost and the time it takes for the video or digital content to be viewed by an end-user. As described more fully in the Legal Proceedings Section, The Company has since filed suit against Google, Inc., YouTube, LLC, and On2 Technologies, Inc., alleging willful infringement of the patent.
On May 22, 2014, MAXD entered into a representation agreement with architect Eli Attia giving MAXD the exclusive rights to sue violators of Eli Attia’s intellectual property rights. While Eli Attia was teaching his invention at Google ☐, the project was internally valued by Google at $120 Billion USD a year. Since then, Flux has since been spun-out of Google ☐, funded and has quickly growing, upon information and belief, to over 800 employees according to one of its founders. MAXD, on behalf of Attia’s, have since filed suit against Google, Inc., Flux Factory, and various executives of these companies for misappropriation of trade secrets. Since this time, the Company has advanced the case(s) and has signed additional agreements with the inventor as late as February 21st, 2017 and with additional counsel in June 2020 to support the RICO claim.
On November 29, 2016, MAXD entered into an agreement with Vedanti Systems Limited and Vedanti Licensing Limited (VLL) that resolves their dispute over the international Optimized Data Transmission (ODT) patent portfolio previously owned by Vedanti. The agreement further provides that VLL and MAXD will become co-owners of the pioneering portfolio.
Videos and news relating to the Company is available on the company website at www.maxd.audio. The MAX-D Technology Highlights Video summarizes the HD Audio™ process and shows the need for high definition (HD) Audio in several key vertical markets. The video explains MAX-D as what we believe to be the only dynamic HD Audio™ that is being offered to various markets.
Plan of Operation
We began our operations on October 8, 2008, when we purchased the Form 10 Company from the previous owners. Since that date, we have conducted financings to raise initial start-up money for the building of our internet search engine and social networking website and to start our operations. In 2011, the Company shifted the focus of its business operations from their social networking website to the marketing of the Max Sound HD Audio Technology and in 2014 the Company began litigations against Google and others for infringement of its technologies and associated legal rights to the various proprietary technologies.
The Company believes that Max Sound HD Audio Technology is a game changer for several vertical markets whose demand will create revenue opportunities in 2020.
We expect our financial requirements to increase with the additional expenses needed to market and promote the MAX-D HD Audio Technology. We plan to fund these additional expenses through financings and through loans from our stockholders and/or officers based on existing lines of credit and we are also considering various private funding opportunities until such time that our revenue stream is adequate enough to provide the necessary funds.
Results of Operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020:
Revenues: During the years ended December 31, 2021, we realized $288,000 of revenues from our business. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we realized $0 of revenues from our business. The change in revenues between the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $288,000 or 100% as a result of the licensing agreements entered into during the year ended December 31, 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses: Our general and administrative expenses were $284,774 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $89,929 for the year ended December 30, 2020, representing an increase of $194,845 or approximately 217%,as a result of increase in the general operation of the Company including product development and marketing of our Max Sound Technology and a slight offset with a decrease in compensation expense.
Professional Fees: Our professional fees were $93,274 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $59,200 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing decrease of $34,074 or approximately 58%, as a result of ongoing litigation.
Compensation: Our compensation expenses were $288,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $342,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, representing a decrease of $54,000, or approximately 16%, as a result of decrease in our expensing of monthly compensation to our management and employees and options granted to the Company’s CFO.
Interest Expense: Interest expense increased by $4,906 to $540,607 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $535,701 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to interest on loans.
Interest Expense - Related Party : Interest expense - related party decreased by $21,150 to $476,171 for the year ended December 31, 2021 from $497,321 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to interest on a related party Company loan.
Net Loss: Our net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020was $1,394,826 and $1,497,818, respectively. The increase was primarily due to increase in licensing revenue during the year ended December 31, 2021 and offset by an increase in operating expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Revenues for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $288,000 and $0, respectively. We have an accumulated deficit of $84,365,675 for the period from December 9, 2005 (inception) to December 31, 2021 and have cash flow provided by operations of $38,820 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our financial statements have been presented on the basis that it is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of revenues from our subscriber base and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We have incurred losses from inception. These factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
From our inception through December 31, 2021, our primary source of funds has been the proceeds of private offerings of our common stock, private financing, and loans from stockholders. For the past 16 months we have not conducted any capital raising activities.
After a final phase of due diligence completed on November 12, 2021, Max Sound discovered the assets claimed by Hende were indeed not directly owned. Since a deal was contingent on value and contacts that could be verified but ultimately proved unverifiable, we’ve gone in a different direction and terminated the acquisition. Because we couldn’t document Hende’s direct ownership, we are unable to completely any relationship mechanically.
Nonetheless, we established some presence in the relevant markets for the concept car that Max Sound was instrumental in creating. Max Sound has also sponsored Hende at the top 100 leaders in transportation event where the company was awarded for its innovative design. We intend to do a redesign including an upgraded audio solution for the supercar. The car will be a showcase for new technology that can be licensed to other manufacturers. We have no intention to be a manufacturer.
The resources to build this is expected to be available sometime in the first quarter. No further information can be provided at this time because we have yet to value in dollars and cents the investment of these projects or any future budgeting which will be refined and established in the first quarter 2022. Stay tuned.
We previously discussed our development of the precious minerals and metals database project in Africa as well as being negotiated elsewhere that we have named Inground Assets™. This is a paradigm shifting algorithm planned for introduction in Q-1, 2022 online as a Dutch Auction. Current versions contain and display some or all of the following data on command -
Historical repositories dating back to 100 years that produce bulletins documenting the exploration of precious minerals and metals, and catalog harvested minerals including what is still available in each mapping. Each country's rarest available minerals can be included as well, eg. antimony, tantalite, silver, uranium, emeralds, copper, tungsten, beryllium, and more as well as Location Mapping that identify specific areas with which minerals are still available for harvesting. Generatable short reports on every mineral will be available in each specific areas, precise coordinates of all available rare metals and minerals, which includes thousands of recommended targeted dig areas. All Location Mapping areas where Microchipped Raw Materials are reviewable. All tributaries, rivers, and dams in a country are digitized for quick use and analysis, including digitized mapping of mountains, roadways, and deposits of many rare metals and waterways.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued no convertible notes and agreed with its only two debt holders to eliminate all of the moving conversion rights until the S.E.C rightfully enforces Regulation Sho to restore the Company’s equity stolen by Knight Securities and other bad market actors who continue unimpeded in their daily illegal naked short selling of the Company’s shares and in absolute and direct violation of the existing law.
Loans and Advances
On July 6, 2017, the Company entered into a two-year line of credit agreement with the principal stockholder in the amount of $100,000. Subsequently, on October 2, 2017, the Company entered into a two-year line of credit agreement with the principal stockholder in the amount of $200,000. The line of credit carries an interest rate of 4%.
On October 2, 2017, the Company, in exchange for Greg Halpern's consideration issuing the Company a line of credit of $100,000 on July 6, 2017 and another line of credit of $200,000 on October 2, 2017 and for Mr. Halpern's forgiveness of $960,000 of interest owed to Mr. Halpern for his Preferred Shares accrued dividend rate of 8% per annum of his already owned 5 million Series A Convertible Preferred Shares, the Board deemed it proper to grant Mr. Halpern an additional 800,000,000 shares of the Company's common stock, which at Mr. Halpern's election he may convert into 5,000,000 additional Series A Convertible Preferred Shares with the same voting rights and percentages as his previously granted and owned 5,000,000 Series A Convertible Preferred Shares.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the principal stockholder has advanced $93,173 and accrued $15,371 in interest and was repaid $132,040.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the principal stockholder has advanced $89,655 and accrued $15,698 in interest and was repaid $71,453.
The line of credit balance and accrued interest as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 is $412,888 and $436,373, respectively.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Changes to accounting principles are established by the FASB in the form of ASU’s to the FASB’s Codification. We consider the applicability and impact of all ASU’s on our consolidated financial position, results of operations, stockholders’ deficit, cash flows, or presentation thereof. Management has evaluated all recent accounting pronouncements as issued by the FASB in the form of Accounting Standards Updates (“ASU”) through the date these financial statements were available to be issued and found no recent accounting pronouncements issued, but not yet effective accounting pronouncements, when adopted, will have a material impact on the financial statements of the Company.
In September 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2016-13, Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments, which supersedes current guidance by requiring recognition of credit losses when it is probable that a loss has been incurred. The new standard requires the establishment of an allowance for estimated credit losses on financial assets including trade and other receivables at each reporting date. The new standard will result in earlier recognition of allowances for losses on trade and other receivables and other contractual rights to receive cash. In November 2019, the FASB issued ASU No. 2019-10, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses (Topic 326), Derivatives and Hedging (Topic 815) and Leases (Topic 842), which extends the effective date of Topic 326 for certain companies until fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022. The new standard will be effective for the Company in the first quarter of fiscal year beginning October 1, 2023, and early adoption is permitted. The Company has not completed its review of the impact of this standard on its consolidated financial statements.
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes.” This guidance, among other provisions, eliminates certain exceptions to existing guidance related to the approach for intraperiod tax allocation, the methodology for calculating income taxes in an interim period and the recognition of deferred tax liabilities for outside basis differences. This guidance also requires an entity to reflect the effect of an enacted change in tax laws or rates in its effective income tax rate in the first interim period that includes the enactment date of the new legislation, aligning the timing of recognition of the effects from enacted tax law changes on the effective income tax rate with the effects on deferred income tax assets and liabilities. Under existing guidance, an entity recognizes the effects of the enacted tax law change on the effective income tax rate in the period that includes the effective date of the tax law. ASU 2019-12 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this pronouncement on January 1, 2021; however, the adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-06, “Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity”, to reduce complexity in applying GAAP to certain financial instruments with characteristics of liabilities and equity. ASU 2020-06 is effective for interim and annual periods beginning after December 15, 2023, with early adoption permitted. We adopted this pronouncement on January 1, 2021; however, the adoption of this standard did not have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
All other newly issued accounting pronouncements but not yet effective have been deemed either immaterial or not applicable.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our financial statements and related public financial information are based on the application of accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). GAAP requires the use of estimates; assumptions, judgments and subjective interpretations of accounting principles that have an impact on the assets, liabilities, revenues and expense amounts reported. These estimates can also affect supplemental information contained in our external disclosures including information regarding contingencies, risk and financial condition. We believe our use of estimates and underlying accounting assumptions adhere to GAAP and are consistently and conservatively applied. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We continue to monitor significant estimates made during the preparation of our financial statements.
Use of Estimates:
In preparing financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles, management is required to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and revenues and expenses during the reported period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Revenue Recognition:
Effective January 1, 2018, the Company adopted ASC 606 - Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, the Company recognizes revenue from the commercial sales of products, licensing agreements and contracts by applying the following steps: (1) identify the contract with a customer; (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) determine the transaction price; (4) allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation in the contract; and (5) recognize revenue when each performance obligation is satisfied. For the comparative periods, revenue has not been adjusted and continues to be reported under ASC 605 - Revenue Recognition. Under ASC 605, revenue is recognized when the following criteria are met: (1) persuasive evidence of an arrangement exists;(2) the performance of service has been rendered to a customer or delivery has occurred; (3) the amount of fee to be paid by a customer is fixed and determinable; and (4) the collectability of the fee is reasonably assured.
We had $288,000 and $0 in revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Stock-Based Compensation:
In December 2004, the FASB issued FASB Accounting Standards Codification No. 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation. Under FASB Accounting Standards Codification No. 718, companies are required to measure the compensation costs of share-based compensation arrangements based on the grant-date fair value and recognize the costs in the financial statements over the period during which employees are required to provide services. Share-based compensation arrangements include stock options, restricted share plans, performance-based awards, share appreciation rights and employee share purchase plans. As such, compensation cost is measured on the date of grant at their fair value. Such compensation amounts, if any, are amortized over the respective vesting periods of the option grant. The Company applies this statement prospectively.
Equity instruments (“instruments”) issued to other than employees are recorded on the basis of the fair value of the instruments, as required by FASB Accounting Standards Codification No. 718. FASB Accounting Standards Codification No. 505, Equity Based Payments to Non-Employees defines the measurement date and recognition period for such instruments. In general, the measurement date is when either a (a) performance commitment, as defined, is reached or (b) the earlier of (i) the non-employee performance is complete or (ii) the instruments are vested. The measured value related to the instruments is recognized over a period based on the facts and circumstances of each particular grant as defined in the FASB Accounting Standards Codification.
Derivative Financial Instruments:
Fair value accounting requires bifurcation of embedded derivative instruments such as conversion features in convertible debt or equity instruments, and measurement of their fair value for accounting purposes. In determining the appropriate fair value, the Company uses the Black-Scholes option-pricing model. In assessing the convertible debt instruments, management determines if the convertible debt host instrument is conventional convertible debt and further if there is a beneficial conversion feature requiring measurement. If the instrument is not considered conventional convertible debt, the Company will continue its evaluation process of these instruments as derivative financial instruments.
Once determined, derivative liabilities are adjusted to reflect fair value at each reporting period end, with any increase or decrease in the fair value being recorded in results of operations as an adjustment to fair value of derivatives. In addition, the fair value of freestanding derivative instruments such as warrants, are also valued using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
The Company accounts for its long-lived assets in accordance with ASC Topic 360-10-05, Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets." ASC Topic 360-10-05 requires that long-lived assets, such as technology rights, be reviewed for impairment annually, or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the historical cost carrying value of an asset may no longer be appropriate. The Company assesses recoverability of the carrying value of an asset by estimating the future net cash flows expected to result from the asset, including the eventual disposition. If the future net cash flows are less than the carrying value of an asset, an impairment loss is recorded equal to the difference between the asset's carrying value and fair value or disposable value.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “special purpose entities”.