ITEM 7.MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
OVERVIEW
We are a provider of comprehensive space solutions and secure, precise, geospatial intelligence. We help government and commercial customers monitor, understand and navigate our changing planet; deliver global broadband communications; and explore and advance the use of space. Our approach combines decades of deep mission understanding and a proven commercial and defense foundation to deploy solutions and deliver insights with speed, scale and cost effectiveness. Our businesses are organized and managed in two reportable segments: Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure, as described below under “Segment Results”.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS
Common stock offering
On March 22, 2021, we completed an underwritten public offering of 10 million shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $40 per share (“Offering”). We received proceeds of $380 million, net of $20 million of transaction fees. The underwriters did not exercise the option to purchase an additional 1.5 million shares of our common stock prior to the expiration of the option.
On March 26, 2021, we redeemed $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 9.75% Senior Secured Notes due 2023 (“2023 Notes”) using a portion of the net proceeds from the Offering. Additionally, we paid premiums of approximately $34 million related to the early redemption.
COVID-19 operational posture and current impact
We continue to monitor and adapt our pandemic crisis response plan, while maintaining a focus on the protection of the health and safety of our employees, families, customers and communities. All our locations continue to operate through a combination of work from home and personnel working on-site, though in some cases capacity utilization and productivity are below normalized levels. We are observing stress in our supplier base inside and outside the U.S. and will continue to monitor and assess the actual and potential COVID-19 impacts on employees, customers, suppliers and the productivity of the work being done, all of which to some extent will affect revenues, estimated costs to complete projects, earnings and cash flow. Our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021, were not materially impacted by COVID-19.
Changes in our operations in response to COVID-19 and employee illnesses resulting from the pandemic have resulted in inefficiencies and delays of our projects, impacts to service level contracts, including in sales and product development efforts and additional costs related to business continuity initiatives that cannot be fully mitigated through succession planning or employees working remotely. We have delayed transition of our employees back into Maxar worksites due to increases in COVID-19 cases in the broad population. Additionally, to provide for the health and safety of our workforce and business continuity, we have implemented a Vaccination Policy which requires that Maxar employees are vaccinated for COVID-19 unless they have an approved accommodation. As of January 4, 2022, 99% of our U.S. based employees were in compliance with this policy and have either been vaccinated or received an accommodation.
WorldView Legion satellites update
We continue to make progress during the test and integration phase. During January 2022, we experienced delays related to COVID-19 protocols and now, assuming no major issues arise, anticipate the first launch of the WorldView Legion satellites in the June to July, 2022 timeframe. We plan on having three launches in total and expect the second and third launches to be within three and six months, respectively, after the first launch.
SEGMENT RESULTS
Our Chief Operating Decision Maker measures performance of our reportable segments based on revenue and Adjusted EBITDA. Our operating and reportable segments are: Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure.
Earth Intelligence
In the Earth Intelligence segment, we are a global leader in high-resolution space-based Earth observation imagery products and analytics. We launched the world’s first high-resolution commercial imaging satellite in 1999 and currently operate a four-satellite imaging constellation, providing us with over two decades and approximately 137 petabytes of imagery over our history (referred to as our “Image Library”) of the highest-resolution, commercially available imagery. Our imagery solutions provide customers with timely, accurate and mission-critical information about our changing planet and support a wide variety of government and enterprise applications, including mission planning, mapping and analysis, environmental monitoring, disaster management, crop management, oil and gas exploration and infrastructure management. We continue to innovate as demands for new satellite technology and advanced analytic tools increase. We are a leader in commercial satellite imagery, and our commitment to accuracy, clarity and recency of foundational mapping enables us to provide the highest quality imagery basemaps for our customers. The high-quality satellite also enables us to provide advanced 3D modeling for augmented reality (“AR”), virtual reality (“VR”) and interactive engagement through our Precision3D Suite of tools. The U.S. government is the largest customer of our Earth Intelligence segment through the EnhancedView Contract, G-EGD and OWT programs and various classified and unclassified contract vehicles. In the commercial satellite Earth observation industry, we are a leader across U.S. government agencies, international government agencies and enterprise customer verticals.
We also provide geospatial services that combine imagery, analytic expertise and innovative technology to deliver intelligence solutions to customers. Our approximately 1,700 cleared personnel support analytic solutions that accurately document change and enable geospatial modeling and analysis that help predict where events will occur. Our primary customer of geospatial services is the U.S. government, but we also support intelligence requirements for other U.S. allied governments, global development organizations and enterprise customers.
Space Infrastructure
In the Space Infrastructure segment, we provide solutions for communications, Earth observation, remote sensing, on-orbit servicing, robotic assembly and space exploration. We address a broad spectrum of needs for our customers, including mission systems engineering, product design, spacecraft manufacturing, assembly, integration and testing. Our principal customers in the Space Infrastructure segment are commercial satellite operators and government agencies worldwide. Our approach combines proven success gained over six decades in the industry with the nimbleness and agility of a smaller space company.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following table provides selected annual financial information for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
*Not meaningful.
Product and service revenues
Total revenues increased to $1,770 million from $1,723 million, or by $47 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in revenues in our Space Infrastructure and Earth Intelligence segments.
Total revenues increased to $1,723 million from $1,666 million, or by $57 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in revenue in our Space Infrastructure segment partially offset by a decrease in revenue in our Earth Intelligence segment. The revenue decrease in our Earth Intelligence segment was primarily driven by a $40 million decrease in the recognition of deferred revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract. We recognized $120 million of deferred revenue from the EnhancedView Contract for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as it was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020.
Further discussion of the drivers behind the increase in revenues is included within the “Results by Segment” section below.
See Note 16, “Revenues” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for product and service revenues by segment.
Product and service costs
Total cost of product and services decreased to $984 million from $993 million, or by $9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease in costs was driven by a decrease in product costs within our Space Infrastructure segment partially offset by an increase in service costs within our Earth Intelligence segment.
Total cost of product and services increased to $993 million from $975 million, or by $18 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase in costs was primarily driven by an increase in costs within our Earth Intelligence segment partially offset by a decrease within our Space Infrastructure segment.
Selling, general and administrative
Selling, general and administrative costs increased to $369 million from $332 million, or by $37 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in labor related expenses of $28 million, an increase in research and development expenses within the Space Infrastructure segment of $11 million and an increase in other expenses of $4 million. The increase in labor related expenses was primarily driven by an increase in headcount, employee compensation and fringe benefits. These increases were partially offset by a $6 million decrease in transaction and integration related expenses.
Selling, general and administrative costs increased to $332 million from $325 million, or by $7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily due to an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $23 million. Stock-based compensation expense increased primarily due to a higher stock price. The increase was also due to an increase in labor related expenses of $16 million driven primarily by an increase in headcount and employee compensation. These increases were partially offset by a $15 million decrease in restructuring expenses, a $9 million decrease in transaction and integration related expenses and a $7 million decrease in travel related expenses driven by our COVID-19 operating posture.
Depreciation and amortization
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $290 million from $348 million, or by $58 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in amortization expense for backlog acquired as part of the acquisition of DigitalGlobe, Inc. on October 5, 2017. We recognized ten months of amortization expense for the year ended December 30, 2020, compared to none for the year ended December 31, 2021, as all of the U.S. government acquired backlog was fully amortized as of October 2020. The decrease was also driven by a decrease in depreciation expense related to the extension of the useful lives of two satellites in the fourth quarter of 2020 and three satellites in the fourth quarter of 2021. These decreases were partially offset by the inclusion of a full year of depreciation and amortization expense from property, plant and equipment and intangible assets acquired as part of the Vricon Acquisition on July 1, 2020, compared to two quarters of expense in 2020.
Depreciation and amortization expense decreased to $348 million from $376 million, or by $28 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in amortization expense for backlog acquired as part of the DigitalGlobe acquisition. We recognized a full year of amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to approximately nine months for the year ended December 31, 2020, as all of the U.S. government acquired backlog was fully amortized in October 2020. The decrease was also driven by a decrease in depreciation expense related to asset retirements made in the second half of 2019 and in the first quarter of 2020, the extension of the useful life of one satellite in the fourth quarter of 2019 and two satellites in the fourth quarter of 2020 and the sale of our owned properties in Palo Alto in December 2019. These decreases were partially offset due to the inclusion of depreciation and amortization expense from property, plant and equipment and intangible assets acquired as part of the Vricon Acquisition on July 1, 2020, compared to no such expense in 2019.
(Gain) loss on orbital receivables allowance
*Not meaningful.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, as a result of an increased certainty of collections of the outstanding orbital receivables from our largest customer, due to their emergence from bankruptcy, we recognized a $49 million reversal of our orbital receivables allowance.
During each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, we recognized a $14 million loss on our orbital receivables allowance within the Space Infrastructure segment. The losses were primarily due to a decrease in the credit rating associated with our largest orbital receivables customer.
Impairment loss
*Not meaningful.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized an impairment loss of $33 million related to the write-off of a $33 million prepaid asset with a commercial provider of ground station services under a contract which was above current market value. In December 2020, we executed a new multi-year contract with the provider for services at reduced cost. As a result of the prior contract being terminated and the new contract being at market value, we concluded the remaining prepaid asset from the prior contract with the provider had no continuing value. There were no impairment losses recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 or 2019.
Satellite insurance recovery
During the year ended December 31, 2019, we received a satellite insurance recovery of $183 million related to the loss of imaging capability of our WorldView-4 satellite in December 2018. There was no satellite insurance recovery during the year ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
Loss (gain) on sale of assets
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized no loss (gain) on sale of assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized a $1 million loss on sale of assets. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a gain of $136 million related to the sale and subsequent leaseback of our owned properties in Palo Alto, California.
Interest expense, net
*Not meaningful.
Under the EnhancedView Contract, we received advanced payments from the U.S. government during the construction phase of the WorldView-1 satellite, which was more than one year before capacity was made available to them. The effect of imputing interest on these advanced payments was to increase contract liabilities with an offsetting charge to interest expense. As capacity was provided to the customer, revenue was recognized and the contract liabilities balance decreased. The remaining revenue was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020.
Interest expense, net decreased to $151 million from $175 million, or by $24 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily due to a $47 million decrease in interest on long-term debt primarily driven by lower principal balances on the 2023 Notes and Term Loan B (as defined below) due to a repurchase of a portion of the 2023 Notes in the second quarter of 2020, a partial redemption of the 2023 Notes in the first quarter of 2021 and a repayment made on Term Loan B in the second quarter of 2020. These decreases in interest on long-term debt were partially offset by an increase in interest expense following our issuance of the 2027 Notes (as defined below). There was also an increase in capitalized interest of $7 million related to the building of our WorldView Legion satellites. These decreases were partially offset by a $41 million loss on debt extinguishment from the partial redemption of our 2023 Notes using proceeds from the Offering for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a $7 million loss on debt extinguishment for 2020.
Interest expense, net decreased to $175 million from $219 million, or by $44 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily due to a $15 million increase in the loss on debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2019 compared to 2020, an increase in capitalized interest of $14 million related to the building of our WorldView Legion satellites and a $12 million decrease in interest on advance payments from customers.
Other income, net
*Not meaningful.
Other income, net decreased to $8 million from $104 million, or by $96 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a gain of $85 million recorded as a result of the remeasurement of our previously held equity interest in Vricon due to the Vricon Acquisition for the year ended December 31, 2020 which did not recur in 2021. In addition, the decrease was driven by a $3 million foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a $5 million foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other income, net increased to $104 million from $1 million, or by $103 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The increase was primarily driven by a gain of $85 million recorded as a result of the remeasurement
of our previously held equity interest in Vricon due to the Vricon Acquisition. In addition, the increase was driven by a $5 million foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $2 million foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Income tax (benefit) expense
*Not meaningful.
Income tax benefit decreased to $13 million from $22 million, or by $9 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. This change was primarily due to a $13 million reduction in the December 31, 2020 estimated federal Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (“BEAT”) driven by a change in tax strategy enabled by a reduction in forecasted interest expense.
Income tax (benefit) expense changed to a benefit of $22 million from an expense of $5 million, or by $27 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. This change was primarily due to the release of a $17 million valuation allowance related to the deferred tax liability recorded in connection with the Vricon Acquisition and the reduction of BEAT estimated at December 31, 2019.
Equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax
There was no equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1 million for 2020. As we acquired Vricon effective July 1, 2020, Vricon’s results were included in our consolidated results from that date forward and are no longer presented in equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax. See Note 5, “Business Combination” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for additional detail on the Vricon Acquisition.
Equity in income from joint ventures, net of tax for the year ended December 31, 2019, was primarily related to our Vricon joint venture of which we owned an approximately 50% interest prior to completion of the Vricon Acquisition in 2020.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax
*Not meaningful.
There was no income from discontinued operations, net of tax for the year ended December 30, 2021 as the sale of our MDA Business was completed in the second quarter of 2020.
Income (loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax increased to $349 million from $26 million, or by $323 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The increase is primarily driven by the after-tax gain on disposal of the MDA Business of $317 million. The increase was also impacted by a $39 million recovery of a previously recorded liability in relation to the Company’s dispute with a Ukrainian customer for the year ended December 31, 2020.
RESULTS BY SEGMENT
We analyze financial performance by segments, which group related activities within our business. We report our financial performance based on two reportable segments: Earth Intelligence and Space Infrastructure. Intrasegment transactions have been eliminated from the segmented financial information discussed below.
*Not meaningful.
Adjusted EBITDA disclosures throughout this section, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” are non-GAAP measures. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further discussion of Adjusted EBITDA disclosures.
Earth Intelligence
The following table provides selected financial information for the Earth Intelligence segment.
Revenues from the Earth Intelligence segment increased to $1,093 million from $1,081 million, or by $12 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a $48 million increase in revenue from international defense and intelligence customers, a $36 million increase in new and expanded commercial programs and a $7 million increase in revenue from new contracts with the U.S. government. These increases were
partially offset by an $80 million decrease in the recognition of deferred revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract. We recognized $80 million of deferred revenue from the EnhancedView Contract for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to none for the year ended December 31, 2021, as it was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020.
Revenues from the Earth Intelligence segment revenues decreased to $1,081 million from $1,085 million, or by $4 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $40 million decrease in the recognition of deferred revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract. We recognized $120 million of deferred revenue from the EnhancedView Contract for the year ended December 31, 2019, compared to $80 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, as it was fully recognized as of August 31, 2020. These decreases were partially offset by a $15 million increase in revenue from new contracts with the U.S. government, an $11 million increase in revenue from international defense and intelligence customers and a $10 million increase in revenue driven by the inclusion of Vricon’s revenue for two quarters in 2020 compared to none in 2019 as it was accounted for as an equity method investment. Revenue from international defense and intelligence customers increased primarily due to the usage of new direct access facilities which became operational and contracts that signed in the second half of 2019.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased to $492 million from $513 million, or by $21 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The decrease was primarily driven by a decrease in the recognition of deferred revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract as mentioned above. The decrease was also driven by an increase in selling, general and administrative costs due to an increase in labor related expenses driven by an increase in headcount, employee compensation and fringe benefits for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. These decreases were partially offset by the expansion of contracts with existing commercial and international defense and intelligence customers contributing to positive program margin growth.
Adjusted EBITDA decreased to $513 million from $548 million, or by $35 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $40 million decrease in the recognition of revenue related to the EnhancedView Contract and a $10 million decrease related to equity in income from our Vricon joint venture which was acquired and consolidated in our results in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in revenue from new contracts with the U.S. government.
Space Infrastructure
The following table provides selected financial information for the Space Infrastructure segment.
*Not meaningful.
Changes in revenues from year to year are influenced by the size, timing and number of satellite contracts awarded in the current and preceding years and the length of the construction period for satellite contracts awarded. Revenues on satellite contracts are recognized using the cost-to-cost method to determine the percentage of completion over the construction period, which typically ranges between 20 to 36 months, and up to 48 months in certain situations. Adjusted EBITDA margins can vary from quarter to quarter due to the mix of our revenues and changes in our estimated total costs at completion (“EAC”) as our risks are retired and as our EACs are increased or decreased based on contract performance. Adjusted EBITDA margins are also impacted by estimated contractual consideration.
Revenues from the Space Infrastructure segment increased to $740 million from $721 million, or by $19 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. Revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in revenues from commercial programs of $87 million due to higher volumes and lower EAC growth primarily due to no COVID-19
program impacts for the year ended December 31, 2021. Revenues were negatively impacted by a $19 million decrease year over year related to our contract with Sirius XM Holdings Inc. (“Sirius XM”). The year ended December 31, 2021, included a $30 million cumulative adjustment to revenue primarily related to the loss of final milestone and expected orbital payments from Sirius XM due to the non-performance of the SXM-7 satellite and other adjustments that were recorded in 2021. After exhausting efforts to fully recover the SXM-7 satellite and further discussions with Sirius XM, in April 2021, we made the determination to record the cumulative adjustment to revenue. In addition, there were $3 million of costs incurred in the first quarter of 2021 related to attempts to repair and fully recover the SXM-7 satellite. The aggregate impact for the year ended December 30, 2021, was $33 million. The $33 million decrease was partially offset by the non-reoccurrence of a $14 million adjustment to revenue due to the identification of a design anomaly on the commercial satellite program, which was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2020. In addition, the total increase in revenues from the Space Infrastructure segment was partially offset by a $49 million decrease in revenues from U.S. government contracts.
Revenues from the Space Infrastructure segment increased to $721 million from $706 million, or by $15 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared 2019. Revenues increased primarily as a result of an increase in volume related to U.S. government contracts of $137 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. This increase in revenue was partially offset by the impact of reduced volumes on commercial programs of $122 million including a $9 million impact due to increases in estimated costs and an associated change in the EAC profit margin of a commercial satellite program due to the identification of a design anomaly in the final stage of a testing process. Revenues were also negatively impacted by $27 million of estimated COVID-19 related EAC growth during the period and are included in the above-mentioned results. The increases in the EACs are due to increases in estimated program costs associated with the COVID-19 operating posture and the estimated impact of certain items such as supplier delays and increased labor hours. These costs are considered incremental and separable from normal operations.
Adjusted EBITDA increased to $46 million from a loss of $3 million, or by $49 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase in the Space Infrastructure segment was primarily related to a $92 million increase driven by increased volumes on commercial programs which resulted in increased margins and fewer negative EAC impacts during the year as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which included negative EAC impacts due to COVID-19. The increase in commercial program margins has been driven by a change in program mix related to the completion of less profitable programs offset by new, more profitable programs. These increases were partially offset by the $19 million reduction in revenue related to the above-mentioned SXM-7 satellite impacts and a $19 million increase in indirect costs and selling, general and administrative costs which was primarily driven by an $11 million increase in research and development expenses.
Adjusted EBITDA was a loss of $3 million compared to a loss of $17 million, or an increase of $14 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019. The increase in the Space Infrastructure segment is primarily related to higher margins and favorable EACs outside of the estimated COVID-19 impacts discussed below, on commercial programs of $68 million. This has been driven by a change in program mix related to the completion of less profitable programs offset by new, more profitable programs along with $8 million less of program losses on a developmental program for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to the same period in 2019. The increase in commercial programs are partially offset by an estimated $27 million negative impact related to our COVID-19 operating posture. The increase is also partially offset by a $16 million increase in costs due to a change in the compensation structure from retention payments to bonuses which were not included in segment Adjusted EBITDA in 2019, a $9 million negative impact on the above-mentioned commercial satellite program with a design anomaly and a recovery of a previously reserved amount of $7 million in 2019 which did not reoccur in 2020. The remainder of the change was related to a decrease in cost of product and services and selling, general and administrative expenses.
Corporate and other expenses
Corporate and other expenses include items such as corporate office costs, regulatory costs, executive and director compensation, foreign exchange gains and losses, retention costs and fees for legal and consulting services.
Corporate and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased to $89 million from $61 million, or by $28 million, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily driven by a $14 million increase in selling, general and administrative costs primarily due to an increase in labor related expenses driven by an increase in employee compensation and fringe benefits. There was also an increase in stock-based compensation expense of $5 million primarily due to a higher fair market value of equity awards granted. The increase was also driven by a $3 million foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a $5 million foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Corporate and other expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased to $61 million from $86 million, or by $25 million, compared to 2019. The decrease was primarily driven by a $24 million decrease in retention costs related to a 2019 program within the Space Infrastructure segment. The decrease was also driven by a $5 million foreign exchange gain for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to a $2 million foreign exchange loss for the year ended December 31, 2019. These decreases were partially offset by a $13 million increase in stock-based compensation expense primarily driven by a higher stock price.
Intersegment eliminations
Intersegment eliminations are related to projects between our segments, primarily WorldView Legion. Intersegment eliminations decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020, primarily related to a decrease in satellite construction activity.
Intersegment eliminations decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019, primarily related to a decrease in satellite construction activity.
BACKLOG
Our backlog by segment from continuing operations is as follows:
Order backlog, representing the estimated dollar value of firm contracts for which work has not yet been performed (also known as the remaining performance obligations on a contract), was $1,893 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $1,904 million as of December 31, 2020. Order backlog generally does not include unexercised contract options and potential orders under indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contracts. Approximately 66% of the total $1,893 million backlog as of December 31, 2021 is expected to be converted into revenue in 2022.
Backlog in the Space Infrastructure segment is primarily comprised of multi-year awards, such as satellite builds. Fluctuations in backlog are driven primarily by the timing of large program wins. Backlog in the Earth Intelligence segment consists of both multi-year and annual contracts, which renew at various times throughout the year. As a result, the timing of when contracts are awarded and when option years are exercised may cause backlog to fluctuate significantly from period to period.
Although backlog reflects business that is considered to be firm, terminations, amendments or cancellations may occur, which could result in a reduction in our total backlog.
Our unfunded contract options totaled $650 million and $856 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Unfunded contract options represent estimated amounts of revenue to be earned in the future from negotiated contracts
with unexercised contract options and indefinite delivery/indefinite quantity contracts. Unfunded contract options as of December 31, 2021 were primarily comprised of the option year in the EnhancedView Contract (September 1, 2022 through July 12, 2023) and other U.S. government and commercial customer contracts. In November 2021, the National Reconnaissance Office (“NRO”) announced the release of the Electro-Optical Commercial Layer (“EOCL”) contract Request for Proposal (“RFP”) which is expected to replace the existing EnhancedView Contract. In December 2021, we submitted our response to the EOCL RFP and anticipate the NRO to award EOCL contracts prior to the expiration of the EnhancedView Contract, including remaining option years.
LIQUIDITY & CAPITAL RESOURCES
Our sources of liquidity include cash provided by operations, access to existing credit facilities, collection or securitization of orbital receivables and, when available and efficient, access to the capital markets. We generally maintain limited cash on hand and use available cash to pay down borrowings on our Syndicated Credit Facility (as defined below). Our primary short-term cash requirements are to fund working capital, including requirements on long-term construction contracts (including our geostationary satellite contracts), fixed overhead costs and to fund increased capital expenditures, including the construction of our WorldView Legion satellites. Working capital requirements can vary significantly from period to period, particularly as a result of the timing of receipts and disbursements related to long-term construction contracts.
Our medium-term to long-term cash requirements are to service and repay debt and make investments, including in facilities, equipment, technologies and research and development for growth initiatives. These capital investments include investments to replace the capability or capacity of satellites which have or will go out of service in the future. Over the near-term to medium-term, it is also possible that our customers may fully or partially fund the construction of additional Legion satellites. Cash is also used to pay dividends and finance other long-term strategic business initiatives.
Our first maturity of long-term debt is in the fourth quarter of 2023 and relates to the 2023 Notes and Revolving Credit Facility. We had a significant partial debt redemption of the 2023 Notes in the first quarter of 2021 using proceeds from our Offering. On March 26, 2021, we redeemed $350 million aggregate principal amount of our 2023 Notes using a portion of the net proceeds from the Offering.
We have significant purchase obligations in the normal course of business for goods and services, under agreements with defined terms as to quantity, price and timing of delivery. Purchase obligations represent open purchase orders and other commitments for the purchase or construction of property, plant and equipment or intangible assets, operational commitments related to remote ground terminals, or with subcontractors on long-term construction contracts that we have with customers in the normal course of business. As of the year ended December 31, 2021, we had total short-term purchase obligations of $324 million and total long-term purchase obligations of $127 million. These amounts are based on volumes consistent with anticipated requirements to fulfill purchase orders or contracts for product deliveries received, or expected to be received, from customers.
We also have short and long-term requirements to fund our pension plans within the Space Infrastructure segment. Funding requirements under applicable laws and regulations are a major consideration in making contributions to our pension plans. Failure to satisfy the minimum funding thresholds with respect to appropriate laws and regulations could result in restrictions on our ability to amend the plans or make benefit payments. With respect to our qualified pension plan, we intend to contribute annually not less than the required minimum funding thresholds. In December 2020, we prefunded $16 million related to our qualified pension plan. Due to the December 2020 prefunding, there were no required contributions for our qualified pension plan for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 includes provisions for pension funding relief in future periods. We have elected to take advantage of these provisions and anticipate lower required contributions for our qualified pension plan in the upcoming years. The Company has no further required contributions on its qualified pension plan for the year ended December 31, 2022.
Our ability to fund our cash needs will depend, in part, on our ability to generate cash in the future, which depends on our future financial results. Our future results are subject to general economic, financial, competitive, legislative and
regulatory factors that may be outside of our control. Our future access to, and the availability of credit on acceptable terms and conditions is impacted by many factors, including capital market liquidity and overall economic conditions.
We believe that our cash from operating activities generated from continuing operations, together with available borrowings under our Revolving Credit Facility, will be adequate for the next twelve months and the foreseeable future to meet our anticipated uses of cash flow, including working capital, capital expenditure, debt service costs, dividend and other commitments. While we intend to reduce debt over time using cash provided by operations, we may also seek to meet long-term debt obligations, if necessary, and fund future capital investments by obtaining capital from a variety of additional sources or by refinancing existing obligations. These sources include public or private capital markets, bank financings, proceeds from dispositions or other third-party sources.
Summary of cash flows
Operating activities
Cash flows from operating activities can vary significantly from period to period as a result of our working capital requirements, given our portfolio of large construction programs and the timing of milestone receipts and payments with customers and suppliers in the ordinary course of business. Investment in working capital is also necessary to build our business and manage lead times in construction activities. We expect working capital account balances to continue to vary from period to period. We efficiently fund our working capital requirements with the Revolving Credit Facility (as defined below).
Cash provided by operating activities related to continuing operations increased to $294 million from $243 million, or by $51 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. This change was primarily driven by favorable changes in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020.
Cash provided by operating activities related to continuing operations decreased to $243 million from $258 million, or by $15 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. This change was primarily driven by favorable changes in working capital for the year ended December 31, 2020, compared to 2019, offset by the insurance proceeds of $183 million related to the loss of the WorldView-4 satellite received in the year ended December 31, 2019.
Investing activities
Cash used in investing activities related to continuing operations decreased to $234 million from $406 million, or by $172 million, in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. The primary investing activities included expenditures on property, plant and equipment of $135 million and $221 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and investments in software of $99 million and $87 million, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Property, plant and equipment expenditures in 2021 and 2020 primarily related to the build
of our WorldView Legion satellites. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also used cash of $120 million, net of cash received, to acquire the remaining interest in Vricon
Cash used in investing activities related to continuing operations increased to $406 million from $6 million, or by $400 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. The primary investing activities included expenditures on property, plant and equipment of $221 million and $257 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively, and investments in software of $87 million and $57 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Property, plant and equipment expenditures in 2020 and 2019 primarily related to the build of our WorldView Legion satellites. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we also used cash of $120 million, net of cash received, to acquire the remaining interest in Vricon. In 2019, these expenditures were partially offset by net proceeds of $280 million from the sale and subsequent leaseback of our properties in Palo Alto, California. California. Cash used in investing activities was also partially offset by a return of capital from discontinued operations of $20 million and $28 million, for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Financing activities
Cash used in financing activities related to continuing operations decreased to $31 million from $555 million, or by $524 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included a repurchase of the 2023 Notes of $384 million, settlement of a securitization liability of $13 million and debt repayments of $10 million, partially offset by proceeds from issuance of common stock of $380 million. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included debt repayments of $525 million, a repurchase of the 2023 Notes of $169 million and settlement of securitization liability of $11 million, partially offset by net proceeds from bank borrowings of $147 million.
Cash used in financing activities related to continuing operations increased to $555 million from $208 million, or by $347 million, for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to 2019. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included debt repayments of $525 million, a repurchase of the 2023 Notes of $169 million, and settlement of securitization liability of $11 million, partially offset by net proceeds from the issuance of the 2027 Notes of $147 million. During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash used in financing activities from continuing operations included net proceeds from bank borrowings of $980 million offset by debt repayments of $1,115 million, debt issuance costs and fees paid to creditors of $24 million, repurchases of orbital receivables of $24 million and settlement of securitization liability of $20 million.
Long-term debt
The following table summarizes our long-term debt:
Syndicated Credit Facility
As of December 31, 2021, the senior secured syndicated credit facility (“Syndicated Credit Facility”) is composed of: (i) a senior secured first lien revolving credit facility in an aggregate capacity of up to $500 million maturing in December
2023 (“Revolving Credit Facility”) and (ii) a senior secured first lien term B facility in an original aggregate principal amount of $2.0 billion maturing in October 2024 (“Term Loan B”). The Revolving Credit Facility includes an aggregate $200 million sub limit under which letters of credit can be issued. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had $28 million and $31 million, respectively, of issued and undrawn letters of credit outstanding under the Revolving Credit Facility.
Senior Secured Notes due 2023
In December 2019, we issued $1.0 billion in aggregate principal amount of 2023 Notes in a private placement to institutional buyers. The 2023 Notes were issued at a price of 98% and are recorded as long-term debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The 2023 Notes bear interest at the rate of 9.75% per year, payable semi-annually in cash in arrears, for which interest payments commenced in June 2020. The 2023 Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries that guarantee the Syndicated Credit Facility.
Senior Secured Notes due 2027
In June 2020, we issued $150 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.54% Senior Secured Notes due 2027 (“2027 Notes”) in a private placement to institutional buyers. The 2027 Notes were issued at a price of 98.25% and are recorded as long-term debt in our Consolidated Financial Statements. The 2027 Notes bear interest at the rate of 7.54% per year, payable semi-annually in cash in arrears, for which interest payments commenced in December 2020. The 2027 Notes are guaranteed on a senior secured basis by each of the Company’s existing and future subsidiaries that guarantee the Syndicated Credit Facility and the 2023 Notes.
Leaseback Deferred Financing
In December 2019, we completed the sale and subsequent leaseback of our owned properties in Palo Alto, California for proceeds of $291 million. We determined that the leaseback terms were off-market. In accordance with Accounting Standards Codification 842 - Leases, we accounted for the excess of the leaseback payments over the present value of market rental payments as additional financing, separate from the lease liability. This resulted in recognition of a deferred financing liability of $33 million which is repayable over the 10-year leaseback term.
See Note 12, “Long-term debt and interest expense, net” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for further details on our long-term debt.
Securitization liability
We have in place a revolving securitization facility agreement with an international financial institution. Under the terms of the Syndicated Credit Facility, we may offer to sell eligible orbital receivables from time to time with terms of seven years or less, discounted to face value using prevailing market rates. During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not sell or repurchase any orbital receivables. During the year ended December 31, 2019, we did not sell any eligible receivables and repurchased $24 million of specifically identified orbital receivables. The orbital receivables were repurchased as a result of our customer transferring the obligation to another entity which did not meet the credit criteria of our lenders.
The orbital receivables that were securitized remain on our balance sheet as the accounting criteria for surrendering control of the orbital receivables were not met. The net proceeds received have been recognized as a securitization liability that has been subsequently measured at amortized cost using the effective interest rate method. The securitized orbital receivables and the securitization liabilities are being drawn down as payments are received from customers and passed on to the international financial institution. We continue to recognize orbital revenue on the orbital receivables that are subject to the securitization transactions and recognize interest expense to accrete the securitization liability.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding foreign exchange sales contracts. As of December 31, 2021, we had certain letters of credit of $28 million guaranteed by the Syndicated Credit Facility, while indemnified by us. Such arrangements are not expected to have a material effect on our liquidity or capital resources, financial position or results of operations.
We use, from time to time, derivative financial instruments to manage existing foreign currency exposures. We consider the management of financial risks to be an important part of our overall corporate risk management policy. Foreign exchange forward contracts are used to hedge our exposure to currency risk on sales, purchases, cash, net investments and loans denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of our domestic and foreign operations.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations discusses our Consolidated Financial Statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. For a summary of our significant accounting policies, see Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data”.
We consider the following accounting policies to be critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations because these policies require the most difficult, subjective or complex judgments on the part of management in their application. Actual results could differ from our estimates and assumptions, and any such differences could be material to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue recognition
The recognition and measurement of revenue requires the use of judgments and estimates. Specifically, judgment is used in interpreting complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions and determining when all criteria for revenue recognition have been met.
Space Infrastructure
Revenue in the Space Infrastructure segment is primarily generated from long-term construction contracts. Due to the long-term nature of these contracts, we generally recognize revenue over time using the cost-to-cost method to measure progress. Under the cost-to-cost method, revenue is recognized based on the proportion of total costs incurred to EAC. Revenue recognition is also contingent on estimated contractual consideration. An EAC includes all direct costs and indirect costs directly attributable to a program or allocable based on program cost pooling arrangements. Estimates regarding the Company’s cost associated with the design, manufacture and delivery of products and services are used in determining the EAC. Changes to an EAC or estimated contractual consideration are recorded as a cumulative adjustment to revenue.
Our cost estimation process is based on the professional knowledge of our engineering, program management and financial professionals and draws on their significant experience and judgment. We prepare EACs for our contracts and calculate estimated revenues and costs over the life of our contracts. Since our contracts typically span a period of several years, estimation of revenue, cost and progress toward completion requires the use of judgment. Judgments and estimates are re-assessed at least quarterly with most estimates being updated on a monthly basis. Adjustments in estimates could have a material impact on revenue recognition based on the significance of the adjustments. Factors considered in these estimates include our historical performance, the availability, productivity and cost of labor, the nature and complexity of work to be performed, availability and cost of materials, components and subcontracts, the risk and impact of delayed performance and the level of indirect cost allocations.
Earth Intelligence
Revenue in the Earth Intelligence segment is generated from imagery and geospatial intelligence service contracts. Revenue from imagery service contracts is recognized based on satellite capacity made available to the customer in a particular period, when imagery is delivered to the customer, or ratably over the subscription period. Many of our imagery service contracts relate to the transfer of a series of distinct goods or services over time for which management has determined are a single performance obligation. Revenue from our geospatial intelligence service contracts is recognized from the rendering of services that compensate us at a cost-plus-fixed-fee, firm fixed price, or on a time and materials basis.
Some of our contracts contain multiple performance obligations, which requires us to estimate the standalone selling price of each performance obligation in order to allocate consideration transferred from the customer. We have not historically been able to use third-party evidence for determining standalone selling price due to the unique nature of our products and services and lack of visibility into competitor pricing. Standalone selling prices are determined based on management estimates that involve significant judgment. Multiple factors are considered based on the nature of the deliverables included within the contract, which include market conditions, competitive landscape, geographic or regional specific factors, internal costs, profit margin objectives and pricing practices used by us.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States, Sweden and other foreign jurisdictions. We compute the provision for income taxes using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured at the currently enacted tax rates that are expected to apply in years in which they are expected to be paid for or realized. All deferred income taxes are classified as non-current on our Consolidated Balance Sheets. Significant judgments are required in order to determine the realizability of tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we evaluate all significant available positive and negative evidence, including historical operating results, estimates of future sources of taxable income, carry-forward periods available, the existence of prudent and feasible tax planning strategies and other relevant factors.
For further information regarding our deferred tax assets and liabilities see Note 2, “Summary of significant accounting policies” and Note 21, “Income taxes” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.”
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
See Note 3, “New standards and interpretations not yet adopted” to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
In addition to results reported in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we use certain non-GAAP financial measures as supplemental indicators of our financial and operating performance. These non-GAAP financial measures include EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin.
We define EBITDA as earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA adjusted for certain items affecting the comparability of our ongoing operating results as specified in the calculation and Adjusted EBITDA margin as Adjusted EBITDA divided by revenue. Certain items affecting the comparability of our ongoing operating results between periods include restructuring, impairments, insurance recoveries, gain (loss) on sale of assets, CEO severance, (gain) loss on orbital receivables allowance and transaction and integration related expense. Transaction and integration related expense includes costs associated with de-leveraging activities, acquisitions and dispositions and the integration of acquisitions. Management believes that exclusion of these items assists in providing a more complete understanding of our underlying results and trends, and management uses these measures along with the corresponding U.S. GAAP financial measures to manage our business, evaluate our performance compared to prior
periods and the marketplace, and to establish operational goals. Adjusted EBITDA is a measure being used as a key element of our incentive compensation plan. The Syndicated Credit Facility also uses Adjusted EBITDA in the determination of our debt leverage covenant ratio. The definition of Adjusted EBITDA in the Syndicated Credit Facility includes a more comprehensive set of adjustments that may result in a different calculation therein.
We believe that these non-GAAP measures, when read in conjunction with our U.S. GAAP results, provide useful information to investors by facilitating the comparability of our ongoing operating results over the periods presented, the ability to identify trends in our underlying business, and the comparison of our operating results against analyst financial models and operating results of other public companies.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin are not recognized terms under U.S. GAAP and may not be defined similarly by other companies. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered alternatives to net (loss) income as indications of financial performance or as alternate to cash flows from operations as measures of liquidity. EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA have limitations as an analytical tool and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for our results reported under U.S. GAAP.
The table below reconciles our net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019: