Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 16, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from December 16, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the search for a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $1,992,106 which consists of operating costs of $953,247, costs of the terminated business combination of $6,372,702 and other income of $5,333,844.
Through December 31, 2021, our efforts have been limited to organizational activities, activities relating to identifying and evaluating prospective acquisition candidates and activities relating to general corporate matters. We have not generated any revenues from operations, other than interest income on the proceeds held in the Trust Account. As of December 31, 2021 and at December 31, 2020, $400,034,264 and $0 was held in the Trust Account, respectively. We had cash outside of trust of approximately $987,000 and $0 at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively and we had $6,325,000 of accounts payable and accrued expenses as of December 31, 2021. Approximately $5,917,000 of such liabilities at December 31, 2021 relate to the terminated business combination, of which $5,400,000 was waived by the vendor in February 2022.
Except for the withdrawal of interest to pay our taxes and up to $100,000 to pay dissolution expenses, if any, our amended and restated certificate of incorporation (the “Charter”) provides that none of the funds held in trust will be released from the Trust Account until the earliest of (i) the completion of an initial business combination; (ii) the redemption of any of the shares of Class A common stock included in the units sold in the Public Offering (the “Units”) properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend the Charter to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to redeem 100% of the common stock included in the Units being sold in the Public Offering if the Company does not complete an initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering or with respect to any other material provisions relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity or (iii) the redemption of 100% of the shares of Class A common stock included in the Units sold in the Public Offering if we are unable to complete a business combination within such 18 month period. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any funds from interest earned on the trust proceeds. Other than the deferred underwriting discounts and commissions, no amounts are payable to the underwriters of the Public Offering in the event of a business combination.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On March 8, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 40,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $400,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,500,000 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $11,250,000. On April 19, 2022, the overallotment option provided to our underwriter expired without being exercised.
Following the Initial Public Offering, a total of $400,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $1,530,000 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $22,706,154 in transaction costs, including $8,000,000 of underwriting fees, $14,000,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $706,154 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was ($1,621,591). Net loss of $1,992,106 was primarily comprised of terminated business combination costs of $6,372,702 (of which $5,917,029 was unpaid at December 31, 2021) and formation and operating costs of $953,247, offset by non-operating income of $5,333,844 (primarily from Public Offering costs of $1,265,712 and a non-cash charge to earnings related to the excess fair value of our warrants of $529,653, offset by non-cash gains of $5,687,995 and $1,406,950 related to the change in fair value of our warrants and overallotment option, respectively, and interest income $34,264 from our trust account). Further, the change in prepaid insurance and accounts payable and accrued expenses used net cash of $212,670. In February of 2022, a vendor waived payment of $5,400,000 of the accrued transaction costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of approximately $400,034,000. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $987,000 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest.
Further, our sponsor, officers and directors or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a business combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Such Working Capital Loans would be evidenced by promissory notes. The notes would either be repaid upon consummation of a business combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, converted upon consummation of a business combination into additional Private Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Warrant. As of December 31, 2021, no Working Capital Loans have been issued.
As a result of the expenses incurred in connection with the proposed transaction with Syniverse Corporation prior to its termination and other operating expenses, we anticipate that we may need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations. These matters raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.45 per Unit issued at our initial public offering, or $14,000,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Net Loss per Common Share
Our Company’s statement of operations includes a presentation of income (loss) per share for common shares subject to possible redemption in a manner similar to the two-class method of income (loss) per share. Net income (loss) per common share, basic and diluted, for Common stock subject to possible redemption is calculated by dividing the proportionate share of income or loss on marketable securities held by the Trust Account, net of applicable franchise and income taxes, by the weighted average number of Common stock subject to possible redemption outstanding since original issuance.
Net income (loss) per share, basic and diluted, for non-redeemable common stock is calculated by dividing the net income (loss), adjusted for income or loss on marketable securities attributable to Common stock subject to possible redemption, by the weighted average number of non-redeemable common stock outstanding for the period.
Non-redeemable common stock includes Founder Shares and non-redeemable shares of common stock as these shares do not have any redemption features. Non-redeemable common stock participates in the income or loss on marketable securities based on non-redeemable shares’ proportionate interest.
Warrant Liabilities
The Company’s Warrants meet the definition of a derivative and are recorded as derivative liabilities on the Balance Sheet and measured at fair value. At each reporting date, changes in the fair value are recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.