Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this annual report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this annual report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 25, 2021 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the search for a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $558,358, which consists of operating costs of $562,058. interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $5,300 and an income tax provision of $1,600.
Liquidity and Going Concern
On October 26, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 30,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which includes the partial exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 3,900,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $300,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 7,526,667 Private Placement Warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $11,290,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters’ and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $303,000,000 (including $3,000,000 from the proceeds of the Private Placement Warrants) was placed in the Trust Account and we had an initial amount of $1,524,547 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs (other than $14,280,000 of deferred underwriting commissions) related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred approximately $20,634,000 in transaction costs, including $5,220,000 of underwriting fees, $14,280,000 of deferred underwriting fees and approximately $1,134,000 of other offering costs.
For the period from March 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $986,745. Net loss for the period from March 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 was $558,358 and, and changes in operating assets and liabilities used $423,087 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $303,005,300. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. During the period ended December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the Trust Account. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,485,734 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.50 per warrant at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants, including as to exercise price, exercisability and exercise period. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest.
An affiliate of the Sponsor advanced $192,374 to the Company prior to the Initial Public Offering to pay certain of the costs incurred by the Company in connection with the Initial Public Offering. Such advances are to be repaid by the Company out of funds held outside the Trust Account.
We expect that we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business, pay our existing liabilities and pay for the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination. Additionally, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.45 per Unit issued at our initial public offering and $0.65 per Unit issued upon exercise by the underwriters of their overallotment option, or $14,280,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
The determination that the warrants will be equity classified is a critical accounting policy. The fair value of the warrants at the IPO date was used to determine the relative allocation of costs and is a critical estimate. The estimated fair value of the warrants are determined using a Black-Scholes model with Level 3 inputs. Inherent in a Black-Scholes model are assumptions related to expected stock-price volatility (pre-merger and post-merger, expected term, dividend yield and risk-free interest rate). The Company estimates the volatility of its Class A common stock based on management’s understanding of the volatility associated with instruments of other similar entities. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity similar to the expected remaining life of the warrants. The expected life of the warrants is estimated based on management assumptions regarding the timing and likelihood of completing an initial business combination. The dividend rate is based on the historical rate, which the Company anticipates to remain at zero. It is not necessary to calculate the fair value of the warrants thereafter for financial reporting purposes.
The fair value of the forward purchase agreement is also a critical estimate. The fair value of the forward purchase agreement is unchanged from the IPO date to December 31, 2021, and is driven primarily by the uncertainty of consummating a business combination with the applicable metrics required to force the purchase of such shares by the sponsor. If the Company signs a letter of intent to consummate a business combination, the Company will be able to determine whether it is likely that the sponsor will have to purchase such shares, and therefore determine the fair value of the forward purchase agreement at such time.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt -Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.