Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis
References to the “Company,” “Mountain & Co. I Acquisition Corp.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Mountain & Co. I Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the interim financial statement and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Annual Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Annual Report on Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Annual Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s (the “SEC’s”) website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on April 16, 2021 as a Cayman Island exempt company and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses or entities (the “Business Combination”). We have not selected any Business Combination target yet.
Our sponsor is Mountain & Co. I Sponsor LLC, a Cayman Islands limited liability company (the “Sponsor”).
Our registration statement was declared effective on November 4, 2021 (the “Effective Date”). On November 9, 2021, we consummated our IPO of 20,000,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”) at $10.00 per Unit and the sale of 12,000,000 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor that closed simultaneously with the Public Offering. On November 12, 2021, the underwriters exercised their full over-allotment option, resulting in an additional 3,000,000 units purchased and $30,000,000 in additional gross proceeds for aggregate units purchased of 23,000,000 and aggregate gross proceeds of $230,000,000 from both the IPO and over-allotment option exercise.
Transaction costs related to our IPO and the exercise of the over-allotment option amounted to $13,406,427 consisting of $4,600,000 of underwriting commissions, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $756,427 of other cash offering costs.
Following the closing of our IPO on November 9, 2021, and subsequent close of the over-allotment option exercise on November 12, 2021, a total of $236,900,000, comprised of $225,400,000 of the net proceeds from the IPO, including $8,050,000 of the underwriters’ deferred discount, and $11,500,000 of the proceeds of the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, was placed in a U.S.-based trust account at J.P. Morgan Chase Bank, N.A., maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee.
We have until 15 months from the closing of the Public Offering to complete a Business Combination. However, if we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate a Business Combination within 15 months, we may extend the period of time to consummate a Business Combination by an additional three months (for a total of 18 months to complete a Business Combination (the “Combination Period”). In order to extend the time available for us to consummate a Business Combination, our Sponsor or its affiliate or designees must deposit into the Trust Account $2,000,000, or $2,300,000 if the underwriters’ over-allotment option is exercised in full ($0.10 per Public Share in either case), on or prior to the date of the deadline.
Our Sponsor has agreed that it will be liable to us if and to the extent any claims by a third party for services rendered or products sold to us, or a prospective target business with which we have entered into a written letter of intent, confidentiality or other similar agreement or Business Combination agreement, reduce the amount of funds in the trust account to below the lesser of (i) $10.30 per public share and (ii) the actual amount per public share held in the trust account as of the date of the liquidation of the trust account, if less than $10.30 per share due to reductions in the value of the trust assets, less taxes payable, provided that such liability will not apply to any claims by a third party or prospective target business who executed a waiver of any and all rights to the monies held in the trust account (whether or not such waiver is enforceable) nor will it apply to any claims under our indemnity of the underwriters of the Public Offering against certain liabilities, including liabilities under the Securities Act. However, we have not asked our Sponsor to reserve for such indemnification obligations, nor have we independently verified whether our Sponsor has sufficient funds to satisfy
its indemnity obligations and we believe that our Sponsor’s only assets are securities of the company. Therefore, we cannot assure you that our Sponsor would be able to satisfy those obligations. As a result, if any such claims were successfully made against the trust account, the funds available for the initial Business Combination and redemptions could be reduced to less than $10.30 per public share. In such event, we may not be able to complete the initial Business Combination, and you would receive such lesser amount per share in connection with any redemption of your public shares. None of our officers or directors will indemnify us for claims by third parties including, without limitation, claims by vendors and prospective target businesses.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from April 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and initial public offering. We will not generate any operating revenues at the earliest until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from our IPO. We have selected December 31 as our fiscal year end.
For the period from April 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $214,978, which included formation and operating costs of $156,008 and change in fair value of over-allotment liability of $60,000, offset by interest earned on trust account of $1,030.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $303,858 in its operating bank account, and a working capital of $766,124.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 have been satisfied through the payment of certain offering costs by the Sponsor of $25,000 for the Founder Shares and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the Sponsor of $500,000. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with the Business Combination, the Company’s Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide the Company Working Capital Loans, as defined below (see Note 5). As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from IPO filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of this financial statement. The financial statement does not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Going Concern
At December 31, 2021, we had $303,858 in operating cash and a working capital of $766,124, respectively. We have incurred and expects to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our financing and acquisition plans.
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Account Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosure of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern.” We have until February 9, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustment that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on November 5, 2021, we will pay the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative services provided to the members of the Company’s management team. Upon completion of the initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the (i) Founder Shares, which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of the Public Offering, (ii) Private Placement Warrants, which were issued in a private placement simultaneously with the closing of our IPO and the Class A ordinary shares underlying such Private Placement Warrants and (iii) private placement warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of the Company’s securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement that has been signed prior in conjunction with the consummation of the Public Offering. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company registers such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the Company’s completion of its initial Business Combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statement and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statement, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Offering Costs Associated with Initial Public Offering
Deferred offering costs consist of underwriter, accounting, filing and legal expenses incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to our IPO. Upon consummation, they were charged ratably to the underlying instruments they related to on a relative fair value basis. If our IPO had proved to be unsuccessful, these deferred costs, as well as additional expenses to be incurred, would have been charged to operations. Offering costs amounted to $13,406,427 and were charged to temporary equity, outside of shareholders’ deficit, upon the completion of our IPO on November 9, 2021.
Ordinary Class A Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary share subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary share subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary share (including ordinary share that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified in temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary share is classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary share feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our
control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the 23,000,000 Class A ordinary share is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Such changes are reflected in additional paid-in capital, or in the absence of additional capital, in accumulated deficit. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, there were no Class A ordinary shares issued or outstanding.
Warrants
We must account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity” (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own ordinary shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. We account for the warrants as equity-classified.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. The contractual formula utilized to calculate the redemption amount approximates fair value. The Class feature to redeem at fair value means that there is effectively only one class of shares. Changes in fair value are not considered a dividend for the purposes of the numerator in the earnings per share calculation. Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing the pro rata net loss between our Class A ordinary shares and our Class B ordinary shares by the weighted average number of shares of ordinary shares outstanding for each of the periods. The calculation of diluted loss per share of ordinary shares does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with our IPO since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective year beginning after December 15, 2023 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012, (the “JOBS Act”), and may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements
that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and shareholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statement with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.