ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on March 2, 2021. The Company was formed for the purpose of entering into a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business transaction with one or more businesses that the Company has not yet identified. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from March 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $290,431, which consists of operating costs of $292,345, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $1,914.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The registration statement for our Initial Public Offering was declared effective on June 29, 2021. On July 2, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 5,000,000 units and, with respect to the shares of common stock included in the Units sold, the Public Shares at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $50,000,000.
On July 6, 2021, in connection with the underwriters’ exercise of their over-allotment option in full, we consummated the sale of an additional 750,000 Units for an aggregate amount of $7,500,000. In connection with the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-
allotment option, we also consummated the sale of an additional 15,000 Private Placement Units at $10.00 per Private Placement Units, generating total proceeds of $150,000. A total of $7,500,000 was deposited into the Trust Account.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Units, a total of $57,500,000 was placed in the Trust Account.
For the period from March 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $217,798. Net loss of $290,431 was affected by interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $1,914. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $74,547 of cash for operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $57,501,914 (including $1,914 of interest income) consisting of U.S. Treasury securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have not withdrawn any interest earned from the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $370,278. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of the Working Capital Loans may be converted into private units at a price of $10.00 per unit.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our Public Shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Going Concern
We have until July 2, 2022 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after July 2, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or other long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. We began incurring these fees on July 2, 2021, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of our initial Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, $2,012,500. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement. Of the $0.35 per Unit, $0.30 will be paid in cash and $0.05 will be paid in an equivalent value of shares.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, the common stock subject to possible redemption is presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) ASC 260, Earnings Per Share. The statements of operations include a presentation of income (loss) per redeemable public share and income (loss) per non-redeemable share following the two-class method of income per share. In order to determine the net income (loss) attributable to both the public redeemable shares and non-redeemable shares, we first considered the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares. This is calculated using the total net income (loss) less any dividends paid. For purposes of calculating net income (loss) per share, any remeasurement of the accretion to redemption value of the common shares subject to possible redemption was considered to be dividends paid to our public stockholders. Subsequent to calculating the total income (loss) allocable to both sets of shares, we split the amount to be allocated using a ratio of 68% for the Public Shares and 32% for the non-redeemable shares for the period from March 2, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, reflective of the respective participation rights.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common shares and then share in our earnings. As a result, diluted loss per share is the same as basic loss per share for the periods presented.
Offering Costs
Offering costs consisted of legal, accounting and other expenses incurred through the Initial Public Offering that were directly related to the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs were allocated to the separable financial instruments issued in the Initial Public Offering based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Offering costs associated with the common stock issued were initially charged to temporary equity and then accreted to common stock subject to redemption upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. Offering costs amounted to $4,773,824 consisting of $1,150,000 of underwriting fees, $2,012,500 of deferred underwriting
fees and $1,611,324 of other offering costs. $4,368,049 was allocated to Public Shares and charged to temporary equity, and $405,775 was allocated to public rights and charged to stockholders’ deficit.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.