Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and under Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results and events to differ from those anticipated. These statements are based upon information currently available to us, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements, like all statements in this report, speak only as of their date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise these statements in light of future developments. These statements are inherently uncertain, and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely upon these statements.
Overview
MCG is a global membership platform of physical and digital spaces that connects a vibrant, diverse group of members from across the world. These members use the MCG platform to both work and socialize, to connect, create, have fun and drive a positive change. The central pillar of MCG is Soho House, which drives the majority of our membership and revenue today. A Soho House membership offers access to a network of distinctive and carefully curated Houses, across North America, the United Kingdom, Europe and Asia, which serve as the cornerstone of our member experience. We enhance our member experience through our digital channels, including the SH.APP and our website.
Over the last 26 years, we have expanded our membership expertise and diversified our offerings-both physically and digitally. As of January 2, 2022, we have over 155,800 members (including over 122,800 Soho House members) who engage with MCG through our global portfolio of 33 Soho Houses, 9 Soho Works, The Ned in London, Scorpios Beach Club in Mykonos, Soho Home, our interiors and lifestyle retail brand, and our digital channels.
Our membership expertise, honed through the growth of Soho House, has led to our evolution into the Membership Collective Group, a home to numerous memberships including Cities Without Houses, Soho Works, Soho Friends, Soho House Digital, SOHO HOME+ and Ned’s Club. By designing, curating and growing our membership offering, our membership platform can quickly and easily respond to shifting lifestyle trends and the evolution of our members’ needs. Our memberships work together, allowing us to reach new audiences with a set of interconnected offerings.
Our membership has remained resilient through multiple economic cycles and the COVID-19 pandemic. When our physical sites were forced to close as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there was minimal impact on the retention of Soho House members. The power of our model is driven by the important role we believe that we play in our members’ lives and the value we consistently provide them for their membership fees. We believe our retention compares favorably to leading consumer subscriptions or memberships-across music, media, fitness, entertainment and commerce-despite, in many cases, their significantly lower price points.
The demand for our membership is also demonstrated by our large and growing MCG global wait list, which as of January 2, 2022 stands at over 70,000 applicants. Awareness of our distinct membership offerings and their scarcity is spread by our members organically through word of mouth, social media and press coverage.
Further, we have observed a secular shift in the ways that people live and work-with less time spent in traditional corporate offices and more time in social spaces that encourage creativity and mutual engagement. We believe that these trends will only accelerate, and that the freedom to be able to choose where to live and work-particularly in light of the COVID-19 pandemic-will likely have a
significant impact on our target market. We believe this will create an even greater demand for curated communities that can grow and thrive in a more deliberate environment.
For the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022, of our $561 million in Total revenues, $189 million (34%) was attributable to Membership revenues, $218 million (39%) to In-House revenues, and $153 million (27%) to Other revenues. For the fiscal ended January 3, 2021, of our $384 million in Total revenues, $177 million (46%) was attributable to Membership revenues, $127 million (33%) to In-House revenues, and $81 million to Other revenues (21%).
Membership revenues are comprised of annual membership fees and one-time initial registration fees paid by members. In-House revenues include all revenues realized within our Houses, including food and beverage, accommodation, and spa products and treatments. Other revenues include all revenues not realized within our Houses, including Scorpios, Soho Works and standalone restaurants, design and procurement fees from Soho House Design and Soho Home among others. We view Membership revenues and In-House revenues as interrelated, insofar as although there is no minimum spend for any member on our In-House offerings that generate In-House revenues. In practice the significant majority of In-House revenues are generated by our members, and the pricing of our In-House offerings reflects that accordingly, with pricing of such In-House offerings being identical for both members and non-members.
Our Membership Platform
All of our memberships have been built to enrich the lives of their members, as well as expand our membership offering to a broader audience.
Soho House
Soho House remains at the core of our membership platform by creating a foundation upon which additional membership businesses can be built and scaled. While our physical Houses provide our foundation, the people inside them are the soul of Soho House. As a membership founded for the creative industries, we are proud to have championed members who have gone on to shape our cultural landscape as world class writers, artists, performers, directors, founders, designers, and producers - all reflecting the spirit and energy of Soho House.
The membership of each House is assembled by a select committee of influential creatives and innovators that represent the local area in which the membership is founded. Our members actively engage in creating the culture of each House, helping to shape and localize it by participating in member events and contributing to editorial and digital content. We believe this adds to the value of each House, enriching the membership and enhancing the attractiveness of membership to prospective members worldwide. With a US Every House annual membership fee as of February 28, 2022 of approximately $3,800, which provides access to all of our Houses globally, we believe our membership offering provides compelling value to our members that increases as we add new Houses and more members to our global community. Our Houses attract members from every demographic, with members from “Generation Z” (21 years old and younger) and “Millennials”(22- to 37-year-olds) constituting the fastest-growing cohorts. We also believe that the pricing of our In-House offerings represents great value to our members because of the level of quality provided, reinforcing the overall membership experience, rewarding their brand loyalty and creating opportunities for future and recurring revenues.
We created the following types of membership under Soho House to reach a broader audience and enhance the experience of our existing members:
•Cities Without Houses
In 2017, we introduced a new type of Soho House membership known as CWH, which opens up the Soho House membership to people who live in cities where we do not yet have a physical House. This membership allows us to welcome members to our global community in new geographies, generates additional revenues on our existing base of Houses and provides intelligence for future growth, which we have employed to open new Houses in certain locations, including in Austin, Texas (May 2021), Tel Aviv (August 2021), Paris (September 2021) and Rome (October 2021). As of January 2, 2022, we have more than 4,600 CWH members across 44 cities.
•Soho House Digital Membership
The ambition for Soho House has always been to create a truly global membership that brings creative people together, from all over the world. We believe that we will be able to achieve this through the introduction of Soho House Digital Membership-a new, paid digital-only membership that we are now actively working on. Not limited by our physical footprint, Soho House Digital Membership will expand our global reach, allowing us to move further into Asia, Africa and South America, adding fascinating creatives from dynamic cities to our membership.
Soho House Digital Membership will be subject to the same application and approval process as Soho House membership, allowing like-minded individuals to connect, communicate and collaborate with each other, in a purely digital space through the SH.APP. It will make our membership truly diverse, and will enable the best creatives from all over the world to make meaningful connections with each other. In the same way that we’ve grown Cities Without Houses membership in 44 cities around the world, we will use our connections and liaisons on the ground in new cities to build awareness of digital membership, growing it organically through existing creative communities.
By leveraging our digital platforms in this way, and removing the reliance on physical spaces to experience the benefits of our membership, we have created a gateway to previously untapped growth opportunities. We believe this new membership type will be attractive to potential members who are already used to socializing, networking and working digitally. Existing Soho House members will also receive the full functionalities of the Soho House Digital Membership, and therefore, the introduction of the Soho House Digital Membership only serves to improve the richness of their membership experience, making it more valuable - with new opportunities to connect with and consume content from a truly global and diverse membership base.
•Soho Friends
There are a significant number of people who enjoy the Soho House way of living and who have already visited our Houses as guests, stayed in our bedrooms, or visited our public restaurants and spas, but do not currently have a Soho House membership. To respond to this audience, we launched Soho Friends in November 2020 for an annual subscription cost of £100. We offer access to physical spaces, including Soho House bedrooms, and Studio spaces (our new social spaces for Soho Friends and Soho House members) that host curated programs of events and screenings, with additional benefits from our restaurants, spas and online retail brands, although Soho Friends do not have full access to our Houses. As of January 2, 2022, we had 23,450 Soho Friends members. We intend to grow this membership brand in a measured way so that our Soho House members continue to account for the majority of visitors to our Houses and restaurants.
Soho Home
Soho Home was created as a result of the constant requests from our members to recreate the look and feel of the Houses in their own homes. Soho Home is an interiors and lifestyle retail brand that offers handcrafted furniture, lighting, textiles, tableware and accessories through ecommerce. Over the past year, we have transformed Soho Home into a high growth retail business, and in October 2020, we launched SOHO HOME+, which is a subscription-based membership platform with 4,560 members as of January 2, 2022, that offers price discounts, free delivery, and expert design advice plus early access to new collections and seasonal sales for an annual price of approximately $95. In fiscal 2021, we continued to grow our Soho Home retail business and opened two new Soho.Home.Studios in London and New York.
Soho Works
First launched in 2015, Soho Works provides its members with the space and resources to work alongside other like-minded individuals and businesses-facilitating connections and providing the tools to flourish. Aimed at existing Soho House and Soho Friends members, Soho Works draws on the same design principles and membership ethos as Soho House, but is a space purposed entirely for work and creative collaboration.
Beginning with one location in London, we have since opened eight additional sites in London, New York and Los Angeles over the last two years and as of January 2, 2022, we had just over 5,000 members. Soho Works membership rates vary by location and Soho House membership status. For Soho House members, a US Soho Works membership ranges from $100 to $650 per month, depending on membership type.
Scorpios Beach Club
Set in a cove on the southern tip of Mykonos, Scorpios offers a one of a kind beach experience with a well-established globally recognized brand. With a restaurant, terraces and daybeds, and a distinctive wellness offering, Scorpios enriches the lives of its guests who are looking to escape from their daily lives. We believe the Scorpios concept has significant potential to expand into additional locations as a key part of our platform and we expect to open our second site in Tulum, Mexico at the end of 2022.
The Ned
The Ned has created a new space in the heart of the City of London for its members to meet, eat, drink and socialize. The Ned brand seeks to embody a “city within a city” full-service destination, by playing host to multiple restaurants, bedrooms, a range of grooming services, spa, gym and a full service members’ club. The membership offered by The Ned (“Ned’s Club”) is aimed at a broader group of professional people. As of January 2, 2022, Ned’s Club had just over 2,800 members, and intends to expand into additional cities beyond London. We have recently launched Ned Friends - a more accessible membership similar to Soho Friend for frequent visitors and customers of The Ned. We receive management fees under our hotel management contract for the operation of The Ned. As of January 2, 2022, Ned Friends had just over 2,300 members.
The LINE and Saguaro
On June 22, 2021, we acquired the operating agreements relating to the ‘The LINE’ and ‘Saguaro’ hotels. The hotels that are currently operational are located in Los Angeles, Washington, Austin, Scottsdale and Palm Springs, and among them offer a variety of food and beverage offerings together with approximately 1,470 hotel rooms. A further hotel is under development in San Francisco. We receive management fees under our hotel management contract for the operation of these hotels. We believe the transaction will broaden our geographic reach in North America. Refer to Note 3 - Acquisitions for further information in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Factors Affecting Our Business
We believe the coveted lifestyle brand we have created has significant and proven growth potential. This potential, combined with the stability of our membership base, we believe will enable us to maintain our position as an industry leader in the future. We expect to grow our member base by growing the number of Soho Houses, continuing to scale our existing membership brands and launching and growing new membership brands. We believe our track record in expanding and growing our platform will position us to achieve significant and sustained growth.
A significant portion of our revenues is derived from House Revenues which consist of Membership revenues and In-House revenues. Our Membership revenues, which are reflective of our steady and growing global brand, help to provide us with a recurring revenue base that limits the impact of fluctuations in regional economic conditions.
Our business and future performance is also affected by a variety of factors, including:
•The ability to grow our member base. Long-term member growth is a direct driver of Membership revenue growth and an important factor in In-House revenue growth. The impact of long-term member growth on Membership revenues can be particularly impactful to our earnings given the lower direct expenses associated with incremental Membership revenues relative to our other revenue streams.
•Our ability to grow In-House revenues and House-Level Contribution. In addition to their annual membership fee, our members pay for goods and services that they consume, which we refer to as In-House revenues. We continue to actively develop the offerings in our Soho Houses and our other membership brands to improve overall experience and capture greater spend on food and beverage, accommodation, spa services, private events and our other goods and services. We believe that the pricing of our In-House offerings, which is reflective of the membership fees we receive from members who consume most of our In-House offerings, represents great value to our members for the level of quality provided, reinforcing the overall membership experience, rewarding brand loyalty and creating the opportunity for future revenue enhancement. Our proven ability to drive long-term member growth at existing Houses is also an important contributing factor in sustaining growth of In-House revenues and House-Level Contribution. While we have historically been able to partially offset inflation and other cost increases, such as wage increases and increases in cost of goods and services sold by increasing prices coupled with more efficient purchasing practices, productivity improvements, and greater economies of scale, there can be no assurance that we will be able to continue to do so in the future. In particular, recent changes in global macroeconomic conditions could make additional price increases imprudent. There can be no assurance that future cost increases, including as a result of inflation, can be fully offset by increased prices or that increased prices will be fully absorbed by our members without any resulting change to their usage patterns.
•Our ability to adjust membership pricing. As we expand our number of Soho Houses globally and continue to invest in maintaining the quality of our existing Soho Houses, we are able to grow Membership revenues by periodically reviewing our membership fee rates, as well as migrating members from Local House to Every House membership, which also has the effect of increasing Membership revenues and offering new membership brands to join. Contrary to traditional hospitality companies which may experience brand dilution as they expand, the value of our membership and brand strengthens as we expand into new cities and properties and new membership brands. As we expand globally, the value of an Every House membership becomes more compelling to both new and existing members, enhancing our revenue potential. Historically, our membership price increases have not had a material impact on our retention rates and we believe this provides a strong indication of demand and price inelasticity for our memberships.
•Our ability to grow our membership brands and products. We believe the strength of our brand and our culture of creativity and innovation will allow us to continue to capitalize on opportunities in complementary concepts and product lines and that our adjacent lines of business can achieve substantial stand-alone scale. Our expansion into new products and businesses can contribute meaningfully to our revenue in the future as we tap into our existing and growing membership base.
Reportable Segments
Our operations consist of three reportable segments (United Kingdom, North America, Europe and Rest of the World (“ROW”)) and one non-reportable segment that we present as “all other”. Each of our segments includes all operations in that region including our Houses and all associated facilities, spas and stand-alone restaurants. Refer to Note 21 - Segments in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more information on reportable segments.
Key Performance and Operating Metrics Evaluated by Management
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of operating and financial measures. These key measures include:
NUMBER OF SOHO HOUSES. The number of Soho Houses reflects the total number of Soho Houses in operation in any period, irrespective of whether each House is (i) controlled by us, (ii) operated through a non-controlling interest in a joint venture or (iii) operated through a management contract.
We review the number of members from all Houses to assess new member growth, total House Revenues, and House-Level Contribution.
NUMBER OF SOHO HOUSE MEMBERS. Our Soho House membership model is an integral part of our business and has a significant impact on our profitability and financial performance. Typically, members hold an Every House membership or a Local House membership. Member count is the primary driver of Membership revenues and is also a critical factor in In-House revenues as members utilize the offerings that are provided within the Houses. Soho House members include all active, frozen and non-paying members.
The extent to which we achieve growth in our membership base, retain existing members and periodically increase our membership fee rates will impact our profitability. We have historically enjoyed strong member loyalty, reflected by very high retention rates. Robust demand for our memberships is also evidenced by considerable wait lists for our Houses.
The year-over-year increase in our total number of Soho House members is driven by a combination of increases in membership at existing Houses and members from new Houses.
SOHO HOUSE MEMBER RETENTION. Soho House Member Retention is defined as the number of Adult Paying Members at the beginning of a period less the number of Adult Paying Members who cancelled their membership during that same period (without giving any effect to Adult Paying Members who froze their memberships during such period), as a proportion of total Adult Paying Members at the beginning of such period.
NUMBER OF OTHER MEMBERS. Other members include members of Soho Works, Soho Friends and SOHO HOME+ and are key to our growth strategy and enhancing our Soho House member experience. Like Soho House members, other memberships are an integral part of our business and we believe will have a significant impact on our profitability and financial performance in the future.
FROZEN MEMBERS. Frozen Members refers to Soho House members who have elected to suspend their membership payments on a six, nine- or twelve-month basis during which period the member is not able to gain access to a Soho House site as a member, access our membership Apps, or book bedrooms or Cowshed treatments or products on discounted member rates. Frozen Members are not included in Adult Paying Members, but are included in the total number of Soho House members.
MEMBERSHIP REVENUES. Membership revenues are comprised of House Membership Revenues (as defined in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures”) and Non-House Membership Revenues (as defined below). House Membership Revenues and Non-House Membership Revenues are each comprised primarily of annual membership fees and one-time registration fees which are amortized over 20 years. Membership revenues are a function of the number of members, membership mix, and membership pricing. For GAAP, we report Membership revenues only from Houses and sites in which we own a controlling interest. Our membership pricing varies by geographic segment and membership offering and, as such, our mix of House and Soho Works club openings can affect our revenue growth and profitability over time. Prices are generally higher in North America and the rest of the world compared with the UK and Europe. Membership revenues provide a stable and recurring source of revenues which have few direct costs and, as such, is a reliable and predictable source of cash flow.
HOUSE MEMBERSHIP REVENUES. House Membership Revenues is an important performance indicator and is defined in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
IN-HOUSE REVENUES. In-House revenues refer to all revenues realized within our Houses, and primarily includes revenues from food and beverage, accommodation, and spa products and treatments.
HOUSE REVENUES. House Revenues is an important performance indicator and is defined in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
OTHER REVENUES. Other revenues are defined as total revenues that are not realized within our Houses, including revenues from Scorpios, Soho Works and our stand-alone restaurants, procurement fees from Soho House Design, Soho Home and Cowshed retail products and other revenues from products and services that we provide outside of our Houses, as well as management fees from the Ned.
NON-HOUSE MEMBERSHIP REVENUES. Non-House Membership Revenues are comprised of Soho Works membership revenues, Soho Friends membership revenues and SOHO HOME+ membership revenues.
ACTIVE APP USERS. Active App Users is defined as unique users who have logged into any of our membership Apps within the last three months.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We refer to Adjusted EBITDA, House-Level Contribution, House-Level Contribution Margin, Other Contribution and Other Contribution Margin throughout this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as we use these measures to evaluate our operating performance and each of these measures is defined in “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.” We believe these measures are useful to investors in evaluating our operating performance. Adjusted EBITDA, House-Level Contribution, House-Level Contribution Margin, Other Contribution and Other Contribution Margin are all supplemental measures of our performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA, House-Level Contribution, House-Level Contribution Margin, Other Contribution and Other Contribution Margin should not be considered as substitutes for GAAP metrics such as Operating loss and Net loss or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP. Some of our financial and operational data that we disclose in this Annual Report on Form 10-K are presented on a ‘constant currency’ basis to isolate the effect of currency changes during the period. Where we refer to a measure being calculated in ‘constant currency’, we are calculating the dollar change and the percentage change as if the exchange rate that is being used in the current period was in effect for the prior period presented. We believe that this calculation provides a more meaningful indication of actual year over year performance and eliminates the fluctuations from currency exchange rates.
KEY PERFORMANCE AND OPERATING METRICS
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
COMPARISON OF THE FISCAL YEARS ENDED JANUARY 2, 2022 AND JANUARY 3, 2021
CONSOLIDATED STATEMENTS OF OPERATIONS
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
(2)In-House operating expenses is exclusive of depreciation and amortization of $53,568 and $46,386 ($53,568 and $49,827 in constant currency) for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, respectively.
(3)Other operating expenses is exclusive of depreciation and amortization of $23,831 and $23,416 ($23,831 and $25,153 in constant currency) for the fiscal years ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, respectively.
OVERVIEW
The COVID-19 pandemic continued to significantly impact our fiscal 2021 results. Operating loss at our Houses increased as a result of closures for a significant part of the year. Nevertheless, we opened six new Soho Houses in Canouan, Austin, Tel Aviv, Rome, Paris and our ninth House in London.
Our global number of Soho House members increased by 9,298, or 8%, and we gained 3,761 Soho Works members, 21,316 Soho Friends and 2,700 SOHO HOME+ members. Soho House Adult Paying Members increased by 17,585 (a combination of new members and members unfreezing) and our frozen members decreased to 4,454 members. Due to the increase in Soho House adult paying members and our Non-House members across fiscal 2021, Membership revenues increased by $12,279 or 7%.
Total In-House revenues increased by $91,160 in fiscal 2021, or 72% as a result of fewer COVID related restrictions in comparison to fiscal 2020, particularly in the second half of the year. Revenues were also boosted by an additional five fully consolidated Houses in the period versus fiscal 2020. The sixth fiscal 2021 House opening, Soho House Canouan, is not fully consolidated as it is a joint venture agreement which we receive management fee income from. Other revenues increased by 90% in fiscal 2021 predominantly due to fewer COVID restrictions in place in comparison to fiscal 2020 resulting in higher revenues from our restaurants, townhouses and Scorpios during the summer months, as well as growth in our retail offerings and additional revenues from the Mandolin Aegean Bistro restaurant in Miami due to the acquisition of the remaining 50% of ownership in May 2021 resulting in it becoming fully consolidated. We also acquired the operating agreements relating to the LINE and Saguaro hotels in June 2021 which also drove the increase in Other revenues due to the additional management fee income.
Operating loss increased by $33,296 to $188,026 in fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased costs in relation to share-based payments (non-cash), Foreign exchange, Depreciation and amortization, and General and administrative expenses in comparison to fiscal 2020. In-House and Other operating expenses increased year on year in line with higher activity due to reduced COVID restrictions. Both House-Level Contribution and Other Contribution increased in fiscal 2021, primarily as a result of improved trading conditions in comparison to fiscal 2020 and higher Membership revenues.
Net loss attributable to Membership Collective Group increased to $265,395 in fiscal 2021 from $228,461 in fiscal 2020. Adjusted EBITDA loss decreased from $(44,081) in fiscal 2020 to $(23,969) in fiscal 2021.
TOTAL REVENUES
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
MEMBERSHIP REVENUES
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Membership revenues were $189,189 for fiscal 2021 compared to $176,910 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $12,279 or 7%.
Growth was primarily driven by an increase of over 27,000 in Non-House members, which contributed to an additional $12,279 of Membership revenues year on year. Despite an increase of 17,585 Soho House Adult Paying members in fiscal 2021, primarily as a result of members unfreezing during the period, and the recommencement of member intakes at existing Houses in the second half of fiscal 2021, House Membership Revenues fell compared to fiscal 2020 predominantly driven by North America and Europe Houses. In constant currency, Membership revenues decreased by $843, or 0%.
Membership revenues in our North America segment decreased by $3,210 or 3%, despite an additional 7,349 Soho House Adult Paying Members at the end of the fiscal 2021 versus the prior year. The fall is largely due to members remaining frozen for a
significant proportion of the first half of the year due to continued COVID restrictions and the majority of intakes for Houses taking place in the second half of the period meaning less revenue was earned in the period from these members.
Membership revenues in the United Kingdom increased by $4,957, or 9%, as the region experienced a more rapid unfreeze rate across the period versus the other regions and benefited from 180 House London opening at the start of the second quarter of 2021.
Membership revenues in Europe/RoW decreased by $411, or 2%, despite the opening of three new houses in the latter half of fiscal 2021, as the region continued to experience a high rate of frozen members throughout the year as restrictions continued in Europe and in Hong Kong.
The increase in All Other of $10,943 is primarily driven by increase in paying Soho Works members coupled with strong office occupancy across the period, as well as an additional 21,300 Soho Friends and 1,860 SOHO HOME+ members versus the end of fiscal 2020.
IN-HOUSE REVENUES
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
In-House revenues were $217,934 for fiscal 2021, compared to $126,774 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $91,160 or 72%. The increase was driven by an easing of COVID-19 restrictions, new Soho Houses which opened during fiscal 2021 as well as select price increases across our In-House offering. In constant currency, In-House revenues would have increased by $81,757, or 60%.
North America saw an increase in In-House revenues by $51,343 due to fewer restrictions versus fiscal 2020, price rises across food, beverage and accommodation, as well as the opening of Soho House Austin in May 2021 and an excellent performance by Soho House Miami where local COVID-19 restrictions and member caution were less onerous versus other areas of North America.
In the UK, despite continued COVID-19 restrictions in the first quarter of 2021 and towards the end of December, In-House revenues grew significantly year on year across all Houses, with a particularly strong performance of Soho Farmhouse and Babington House in the summer months as well as additional revenue from 180 House in London which opened in April 2021.
Europe struggled throughout the year with more stringent restrictions in the region compared to the UK and North America, meaning growth year-on-year was minimal, even with the opening of three new Houses in the region in the second half of fiscal 2021. The restrictions on international travel to Germany and the Netherlands, had a significant impact on accommodation revenue, which tend to make up a higher proportion of revenue versus Houses in other regions, as well as border closures in Israel which meant no international travel to our new House in Tel Aviv when it opened in the second half of fiscal 2021.
OTHER REVENUES
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Other revenues were $153,431 for fiscal 2021, compared to $80,692 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $72,739 or 90%. This was predominantly driven by reduced COVID restrictions in fiscal 2021 in contrast to fiscal 2020. Stronger revenues from our retail offering and revenues from an additional restaurant in Miami (Mandolin Aegean Bistro), which the remaining shares we didn't own were purchased in May 2021 and hence we started consolidating it, and revenues from the LINE & Saguaro properties which became part of the MCG Group in June 2021, also boosted revenues year on year as well as a full year of revenue from six restaurants and Friends studios that become part of the group in the latter half of fiscal 2020.
North America Other revenues increased year on year due to better performance of our existing restaurants following reduced COVID restrictions, prices rises across our food and beverage offerings, as well revenues from the Mandolin in Miami and from the LINE and Saguaro properties in the second half of fiscal 2021.
Europe saw a strong revenue increase year on year as a result of a successful season at Scorpios, despite some COVID restrictions still being enforced throughout the summer months. It also opened earlier in the year in comparison to fiscal 2020, further boosting revenue.
Recovery at our restaurants and townhouses in the UK boosted segment revenues by $7,012 as sites were open for more time in fiscal 2021 and there were periodic price rises across some of our food and beverage offerings during the second half of the year.
Growth in Other revenues in the All Other segment was driven predominantly by improved performance of our Retail segment year on year as well as a full year of revenue from six restaurants and Friends studios for a full year versus only fourth months in fiscal 2020.
In constant currency, Other revenues increased by 77% year on year.
IN-HOUSE OPERATING EXPENSES AND HOUSE-LEVEL CONTRIBUTION
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
IN-HOUSE OPERATING EXPENSES. In-House operating expenses were $308,840 for fiscal 2021, compared to $220,036 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $88,804, or 40%. The increase is a result of new Houses and fewer capacity restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic in 2021 and the associated increase in volumes. Additionally, inflationary pressures felt in the second half of 2021 meant a subsequent increase in wages as well as food and beverage costs across the Houses. In constant currency, In-House operating expenses increased by $72,483, or 31%.
Throughout fiscal 2021, as a result of the impacts from COVID, governmental agencies in the United Kingdom, European Union and Hong Kong SAR provided the Company with grants primarily to retain on-payroll workers that would otherwise have been terminated
and were instead furloughed in accordance with the rules of the applicable national scheme. Furloughed workers comprised principally of staff at our sites (waiters, bar staff, floor managers etc.) with, to a lesser extent, some non-essential administrative workers in our support offices. These government grants are exclusive of funds received under the Paycheck Protection Program enacted by the U.S. Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, which are accounted for as a borrowing and have subsequently been fully repaid in April 2021. Such government grants, which under their terms meant that the recipient furloughed employees were prohibited by law from providing the Company with services but kept on the Company’s payroll rather than being terminated to claim unemployment benefit, totaled $21 million during the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022 and are presented as a reduction of payroll expenses within In-House operating expenses ($17 million), Other operating expenses ($3 million) and General and administrative expense ($1 million) on the consolidated statements of operations. Under the rules of the schemes, the Company applied to the relevant government agency and recovered the costs of furloughed employees on the Company’s payroll. The net payroll expense within In-House operating expenses and General and administrative expense therefore only reflects the costs incurred from staff that were not furloughed and hence provided services to the Company.
HOUSE-LEVEL CONTRIBUTION. House-Level Contribution, which is defined as House Revenues less In- House operating expenses, was $82,852 for fiscal 2021, compared to $81,159 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $1,693, or 2%. This increase was driven by an increase in In-House revenues versus the prior year, offset by an increase in operating expenses following the reopening of Houses with reduced COVID restrictions across the year, in comparison to fiscal 2020, as well as a slight reduction in House Membership Revenues year on year.
Although House-Level Contribution increased in absolute terms year on year, House-Level Contribution Margin increased by 0% to 21% for fiscal 2021. This was driven by a number of factors including, a fall in membership revenues year on year, which is a direct hit to margin, the dilutive impact of new Houses which tend to have a negative contribution in the first year of operation, as well as limited government support for salaries and wages versus the prior year. This meant that wages could often not be flexed in line with sales, particularly at our Europe Houses. Additionally in fiscal 2020, House Contribution margin was boosted by a one-off credit of $21.5 million related to Covid-19 lease amendments which significantly reduced costs and improved margin.
OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES AND OTHER CONTRIBUTION
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
OTHER OPERATING EXPENSES. Other operating expenses were $167,152 for fiscal 2021, compared with $109,251 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $57,901, or 53%. This increase is primarily driven by six additional sites (public restaurants or Friends studios) included in the All Other segment, and costs in relation to the LINE & Saguaro and Mandolin properties in North America, and the increase in volumes for Soho Home. In addition, Scorpios was re-opened in May 2021 whereas it did not open until July 2020 in the prior year. As previously mentioned, there is a $3 million offset against payroll expenses within Other operating expenses with respect to government grants. In constant currency Other operating expenses would have increased by $49,797 or 42%.
OTHER CONTRIBUTION. Other Contribution, which we define as Other revenues plus Non-House Membership Revenues less Other operating expenses, was $1,710 for fiscal 2021, compared to $(26,070) for fiscal 2020, a decrease in the loss of $27,780. In constant currency, Other Contribution would have improved by $29,714.
Other Contribution Margin was 1% for fiscal 2021, an improvement from (31)% in fiscal 2020. The improvement in Other Contribution and Other Contribution Margin was predominantly driven by the impact of COVID-19 restrictions lifting across sites across the year which meant that revenues were higher than fiscal 2020, improved performance of Soho Home and a significant year on year increase in Non-House Membership revenue.
Other Contribution and Margin improvement in the United Kingdom segment was predominantly due to fewer restrictions in fiscal 2021 compared with fiscal 2020, which meant improved performance of our restaurants and townhouses.
Other Contribution Margin improvement in North America was driven by the strong performance of North America restaurants, benefiting from the acquisition of the remaining 50% share of the Mandolin restaurant in the second quarter of 2021 such that we now fully consolidate the restaurant’s financial results.
Other Contribution Margin improvement in Europe/ROW segment was driven by the earlier opening of Scorpios as well as the removal of many social distancing restrictions in comparison to the same period in 2020.
Other Contribution and Margin improvement in the All Other segment was predominantly due to improved performance of our Retail offering.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
General and administrative expenses were $89,383 for fiscal 2021, compared with $74,954 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $14,429, or 19%. The increase was primarily driven by an increase in business activity following removal of COVID restrictions and support for the new Soho Houses opened in fiscal 2021. Additionally, there was a decrease in government support received for wages in fiscal 2021 versus 2020. Additionally, following the IPO in July 2021, we have seen an increase in costs that are associated with being a listed company. As described previously under In-House operating expenses, there is a $1 million reduction to payroll expenses within General and administrative expense with respect to government grants.
In constant currency, General and administrative expenses would have increased by $8,869, or 11%.
PRE-OPENING EXPENSES
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Pre-opening expenses were $21,294 for fiscal 2021, compared with $21,058 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $236, or 1%. In constant currency, Pre-opening expenses would have decreased by 6%.
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Depreciation and amortization was $83,613 for fiscal 2021, compared with $69,802 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $13,811, or 20%. This increase was primarily driven by amortization of capitalized IT development costs, partly related to the development of the SH.APP, as well as depreciation associated with our six Soho House openings in fiscal 2021. In constant currency, Depreciation and amortization expenses would have increased by $8,634, or 12%.
SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, AND OTHER
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Share-based compensation expense, which is a non cash item, increased by $24,042 to $26,660, primarily driven by the onetime acceleration of vesting by one year triggered by the IPO for certain outstanding awards which was in accordance with the original award terms. Also impacting the increase to a lesser extent, we also have additional expense from the issuance of restricted stock unit awards in June and December 2021.
Foreign exchange loss, net increased by $28,895 to $25,541 for fiscal 2021, primarily driven by an increase in non-USD denominated working capital as a result our foreign growth, foreign exchange volatility impacting our non-USD debt and working capital and an out of period adjustment as described in Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in this Annual report on Form 10-K.
INTEREST EXPENSE, NET
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Net interest expense was $84,382 for fiscal 2021, compared with $77,792 for fiscal 2020, an increase of $6,590 or 8%. This increase was primarily driven by increased interest expense due to the payment-in-kind interest aspect associated with our Senior Facility, loss on extinguishment of the Permira Senior Facility driven by unamortized debt issuance costs and an exit fee on the Senior Facility triggered by the IPO transaction. In constant currency, net interest expense would have increased by $820, or 1%.
GAIN ON SALE OF PROPERTY AND OTHER, NET
The Company recognized Gains on disposal of property and other, net of $6,837 and $98 during fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively. In fiscal 2021, the gain on disposal of property and other, net mainly related to the acquisition of the remaining 50% of ownership interest in Soho House-Cipura (Miami), LLC., which owns and operates the Mandolin Aegean Bistro, located in Miami, Florida. The non-cash gain was related to the remeasurement of our existing 50% ownership to fair value as part of the initial consolidation of Cipura (Miami), LLC after acquisition in May 2021.
SHARE OF LOSS OF EQUITY METHOD INVESTMENTS
We maintain a portfolio of equity method investments owned and operated through non-controlling interests in investments with one or more partners. Two of our Houses are owned and operated by us through non- controlling interests and we own and operate certain of our other businesses through non-controlling interest in joint ventures. The Company recognized Share of loss of equity method investment of $2,249 during fiscal 2021, a decrease of $1,378 on fiscal 2020. Note the Mandolin was previously recognized as a joint venture and now is fully consolidated and this has contributed to the decrease.
INCOME TAX (EXPENSE) BENEFIT
Income tax expense was $894 for fiscal 2021 compared to a benefit of $776 for fiscal 2020, an increase in expense of $1,670. This increase was driven by taxes payable in foreign jurisdictions, specifically Greece and Canada, following a return to profitability. In fiscal 2021, owing to the impact of COVID on the profitability of our operations in Greece, Germany and Canada, where we historically pay cash taxes on their profits, we experienced a decrease in tax paid owing to the decreased profitability associated with the impact of COVID on our operations.
NET LOSS ATTRIBUTABLE TO MCG
Net loss attributable to MCG was $265,395 for fiscal 2021, compared with Net loss attributable to MCG of $228,461 for fiscal 2020, an increase in loss of $36,934. This was attributable primarily to costs associated with Share-based compensation, Depreciation and amortization and Foreign exchange versus fiscal 2020, coupled with a rise in General and administrative expenses year on year as described above. These increases were partially offset by improved contribution from Soho House Houses and our other offerings as well as an increase in Membership revenues compared to fiscal 2020.
ADJUSTED EBITDA
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
Adjusted EBITDA loss improved by $20,112 from $(44,081) in fiscal 2020 to $(23,969) in fiscal 2021. This was predominantly driven improved performance across the business following the reduction in COVID restrictions across the year, most notably in the second half of fiscal 2021, in contrast to fiscal 2020 whereby restrictions had a much more significant impact on trade across the year.
Revenue growth was partially offset by an increase in General and administrative expenses year on year as a result of the IPO in July 2021 and the reduction in government support versus fiscal 2020. As previously mentioned, in fiscal 2021 government grants totaled $21 million and are presented as a reduction of payroll expenses within In-House operating expenses ($17 million), Other operating expenses ($3 million) and General and administrative expense ($1 million) on the consolidated statements of operations and therefore included in Adjusted EBITDA. The net payroll expense within In-House operating expenses and General and administrative expense therefore only reflects the costs incurred from staff that were not furloughed and hence provided services to us.
For a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to Net Loss, see “-Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
NON-GAAP FINANCIAL MEASURES
A reconciliation of Net Loss to Adjusted EBITDA is set forth below for the periods specified:
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
(2)See "Comparison of the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021 - Other Expenses” for information regarding the increase in foreign exchange and share-based compensation expense period-on-period.
(3)Beginning on March 14, 2020, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we issued membership credits to active members of our closed Houses to be redeemed for certain Soho Home products and services. Membership credits were a one-time goodwill gesture, issued as a marketing offer to active members. The expense represents our best estimate of the cost in fulfilling the membership credits.
(4)Represent items of additional expense incurred in order to comply with health and safety protocols while keeping certain Houses open during the pandemic. In 2021, we received a government grant related to business rates in the UK which reduced our COVID related expenses.
(5)Our Corporate financing and restructuring costs vary significantly each year and period presented based on financing and restructuring being undertaken. Such costs do not relate to normal, recurring, cash operating expenses. In fiscal 2021, these costs consisted of refinancing fees incurred of $2,534 and a portion of IPO-related costs of $13,788 which were not eligible to be recognized directly in equity. In fiscal 2020, we undertook an internal restructuring to simplify the business in terms of headcount and cost structure, incurring $5,956 as well as $3,323 of losses in respect of contractual arrangements and $2,992 of site restructuring and closure costs, further we began preparations for a refinancing transaction, which we subsequently completed in March 2021, incurring $1,551 as well as including establishing an equity compensation plan, incurring $325.
The computation of House-Level Contribution and Other Contribution is set forth below:
(1)See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures-Constant Currency” for an explanation of our constant currency results.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Liquidity is the ability to generate sufficient cash flows to meet the cash requirements of our business operations. Our principal sources of liquidity are operating cash flows, holdings of cash and cash equivalents and availability under our Revolving Credit Facility. As of January 2, 2022, we maintained a cash and cash equivalents balance of $213 million and a restricted cash balance of $8 million.
Our primary requirements for liquidity are to fund our working capital needs, operating and finance lease obligations, capital expenditures and general corporate needs. Our ongoing capital expenditures are principally related to opening new Houses, refurbishing and maintaining the existing House portfolio as well as investments in our corporate technology infrastructure to support our digital strategy and technology infrastructure.
In a given year, our primary cash inflows and outflows relate to the following:
•from operating activities, our cash inflows include Membership revenues, In-House revenues and Other revenues, such as the sale of retail products. The primary cash outflows from operating activities include general operating expenses and interest payments.
•from investing activities, our cash inflows include the proceeds from sale of property and equipment and the sales of subsidiaries. The primary cash outflows from investing activities include the purchase of property and equipment as well as intangibles.
•from financing activities, our cash inflows from financing activities include proceeds from borrowings and from the issuance of shares. The primary cash outflows from financing activities include repayments of borrowings and legal and professional fees from debt or equity related transactions.
We believe our existing cash and marketable securities balances will be sufficient to fund our operating and finance lease obligations, capital expenditures and working capital needs for at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Note Purchase Agreement
On March 31, 2021, Soho House Bond Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of Soho House Holdings Limited, issued pursuant to a Notes Purchase Agreement (the ‘Senior Secured Notes Facility’) an aggregate of $441 million in senior secured notes (the ‘Initial Notes’), which were subscribed for by certain funds managed, sponsored or advised by Goldman Sachs & Co. LLC and its affiliates. The Initial Notes mature on March 31, 2027 and bear interest at a fixed rate equal to a cash margin of 2.0192% per annum plus a payment-in-kind (capitalized) margin of 6.1572% per annum.
The terms of the Senior Secured Notes Facility include an option to issue, and a commitment on the part of the purchasers to subscribe for, further notes in one or several issuances on or prior to March 31, 2022 in an aggregate amount of up to $100 million. As of January 2, 2022, there is no outstanding balance on the Senior Secured Notes Facility. For further information, refer to Note 12 - Debt in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revolving Credit Facility
SHG Acquisition (UK) Limited and Soho House U.S. Corp., two of our wholly-owned indirect subsidiaries, entered into a senior revolving facility agreement with HSBC UK Bank PLC (‘HSBC’) on December 5, 2019 (the ‘Revolving Credit Facility’). The initial size of the Revolving Credit Facility was £55 million ($72 million). The Revolving Credit Facility was extended on May 7, 2020 in order to access an additional facility of £20 million ($25 million), bringing the borrowing capacity up to an aggregate of £75 million ($99 million). As of January 2, 2022, £71 million ($96 million) is available to draw with £4 million ($6 million) utilized as a letter of guarantee in respect of one of our lease agreements.
On November 15, 2021 the First Amended and Restated Revolving Facility Agreement (the "First Amendment") was signed which changed the reference rate under the Revolving Credit Facility from a LIBOR-based rate to a SONIA-based rate and to transition financial reporting requirements from accounting principles generally accepted in the United Kingdom to accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The First Amendment also reset the Company's Consolidated EBITDA test levels, scaling up from zero at December 31, 2021 to £32.0 million ($44 million, if translated using the average exchange rate in effect during the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022) after June 30, 2022.
On February 11, 2022, Soho House Bond Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company entered into the Second Amended and Restated Revolving Facility Agreement (the "Second Amendment"), which amends and restates the Revolving Credit Facility. The Second Amendment amends the Revolving Credit Facility to extend the maturity date from January 25, 2023 to January 25, 2024.
Loans under the Revolving Credit Facility are capable of being borrowed, repaid and reborrowed at any time. For further information, refer to Note 12 - Debt in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
CASH FLOWS AND WORKING CAPITAL
The following table provides a summary of cash flow data for the periods presented:
NET CASH USED IN OPERATING ACTIVITIES
For fiscal 2021, Net cash used in operating activities was $127,419 compared to Net cash used in operating activities of $38,229 in fiscal 2020. The increase in cash used of $89,190 was primarily due to Net loss worsening by $33,439 and $57,634 of payment-in-kind interest settled on the extinguishment of the Permira facility.
NET CASH USED IN INVESTING ACTIVITIES
For fiscal 2021, Net cash used in investing activities was $119,139 compared to Net cash used in investing activities of $139,870 in fiscal 2020. The decrease in net cash used of $20,731 was primarily due to $38,127 million less cash used in the purchase of property and equipment. In fiscal 2020, we incurred significant capital spent on the development of Soho House Austin, 180 House and 180 Soho Works which all completed in 2020 or early 2021. In fiscal 2021, in line with our asset-light strategy as defined in Item 1 - Business in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we have reduced the number of projects requiring us to commit substantial capital expenditure.
NET CASH PROVIDED BY FINANCING ACTIVITIES
For fiscal 2021, Net cash provided by financing activities was $408,160 compared to Net cash provided by financing activities of $179,704 in fiscal 2020. This increase in cash generated of $228,456 was primarily due to net proceeds from the initial public offering
of $387,538 and proceeds from borrowings mainly from the Note Purchase Agreement of $465,948 and the Senior convertible preference shares issued, net of issuance costs, of $161,574. This was reduced by the repayment of debt of $613,984 and the cash settled redemption of May 2016 preferred shares, which was required following initial public offering, of $19,899. Refer to Note 12 - Debt and Note 15 - SHHL Redeemable Preferred Shares in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information.
CASH REQUIREMENTS FROM CONTRACTUAL AND OTHER OBLIGATIONS
Material contractual obligations arising in the normal course of business primarily consist of operating and finance lease obligations and long-term debt facilities. The timing and nature of these commitments are expected to have an impact on our liquidity and capital requirements in future periods. Refer to Note 6 - Leases in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information relating to our operating and financing leases and Note 12 - Debt in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information related to our long-term debt.
Purchase obligations include all legally binding contracts, including commitments for the fitting out of real estate and software development/license commitments and service contracts. The majority of our purchase obligations are due within the next 12 months. Refer to Note 18 - Commitments and Contingencies in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information.
Leases
As of January 2, 2022, we have entered into 10 operating lease agreements for Houses, hotels, restaurants, and other properties that are in various stages of construction by the landlord. We will determine the classification as of the lease commencement date, but currently expect these under construction leases to be operating leases. We estimate the total undiscounted lease payments for these leases commencing in fiscal years 2022, 2023, and 2026 to be $488 million, $361 million, and $133 million.
For fiscal years 2022 and 2023, our contractual lease payments from existing lease agreements will total $128,569 and $131,579. Refer to Note 6 - Leases in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information relating to our operating and financing leases.
Except for operating leases entered into in the normal course of business where we have not yet taken physical possession of the leased property, certain letters of credit entered into as security under the terms of several of our leases and the unrecorded contractual obligations set forth above, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of January 2, 2022.
Soho Works Limited loan
In 2017, Soho Works Limited ("SWL") entered into a term loan facility agreement for a £40 million term loan facility. The SWL loan bears interest at 7% and matures on September 29, 2022. On March 11, 2022 this loan was extended and the maturity date is now September 29, 2023.
Goldman Sachs Senior secured notes
On March 9, 2022, Soho House Bond Limited, a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, exercised its option under the Goldman Sachs Senior Secured Note Purchase Agreement to issue $100 million of additional notes. The net proceeds, to be drawn down, will be used for general corporate purposes.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that can have a significant impact on the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities, at the respective dates of our financial statements. We base our estimates, assumptions and judgments on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions and judgments on a regular basis and make changes accordingly. We also discuss our critical accounting estimates with our supervisory board.
We believe the following to be critical accounting policies because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition or results of operations and they require critical management estimates and judgments about matters that are uncertain:
•Going Concern
•Goodwill and purchased intangible asset impairment
•Impairment of other long-lived assets
•Leases
•Income taxes
•Variable interest entities
•Membership credits, and
•Share-based compensation
GOING CONCERN
The going concern basis of presentation in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this annual report assumes that we will continue in operation for at least a period of 12 months after the date these financial statements are issued, and contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business.
We have experienced net losses and significant cash outflows from cash used in operating activities over the past years as we develop our Houses. During the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022, the Company incurred a consolidated net loss of $269 million. During the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022, the Company had negative cash flow from operations of $127 million. As of January 2, 2022, the Company had an accumulated deficit balance of $1,022 million. As of January 2, 2022, the Company had a cash and cash equivalents balance of $213 million, and a restricted cash balance of $8 million.
In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has continued to significantly impact our business and we have had to temporarily close some or all of our Houses, hotels and public restaurants, at different times due to the ongoing effects of the pandemic, which has and will continue to have an impact on our revenues. At the date of issuance of these consolidated financial statements, our Houses are open where possible.
In assessing the going concern basis of preparation of the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022, we have taken into consideration detailed cash flow forecasts for the Company, the Company’s forecast compliance with bank covenants, and the continued availability of committed and accessible working capital to the Company.
We have considered the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company and the resultant global economic uncertainties and have undertaken a re-assessment of the cash flow forecasts covering a period of at least 12 months from the date these financial statements are issued. Cash flow forecasts have been prepared based on a range of scenarios including, but not limited to, no further debt or equity funding, the timing of a full re-opening of our Houses staggered and/or deferred to the end of the calendar year, cost reductions, both limited and extensive, and a combination of these different scenarios. We have assessed the sensitivity analysis on cash flows, and in order to finance these cash flow forecasts, we have completed a series of positive financing events during fiscal 2021, including issuance of new senior secured notes in an aggregate amount equal to $295 million, €62 million ($73 million) and £53 million ($73 million), issuance of $175 million of senior convertible preference shares, and completion of our IPO for net proceeds of $388 million after deducting underwriting discounts and other offering costs (including net proceeds from the partial exercise of the overallotment option). The senior secured notes include an option (which expires on March 31, 2022) for the Company to issue additional notes in an aggregate amount of up to $100 million on or prior to March 31, 2022. This option was exercised on March 9, 2022, refer to Note 23 - Subsequent Events in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The proceeds from the senior secured notes and senior convertible preference shares have been used to repay all amounts outstanding under the Permira Senior Facility and the US government-backed bank loan. The proceeds from the IPO were used to repay the outstanding principal balance of our revolving credit facility of $98 million, which remains in place as a source of additional liquidity if required, and to pay the redemption price of outstanding redeemable preferred shares, with the remainder to be used for general corporate purposes, including working capital needs. See Note 12, Debt, and Note 15, SHHL Redeemable Preferred Shares, for additional information.
We believe that the completed working capital events, our projected cash flows and the actions available to management to further control expenditure, as necessary, provide the Company with sufficient working capital (including cash and cash equivalents) to achieve its plans to recover from the impact of the pandemic, subject to the following key factors:
•the continued access to Houses in a manner that is compliant with local laws and regulations, including the relaxing of mandatory capacity constraints, as well as anticipated demand;
•the level of in-House sales activity (primarily sales of food and beverage) that, even after opening, may be subject to reduced capacity as a result of any on-going restrictions;
•the continued high level of membership retention and renewals (which has been evidenced throughout the pandemic); and
•the implementation of cost reduction measures that are aligned with the anticipated levels of capacity.
While the impact of lockdowns and other restrictions may re-occur beyond current expectations and impact the Company’s ability to keep open Houses and return to a level of operation consistent with pre COVID-19 within the timeframes assumed in management’s detailed cash flow forecasts, we believe that the Company has sufficient financial resources together with an established and cash generative business model, and access to capital.
Based on the available cash as a result of completed financing events discussed above, and the measures that have been put in place to control costs, we believe that the Company is able to continue in operational existence, meet its liabilities as they fall due, operate within its existing facilities, and meet all of its covenant requirements for a period of at least 12 months from the date these financial statements are issued.
Based on the above, the consolidated financial statements have been presented on a going concern basis, which contemplates the realization of assets and the satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. Accordingly, we continue to adopt the going concern basis in preparing the consolidated financial statements for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022.
GOODWILL AND PURCHASED INTANGIBLE ASSET IMPAIRMENT
Our methodology for allocating the purchase price relating to purchase acquisitions is determined through established valuation techniques. Goodwill represents a residual value as of the acquisition date, which in most cases results in measuring goodwill as an excess of the purchase consideration transferred plus the fair value of any noncontrolling interest in the acquired company over the fair value of net assets acquired, including contingent consideration. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level (operating segment or one level below an operating segment) on an annual basis on the first day of the fourth fiscal quarter and between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. These events or circumstances could include a significant change in the business climate, legal factors, operating performance indicators, competition, or sale or disposition of a significant portion of a reporting unit.
We make judgments about the recoverability of purchased intangible assets with finite lives whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that an impairment may exist. Recoverability of purchased intangible assets with finite lives is measured by comparing the carrying amount of the asset to the future undiscounted cash flows the asset is expected to generate. We review indefinite-lived intangible assets for impairment annually or whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset might be impaired. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. Assumptions and estimates about future values and remaining useful lives of our purchased intangible assets are complex and subjective. They can be affected by a variety of factors, including external factors such as industry and economic trends, and internal factors such as changes in our business strategy and our internal forecasts.
The goodwill balance recorded in the consolidated balance sheets as of January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021 was $214 million and $201 million, respectively. In response to changes in industry and market conditions, we could be required to strategically realign our resources and consider restructuring, disposing of, or otherwise exiting businesses, which could result in an impairment of goodwill or other intangible assets.
There was no impairment of goodwill or purchased intangible assets in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 or fiscal 2019.
IMPAIRMENT OF OTHER LONG-LIVED ASSETS
We periodically evaluate long-lived assets held for use, which include property, plant and equipment, other intangible assets and equity method investments and assets held for sale whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of those assets may not be recoverable. Assets are grouped and evaluated for impairment at the lowest level of which there are identifiable cash flows. Such assets are reviewed for impairment using factors including, but not limited to, our future operating plans and projected cash flows. The determination of whether impairment has occurred is based on an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows directly related to that asset or group of assets, compared to the carrying value of the assets. We recognize impairment if the sum of the undiscounted future cash flows does not exceed the carrying value of the assets. For impaired assets, we recognize a loss equal to the difference between the net book value of the asset and its estimated fair value. Fair value is based on discounted future cash flows of the asset using a discount rate commensurate with the risk. In addition, at the time a decision is made to sell or discontinue use of an asset or group of assets, we record an impairment charge, if appropriate, or accelerate depreciation over the revised useful life of the asset. There was no material impairment recognized in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 or fiscal 2019.
LEASES
We have entered into lease agreements for our Houses, hotels, restaurants, spas and other properties. We account for our leases under Accounting Standards Update ("ASU") 2016-02, Leases (Topic 842).
We determine the initial classification and measurement of our right-of-use assets and lease liabilities at the lease commencement date and thereafter if modified. The determination of operating and finance leases requires significant judgments, including estimation of the rate implicit in the lease, incremental borrowing rates and reasonably assured lease terms. The lease term includes any renewal options and termination options that we are reasonably assured to exercise. The present value of lease payments is determined by using the interest rate implicit in the lease for finance leases and the incremental borrowing rate for operating leases. The incremental borrowing rate is determined by using a portfolio approach based on the rate of interest that we would pay to borrow on a collateralized basis an amount equal to the lease payments in a similar economic environment. We recognized operating lease assets of $997 million and $962 million and operating lease liabilities of $1,152 million and $1,090 million at January 2, 2022 and January 3, 2021, respectively.
INCOME TAXES
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Our effective tax rates differ from the statutory rates, primarily due to the foreign tax rate differential, tax exempt revenue and non- deductible expenses and as further described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Form 10-K. Our effective tax rate was (0)%, 0% and (4)% in fiscal 2021, fiscal 2020 and fiscal 2019, respectively. We incurred for fiscal 2021 an expense to our consolidated statement of operations, of $1 million, a benefit for fiscal 2020 of $1 million, and an expense for fiscal 2019 of $4 million.
Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. Although we believe our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our historical income tax provisions and accruals. We adjust these reserves in light of changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different than the amounts recorded, such differences will impact the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of reserve provisions and changes to reserves that are considered appropriate, as well as the related net interest.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, we consider all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, reversal patterns of taxable and deductible temporary differences and the feasibility of tax planning strategies. In the event that we change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
Our provision for income taxes is subject to volatility and could be adversely impacted by earnings being lower than anticipated in countries that have lower tax rates and higher than anticipated in countries that have higher tax rates; by changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities; by tax effects of non-deductible compensation; by tax costs related to intercompany realignments; by changes in accounting principles; or by changes in tax laws and regulations.
VARIABLE INTEREST ENTITIES
We analyze our variable interests, including loans, guarantees, and equity investments, to determine if the entity in which we has a variable interest is a VIE. For those entities determined to be VIEs a quantitative and qualitative analysis is performed to determine if we will be deemed the primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary of a VIE is defined as the variable interest holder that has a controlling financial interest in the VIE.
A controlling financial interest is defined as one that has (i) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact its economic performance and (ii) the obligation to absorb losses of the entity or the right to receive benefits from the entity that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
In evaluating whether we have the power to direct the activities of a VIE that most significantly impact its economic performance, we base our qualitative analysis on our review of the design of the entity, its organizational structure including decision-making ability and the relevant development, ownership interest, operating, management and financial agreements. This evaluation requires consideration of all facts and circumstances relevant to decision-making that affect the entity’s future performance and the exercise of professional judgment in deciding which decision-making rights are most important.
We consolidate those entities in which it is determined to be the primary beneficiary. If we are not determined to be the primary beneficiary but can exercise significant influence over these entities, these investments are accounted for under the equity method of accounting.
MEMBERSHIP CREDITS
As a result of government imposed measures intended to control the spread of COVID-19, including quarantines, restrictions on travel and restrictions on certain business operations, we temporarily closed many of our Houses. We issued membership credits to active members of such closed Houses to be redeemed for certain Soho Home products, food and beverage in our Houses and our public restaurants and other eligible services. Membership credits were a one-time goodwill gesture, issued as a marketing offer to active members. As such, the issuance of the membership credits provided is deemed to have no material right or separate performance obligation, and no contractual arrangement has been entered into. We recognize a liability in respect of the outstanding membership credits based on our best estimate of the cost to be incurred in fulfilling the membership credits, which are expected to be redeemed by our active members. In estimating the cost of fulfillment, we regularly review the purchase cost price of items that membership credits are redeemed against. This is principally food and beverage in our Houses which is a significant component of the purchase cost percentage applied to the face value of the membership credits issued. We then apply an expected redemption rate percentage to this which is based on historical redemption patterns by our members. These two calculations yield our accrued liability for membership credits. The liability associated with the membership credits is derecognized based on the usage of credits by members during the period incurred. The redemption rate applied when estimating the liability is based on historical redemption patterns of comparable offerings and is subject to uncertainty. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether the redemption rate should be adjusted based on our cumulative redemption experience and changes to other factors including any changes to expiration dates based on our re-opening plans for our Houses as well as our actual experience of the cost of fulfillment. Estimating the expected redemption rate by our members and, to a lesser extent, the cost of fulfillment involves significant judgment. The membership credits were initially set to expire on December 31, 2020, but this expiration was extended to September 30, 2021. The expense recognized during the fiscal year ended January 2, 2022 is net of $4 million recorded upon expiration of the vast majority of credits on September 30, 2021.
SHARE-BASED COMPENSATION
In August 2020, the Company established the 2020 Equity and Incentive Plan (the “2020 Plan”) under which SHHL Share Appreciation Rights (“SARs”) and SHHL Growth Shares were issued to certain employees. In connection with the IPO in July 2021, 25% of the outstanding awards accelerated in accordance with the original plan and all of the outstanding awards were exchanged into awards that will be settled in Class A Common Stock of MCG. The exchanged awards are subject to the same vesting conditions as the original awards. The Company treated the exchange as a Type I probable-to-probable modification.
In July 2021, the Company established its 2021 Equity and Incentive Plan (the "2021 Plan"). The 2021 Plan allows for grants of nonqualified stock options, SARs, and RSUs, or performance awards. There were 12,107,333 shares initially available for all awards under the 2021 Plan and the shares available will increase annually on the first day of each calendar year, beginning with the calendar year ending December 31, 2022.
Share-based compensation expense is measured based on the grant-date fair value of those awards. All the Company awards in issue are have graded-vesting features and are service conditions only awards and therefore compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the total requisite service period for the entire award.
For the Company’s SAR and Growth Share awards, the grant-date fair value of the awards is determined using the Black-Scholes option pricing model and involves several assumptions, including the expected term of the option, expected volatility and risk-free interest rate. We have limited historical data of our own, owing to there only being a public market for our shares following the IPO in July 2021, to utilize in determining our assumptions. As such, for SAR and Growth Share awards granted in fiscal 2021 and 2020, we based our volatility assumption on and that of a selected peer group. Forfeitures are recognized as they occur for all equity awards.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an ‘emerging growth company,’ as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012, or the JOBS Act, and are eligible to take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not ‘emerging growth companies,’ including, but not limited to: presenting only two years of audited financial statements in
addition to any required unaudited interim financial statements with correspondingly reduced “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, or Sarbanes-Oxley; having reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy or information statements; being exempt from the requirements to hold a non-binding advisory vote on executive compensation or seek stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved; and not being required to adopt certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.