ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the audited consolidated financial statements and the notes to those statements which appear elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements. Please see page 1 on this Annual Report on Form 10-K “Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K under the caption “Risk Factors” for a discussion of the risks, uncertainties and assumptions associated with these statements.
Overview
Marchex’s conversation intelligence platform, that incorporates AI functionality to help with sales engagement and marketing solutions, helps businesses turn strategic insights into the actions that can drive their most valued sales outcomes. Our multichannel voice and text capabilities help enable sales and marketing teams to deliver the buying experiences that improves their customer experiences. Marchex provides its’ conversation intelligence solutions for market-leading companies in numerous industries, including several of the world’s most innovative and successful brands.
We believe that we have a set of tools for enterprises that depend on phone calls, texts and other communication channels to help convert prospects into customers, to deliver compelling customer experiences during the sales process and maximize returns. Our mission is to help our customers grow by giving them real-time insights into the conversations they are having with their customers across phone, text and other communication channels. Marchex leverages proprietary data and conversational insights to deliver real-time AI-powered functionality that drives solutions that help enable brands to personalize customer interactions in order to accelerate sales and grow their business.
We were incorporated in Delaware on January 17, 2003.
We have offices in Seattle, Washington; Wichita, Kansas; and Mississauga, Canada.
Recent Developments
New Product Launch
In May 2021, Marchex released the first of several planned sales engagement solutions with its auto dealer facing product: Marchex Engage for Automotive. Marchex Engage for Automotive is the company’s newest artificial intelligence-powered solution, developed specifically for automotive dealers. Marchex Engage for Automotive is an innovative conversation intelligence application that enables automotive sales teams to deliver better buying experiences and sell more.
COVID-19
The global pandemic continues to be unpredictable. In Q2 2021, we experienced higher conversational volumes as the number of cases steadily declined. However, the resurgence of new variants, supply chain disruptions, and labor shortages decreased conversational volumes at times in the second half of 2021. Our revenue was affected by the pandemic in 2020 and 2021. We are cautiously optimistic about the recovery of the U.S. economy as we look towards the start of the new fiscal year. We continue to add customers across multiple product offerings and verticals and plan to focus on our strategic priorities and growth initiatives to support our long-term growth efforts.
See the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. For additional information for the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting global disruptions on our business and operations, refer to “Results of Operations” within this discussion and analysis and Item 1.A of Part I, “Risk Factors.”
Divestiture
In October 2020, we sold certain assets related to the Local Leads Platform, Call Marketplace and other assets not related to core conversational analytics (the “Divestiture”). The purchaser is a related party controlled by a shareholder and officers of the Company. At closing, we received cash consideration of approximately $2.3 million plus certain other contingent consideration, and in 2021 an additional $400,000 in cash for the remaining minority equity interest from an unrelated party.
In connection with the closing, we also entered into an administrative support services agreement with the purchaser pursuant to which we will provide administrative services to the purchaser for a support services fee, with certain guaranteed payments to us in the first year and contingently in the second year following closing.
This Divestiture has been classified as discontinued operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 11: Discontinued Operations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Technology Infrastructure and Cloud Initiatives
We made advancements in our technology infrastructure and cloud initiatives. In 2021, we were able to advance build out of our platform, which helped reduce our operating expenses compared to the prior year. We are focused on moving portions of our technology infrastructure to the cloud which helps enable us to innovate through scale and a common architecture.
Factors Affecting our Performance
We utilize phone numbers as part of a number of analytics services to our customers such as our call and text analytics and communications. If we are not able to secure or retain sufficient phone numbers needed for our services or we are limited in the number of available telecommunication carriers or vendors to provide such phone numbers to us in the event of any industry consolidation or if telecommunication carriers or vendors were to experience system disruptions, our revenue and results of operations may be materially and adversely affected. We anticipate that these variables will fluctuate in the future, affecting our ability to grow and our financial results. In particular, it is difficult to project call and text usage, the number of calls or texts or other actions performed by users of our services.
Our quarterly results have fluctuated in the past and may fluctuate in the future due to seasonality. Our experience has shown that during the spring and summer months, call volumes in certain verticals such as home services are generally higher than during other times of the year and during the latter part of the fourth quarter of the calendar year we generally experience lower call volumes. The extent to which call volumes may decrease during these off-peak periods is difficult to predict. Prolonged or severe decreases in call volumes during these periods may adversely affect our growth rate and results and in turn the market price of our securities. However, there can be no assurances such seasonal trends will consistently repeat each year. Historically, we have seen this trend generally reversing in the first quarter of the calendar year with increased call volumes and often new budgets at the beginning of the year for many of our customers with fiscal years ending December 31. However, there can be no assurances such seasonal trends will consistently repeat each year.
In addition, as discussed elsewhere in this report, we have and may continue to experience impacts from quarantines, market downturns and changes in customer behavior related to the pandemic. We believe that our future revenue growth will depend on, among other factors, our ability to attract new customers, compete effectively, maximize our sales efforts, successfully improve existing analytics products and sales engagement solutions, and develop successful new products and solutions. If we are unable to generate adequate revenue growth and to manage our expenses, we may continue to incur significant losses in the future and may not be able to achieve or maintain profitability.
Climate Change
We have considered specific risks associated as a result of climate change legislation or regulation and determined that in their current form, legislation or regulation is not reasonably likely to have a material effect on our financial condition or results of operations. However, further iteration of the proposed legislation may yield different results.
Components of the Results of our Operations
Revenue
We generate the majority of our revenues from core analytics and solutions services. Our call analytics technology platform provides data and insights that can measure the performance of calls and texts for our customers. We generate revenue from our call analytics technology platform when customers pay us a fee for each call/text or call/text related data element they receive from calls or texts or for each phone number tracked based on a pre-negotiated rate. Customers typically receive the benefit of our services as they are performed and substantially all of our revenue is recognized over time as services are performed.
In certain cases, we record revenue based on available and reported preliminary information from third parties. Collection on the related receivables may vary from reported information based upon third party refinement of the estimated and reported amounts owed that occurs subsequent to period ends.
Service Costs
Our service costs represent the cost of providing our services to our customers. These costs primarily consist of telecommunication costs, including the use of phone numbers relating to our services; colocation service charges of our network equipment; bandwidth and software license fees; network operations; and payroll and related expenses of personnel, including stock based compensation.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of payroll and related expenses for personnel engaged in marketing and sales functions; advertising and promotional expenditures including online and outside marketing activities; cost of systems used to sell to and serve customers; and stock-based compensation of related personnel.
Product Development
Product development costs consist primarily of expenses incurred in the research and development, creation and enhancement of our products and services.
Our research and development expenses include payroll and related expenses for personnel; costs of computer hardware and software; costs incurred in developing features and functionality of the services we offer; and stock-based compensation of related personnel.
For the periods presented, substantially all of our product development expenses are research and development. Product development costs are expensed as incurred or capitalized into property and equipment in accordance U.S. GAAP.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related expenses for executive and administrative personnel; professional services, including accounting, legal and insurance; bad debt provisions; facilities costs; other general corporate expenses; and stock-based compensation of related personnel.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure stock-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize it as expense over the vesting or service period, as applicable, of the stock-based award using the straight-line method. We account for forfeitures as they occur. Stock-based compensation expense is included in the same lines as compensation paid to the same employees in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Amortization of Intangibles from Acquisitions
Amortization of intangible assets excluding goodwill relates to intangible assets identified in connection with our acquisitions. The intangible assets have been identified as customer relationships; acquired technology; non-competition agreements; tradenames. These assets are amortized over useful lives ranging from 12 to 60 months.
Provision for Income Taxes
We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax law is recognized in results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
Results of Operations
The following table presents revenue from continuing operations and certain of our operating results from continuing operations as a percentage of revenue:
Stock-based compensation expense was included in the following operating expense categories as follows:
See Note 6: Stockholders' Equity (b). Stock Option Plan of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements, as well as our Critical Accounting Policies for additional information about stock-based compensation.
Revenue
Revenue increased $2.3 million, or 4%, from $51.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $53.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was due primarily to the 2020 negative impact of the coronavirus pandemic on customer usage, rate discounts provided as a result of customer distress. These impacts did not recur to the same extent during 2021.
In the short term, we expect our revenues to be similar to or slightly higher than the most recent quarterly period as we focus on performance improvements for our customers in our product offerings. While we believe the U.S economy has the opportunity to expand, we expect our results to be volatile in the near term as the pandemic continues to be unpredictable and we expect to monitor the potential disruptions.
In the longer term, we believe that our new product releases and growth initiatives may enable the Company to progress, resulting in an opportunity for potential revenue growth. Prospective customers have indicated that they plan to initiate trials and there are existing customers that are considering the breadth of our product offerings, which would result in new revenue opportunities.
For additional discussion of trends and other factors in our business, refer to Industry and Market Factors in Item 2 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Expenses
Service Costs. Service costs increased $806,000, or 4%, from $20.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $21.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of revenues, service costs were 41% and 41% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The increase in dollars was primarily due to an increase in communication and network costs totaling $1.1 million. In addition, an increase in personnel costs and outside service provider costs of $246,000 contributed to the increase. These increases were offset in the 2021 period by $468,000 of higher support service fees under the agreement related to the Divestiture.
We expect in the near and intermediate term that service costs in absolute dollars will be similar in relation to the most recent period. Upon completion of various infrastructure efficiency initiatives, there may also be a positive impact on service costs as a percentage of revenue and further benefit in the event we generate contribution from new launches of analytics products and sales engagement solutions.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses decreased $3.1 million, or 19%, from $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $13.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of revenue, sales and marketing expenses were 33% and 25% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The net decrease in dollars and as a percentage of revenue was primarily attributable to an
aggregate net decrease in personnel and outside service provider costs and stock-based compensation costs totaling $2.6 million. In addition, a decrease in travel related costs largely due to pandemic influcened restrictions totaling $240,000 and $374,000 of higher support service fees recovery in 2021. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in marketing costs of $149,000. The percentage of revenue decrease was partially attributable to the benefit obtained from a portion of the sales and marketing expenses being fixed in nature and higher revenues in 2021.
We expect some volatility in sales and marketing expenses based on the timing of marketing initiatives but expect sales and marketing expenses in the near term to increase in connection with any revenue increase. We also expect, to the extent that we increase our marketing activities, this could correspondingly also cause an increase as a percentage of revenue. We also believe as pandemic restrictions ease, travel related costs will increase as compared to the year ended December 31, 2021.
Product Development. Product development expenses decreased $4.9 million, or 23%, from $21.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $16.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of revenue, product development expenses were 41% and 30% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The net decrease in dollars and as a percentage of revenue was primarily due to a net decrease in personnel and outside service provider costs and stock-based compensation totaling $3.3 million as well as higher support services fee recovery of $1.3 million in 2021.
We expect that product development expenses will be relatively stable to modestly higher in absolute dollars as we continued to driver further optimizing our technology infrastructure and cloud initiatives offset by an increase in the number of personnel and consultants to enhance our service offerings
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses decreased $3.5 million, or 27%, from $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $9.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As a percentage of revenue, general and administrative expenses were 25% and 17% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively. The decrease in dollars was primarily comprised of a decrease in personnel and outside service provider costs and stock-based compensation costs totaling $1.5 million, $1.4 million of higher support services fee recovery in 2021, and a $698,000 decrease in professional fees.
We also expect our general and administrative expenses to increase to the extent that we expand our operations and incur additional costs in connection with being a public company and regulatory updates including expenses related to professional fees and insurance, as well as a result of stock based compensation expense. We also expect fluctuations in our general and administrative expenses to the extent the recognition timing of stock compensation is impacted by market conditions relating to our stock price. In addition, we anticipate that our general and administrative expenses may be adversely impacted by the continuing COVID-19 pandemic at least for the near term.
Amortization of Intangible Assets from Acquisitions. Intangible amortization expenses was $5.3 million and $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively, The expense was associated with amortization of intangible assets acquired in the Telmetrics, Callcap, and Sonar acquisitions. During 2020 and 2021, the amortization of intangibles related to service costs, sales and marketing and general and administrative expenses. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recorded an impairment charge totaling $5.0 million relating to our intangible assets from acquisitions. For additional information, see the discussion in “Impairment of Goodwill and Impairment of Intangible Assets from Acquisitions” below.
Acquisition and Disposition-related Benefits. The change in the acquisition and disposition-related benefits from $1.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to an expense of $142,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to a $1.5 million adjustment in 2020 to the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration liabilities related to our acquisitions of Telmetrics in November 2018 and of Sonar in December 2019. In 2021, we incurred professional and related fees primarily associated with acquisition and disposition related matters.
Impairment of Goodwill and Impairment of Intangible Assets from Acquisitions. During the first quarter of 2020, we recognized a goodwill impairment loss of $14.7 million. We did not identify indicators of a goodwill impairment during the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we have $17.6 million of goodwill remaining on our balance sheet.
In the first quarter of 2020, we performed an interim impairment test of our long-lived intangible assets. Based on the results of this testing, we recorded a pretax non-cash impairment totaling $5.0 million relating to customer relationships, technologies, non-compete agreements and tradenames. This charge is reflected in our Consolidated Statements of Operations for the year ending December 31, 2020. The identified intangible assets acquired in the Telmetrics, Callcap and Sonar acquisitions are being amortized on a straight-line basis over a range of useful lives of 12 to 60 months.
The current business environment is subject to evolving market conditions and requires significant management judgment to interpret the potential impact to our assumptions. To the extent that changes in the current business environment impact our ability to achieve levels of forecasted operating results and cash flows, or should other events occur indicating the remaining carrying value of our assets might be impaired, we would test our goodwill and intangible assets for impairment and may recognize an additional impairment loss to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds such assets’ fair values. No additional impairment of our intangible assets has been discovered since the first quarter of 2020. We will continue to monitor our financial performance, stock price and other factors in order to determine if there are any additional indicators of impairment. As a result, we may record an additional impairment loss in the near or intermediate term, which could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Loan Extinguishment. In the second quarter of 2020, we received loans through the CARES Act. In the third quarter 2021, we were legally released from our obligation and recognized a $5.2 million gain on loan extinguishment from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Income and Other, net. The interest income and other, net from continuing operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 was $123,000 and $2.5 million, respectively. In the second quarter 2021, we received $2.5 million related to a contractual settlement of an upside payment with previously divested properties.
Income Tax (Benefit). The income tax (benefit) from continuing operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021 was ($1.9 million) and $235,000, respectively. The income tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of state income taxes. The income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of deferred tax benefits related to one of our foreign jurisdictions and an allocation of profits to discontinued operations, offset in part by U.S. state income tax expense. The effective tax rate differed from the expected tax rate of 21% due to a full valuation allowance, non-taxable CARES Act loan extinguishment income, and to a lesser extent due to state income taxes, non-deductible stock-based compensation related to incentive stock options recorded under the fair-value method, and other non-deductible amounts.
At December 31, 2021, based on all the available evidence, both positive and negative, we determined that it is not more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized and accordingly, we have recorded a 100% valuation allowance of $53.1 million against our net deferred tax assets ($53.9 million of deferred tax assets that are partially offset by $802,000 in reversing deferred tax liabilities). This compares to a 100% valuation allowance of $43.3 million at December 31, 2020 ($44.6 million of deferred tax assets that are partially offset by $1.3 million in reversing deferred tax liabilities). In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, based on all the available evidence, both positive and negative, we considered whether it is more likely than not that some or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets depends on the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences are deductible. We considered the future reversal of deferred tax liabilities, carryback potential, projected taxable income, and tax planning strategies as well as the Company’s history of taxable income or losses in the relevant jurisdictions in making this assessment. We have incurred federal taxable losses in 2020 and 2021.
Discontinued Operations, net of tax. In October 2020, we sold certain assets related to the Local Leads Platform, Call Marketplace and other assets note related to core conversational analytics. The operating results related to these dispositions are shown as discontinued operations, net of tax. Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In the October 2020 sale, we received net cash proceeds at closing of $2.3 million and the sale includes contingent earn-out payments that depend on the achievement of certain sales thresholds. No gain or loss on the sale of discontinued operations
was recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Operations as it was sold to a related party. See Note 11: Discontinued Operations of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion.
Net Loss. Net loss from continuing operations decreased $37.6 million, or 90%, from $42.0 million in 2020 compared to $4.4 million in 2021. The decrease in loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to impairment charge related to goodwill and long-lived intangible assets with no corresponding amounts in the 2021 period. Further, the decrease was driven by a $5.2 million gain on loan extinguishment and lower product development, general and administrative, and sales and marketing operating expenditures.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2020 and 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $33.9 million and $27.1 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had current and long-term contractual obligations of $4.3 million, of which $3.3 million is for rent under our facility operating leases.
Cash used in operating activities was $6.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash used in operating activities was primarily a result of a net loss of $4.4 million, adjusted for non-cash items of $3.8 million, which primarily included depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, and a gain on loan extinguishment, offset by changes in working capital of $5.8 million. The change in working capital was driven primarily by a decrease in accrued expenses and other current liabilities as well as increases in accounts receivable and other current asset balances. Our cash used in operating activities benefited from cash inflow of $2.5 million related to settlement of a contractual matter and $444,000 related to foreign government paycheck assistance and rent subsidies. Cash used in operating activities was $3.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which approximately $7.0 million was used by continuing operations and $3.6 was provided by discontinued operations. The cash used in continuing operations was primarily a result of a net loss of $42.0 million, adjusted for non-cash items of $29.6 million, which primarily included the aggregate estimated impairment of goodwill and intangible assets from acquisitions of $19.6 million, in addition to depreciation and amortization, stock based compensation, the allowance for doubtful accounts and other changes in working capital, offset by an adjustment to the estimated fair value of our contingent consideration liability related to our acquisitions of Telmetrics in November 2018 and Sonar in December 2019.
We expect that, at least for the near term, our revenues may continue to recover if macroeconomic conditions improve and business interruptions caused by the continuing pandemic subside resulting in increased demand for our products and services. However, we continue to monitor the potential disruptions caused by future iterations of COVID-19 and supply chain issues that have ensued, which could cause our revenues to be lower than current levels if customers are unable to procure our services at the same volumes as previously. The adverse impact would reduce our operating cash flows and liquidity going forward.
Cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $951,000 and was primarily attributable to cash paid for purchases of property and equipment as well as capitalized software development costs offset by proceeds for the sale of our equity interest in Archenia. Cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $981,000 and was all attributable to continuing operations and was primarily attributable to cash received from the sale of certain assets related to the Local Leads Platform, Call Marketplace and other assets note related to core conversational analytics in October 2020, partially offset by cash paid for purchases of property and equipment. Consideration received at closing consisted of cash proceeds of $2.3 million.
We expect property and equipment purchases in the near and intermediate term to be modestly higher compared to our most recent periods. We expect any increase to our operations to have a corresponding increase in expenditures for our systems and personnel. In consideration of initiatives related to an increase in our operations, we expect our expenditures for product development initiatives will be relatively stable to modestly higher in the near and intermediate term and increase in the longer term in absolute dollars with any acceleration in development activities and as we increase the number of personnel and consultants to enhance our service offerings. In the intermediate to long term, we also expect to increase the number of personnel supporting our sales and marketing and related growth initiatives.
Cash provided by financing activities was $528,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The cash provided was primarily attributable to proceeds from stock options and the employee stock purchase program. Cash used in financing activities was $5.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, of which approximately $5.7 million was used by continuing operations and $200,000 was provided by discontinued operations. The cash provided was primarily attributable to proceeds received as part of the CARES Act funding. During the second quarter of 2020, we secured promissory notes to bank lenders pursuant to government loan programs (“the Loans”). In the third quarter of 2021, we were legally released from our obligation as our application was approved by the SBA. Therefore, we recognized a non-cash gain of approximately $5.1 million for the forgiveness of our principal.
The repurchases of common stock were a result of a joint and equal tender with Edenbrook Capital LLC for 10 million shares of the Company's Class B common stock at $2.15 per share, of which the Company's share of the repurchase totaled approximately $10.8 million for 5 million shares. In November 2014, our board of directors authorized a new share repurchase program (the “2014 Repurchase Program”) which supersedes and replaces any prior repurchase programs. Under the 2014 Repurchase Program, we are authorized to repurchase up to 3 million shares of our Class B common stock in the aggregate through open market and privately negotiated transactions, at such times and in such amounts as we deem appropriate. Repurchases may also be made under a Rule 10b5-1 plan, which would permit shares to be repurchased when we might otherwise be precluded from doing so under insider trading laws. We have made no repurchases under the 2014 Repurchase Program for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2021.
Based on our operating plans we believe that our resources will be sufficient to fund our operations, including any investments in strategic initiatives, for at least twelve months, however the length and severity of the pandemic could influence our operating plans and resources significantly. Additional equity and debt financing may be needed to support our acquisition strategy, our long-term obligations and our company’s needs. There can be no assurance that, if we needed additional funds, financing arrangements would be available in amounts or on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Failure to generate sufficient revenue or raise additional capital could have a material adverse effect on our ability to continue as a going concern and to achieve our intended business objectives.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our Consolidated Financial Statements have been prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (U.S. GAAP). Our critical accounting policies are those that we believe have the most significant impact to reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities and that require the most difficult, subjective, or complex judgements.
The policies below are critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. In the ordinary course of business, we make a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of our results. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1: Description of Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies and Practices, we believe the following topics reflect our critical accounting policies and our more significant judgement and estimates used in the preparation of our financial statements.
Principles of Consolidation
Our Company consolidates all entities that we control by ownership of a majority voting interest. Additionally, there are situations in which U.S. GAAP requires consolidation even though the usual condition of consolidation (ownership of a majority voting interest) does not apply. Generally, this occurs when an entity holds an interest in another business enterprise that was achieved through arrangements that do not involve voting interests, which results in a disproportionate relationship between such entity's voting interests in, and its exposure to the economic risks and potential rewards of, the other business enterprise. This disproportionate relationship results in what is known as a variable interest, and the entity in which we have the variable interest is referred to as a "VIE." An enterprise must consolidate a VIE if it is determined to be the primary beneficiary of the VIE. The primary beneficiary has both (1) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the entity's economic performance and (2) the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
Our Company held a remaining interest in the related party purchaser of our divested operations, for which we determined we were not the primary beneficiary. At the time, our variable interests in this VIE primarily relate to the issuance of a 10% equity interest in the related party purchaser; contingent consideration related to the transaction; and an administrative support services arrangement. We sold our equity interest in Q3 2021. Refer to Note 11: Discontinued Operations. Although this financial arrangement resulted in our holding variable interests in this related party entity, it did not empower us to direct the strategic and operational activities of the VIE that most significantly impact the VIE’s economic performance.
All inter-company transactions and balances have been eliminated in consolidation. Certain reclassifications have been made to the Consolidated Financial Statements in the prior periods to conform to the current period presentation.
Revenue
We generate the majority of our revenues from core analytics and solutions services. Our call analytics technology platform provides data and insights that can measure the performance of calls and texts for our customers. We generate revenue from our call analytics technology platform when customers pay us a fee for each call, text, or other communication related data element they receive from calls or texts or for each phone number tracked based on a pre-negotiated rate. As such, the majority of total revenue is derived from contracts that include consideration that is variable in nature. The variable elements of these contracts primarily include the number of transactions (for example, the number qualified phone calls).
Customers typically receive the benefit of our services as they are performed and substantially all of our revenue is recognized over time as services are performed. The majority of the Company’s customers are invoiced on a monthly basis following the month of the delivery of services and are required to make payments under standard credit terms.
For arrangements that include multiple performance obligations, the transaction price from the arrangement is allocated to each respective performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price and recognized when revenue recognition criteria for each performance obligation are met. The standalone selling price for each performance obligation is established based on the sales price at which we would sell a promised good or service separately to a customer or the estimated standalone selling price.
In certain cases, we record revenue based on available and reported preliminary information from third parties. Collection on the related receivables may vary from reported information based upon third-party refinement of the estimated and reported amounts owed that occurs subsequent to period ends.
Stock-Based Compensation
FASB ASC Topic 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation (ASC 718) requires the measurement and recognition of compensation for all stock-based awards made to employees, non-employees and directors including stock options, restricted stock issuances, and restricted stock units be based on estimated fair values.
We account for forfeitures as they occur. We measure stock-based compensation cost at the grant date based on the fair value of the award and recognize it as expense over the vesting or service period, as applicable, of the stock-based award using the straight-line method.
We generally use the Black-Scholes option pricing model as our method of valuation for stock-based awards with time-based vesting. Our determination of the fair value of stock-based awards on the date of grant using an option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of highly complex and subjective variables. These variables include, but are not limited to, the expected life of the award, our expected stock price, volatility over the term of the award and actual and projected exercise behaviors.
Although the fair value of stock-based awards is determined in accordance with ASC 718, Compensation - Stock Compensation the assumptions used in calculating fair value of stock-based awards and the use of the Black-Scholes option pricing model is highly subjective, and other reasonable assumptions could provide differing results. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. See Note 6: Stockholders' Equity(b). Stock Option Plan in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts and Advertiser Credits
Accounts receivable balances are presented net of allowance for doubtful accounts and advertiser credits. The allowance for doubtful accounts is our best estimate of the amount of probable credit losses in our accounts receivable. We determine our allowance based on analysis of historical bad debts, advertiser concentrations, advertiser creditworthiness and current economic trends. We review the allowance for collectability on a quarterly basis. Account balances are written off against the allowance after all reasonable means of collection have been exhausted and the potential recovery is considered remote. If the financial condition of our advertisers were to deteriorate, resulting in an impairment of their ability to make payments, or if we underestimated the allowances required, additional allowances may be required which would result in increased general and administrative expenses in the period such determination was made.
We determine our allowance for advertiser credits and adjustments based upon our analysis of historical credits. Material differences may result in the amount and timing of our revenue for any period if our management made different judgments and estimates.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed in business combinations accounted for under the purchase method. Intangible assets from acquisitions represent customer relationships, technologies, non-compete agreements, and tradenames related to previous acquisitions. These assets are determined to have definite lives and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated period over which we expect to realize economic value related to the intangible asset. The amortization periods range from one year to 5 years.
We apply the provisions of the FASB ASC Topic 350, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other” (ASC 350) whereby assets acquired in a purchase business combination and determined to have an indefinite useful life are not amortized, but instead test for impairment at least annually. ASC 350 also requires that intangible assets with definite useful lives be amortized over the respective estimated lives to their estimated residual values and reviewed for impairment in accordance with ASC 360, “Property Plant and Equipment” (ASC 360). Intangible assets are "grouped" and evaluated for impairment at the lowest level of identifiable cash flows.
Goodwill is tested annually on November 30 for impairment. Goodwill and intangible assets are also tested more frequently if events and circumstances indicate that the assets might be impaired. The provisions of the accounting standard for goodwill and other intangible assets allow us to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is necessary to perform a quantitative impairment test. Events and circumstances considered in determining whether the carrying value of goodwill and intangible assets may not be recoverable include but are not limited to: significant changes in performance relative to expected operating results; significant changes in the use of the assets; and significant changes in competition and market dynamics. These estimates are inherently uncertain and can be affected by numerous factors, including changes in economic, industry or market conditions, changes in business operations, a loss of a significant customer, changes in
competition or changes in the share price of common stock and market capitalization. If our stock price were to trade below book value per share for an extended period of time and/or we experience adverse effects of a continued downward trend in the overall economic environment, changes in the business itself, including changes in projected earnings and cash flows, we may have to recognize an impairment of all or some portion of our goodwill and intangible assets. An impairment loss is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds the asset or asset group’s fair value. If the fair value is lower than the carrying value, a material impairment charge may be reported in our financial results. We exercise judgment in the assessment of the related useful lives of intangible assets, the fair values, and the recoverability. In certain instances, the fair value is determined in part based on cash flow forecasts and discount rate estimates. We cannot accurately predict the amount and timing of any impairment of goodwill or intangible assets. Should the value of goodwill or intangible assets become impaired, we would record the appropriate charge, which could have an adverse effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Any future impairment charges could have a material adverse effect on our financial results.
Provision for Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and certain international jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in evaluating our uncertain tax positions and determining our provision for income taxes. We utilize the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases and operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax law is recognized in results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date.
We determined that it is not more likely than not that our deferred tax assets (excluding certain insignificant Canadian deferred tax assets) will be realized and accordingly recorded 100% valuation allowance against these deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2020 and 2021. In assessing whether it is more likely than not that our deferred tax assets will be realized, factors considered included: historical taxable income, historical trends related to advertiser usage rates, projected revenues and expenses, macroeconomic conditions, issues facing the industry, existing contracts, our ability to project future results and any appreciation of its other assets. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets depends on the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences are deductible. We considered the future reversal of deferred tax liabilities, carryback potential, projected taxable income, and tax planning strategies as well as its history of taxable income or losses in the relevant jurisdictions in making this assessment. Based on the level of historical taxable losses and the uncertainty of projections for future taxable income over the periods for which the deferred tax assets are deductible, we concluded that it is not more likely than not that the gross deferred tax assets will be realized.
From time to time, various state, federal, and other jurisdictional tax authorities undertake reviews of us and our filings. We believe any adjustments that may ultimately be required as a result of any of these reviews will not be material to the financial statements.