Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements regarding our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and projections. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Important factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Summary Risk Factors” and Part I and Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
A discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, including a year-to-year comparison between 2021 and 2020, is presented below. For a discussion regarding our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2019, including a year-to-year comparison between 2020 and 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 2, 2021.
Overview
We are a microbiome therapeutics company developing a novel class of live biotherapeutic drugs, which are consortia of microbes designed to treat disease by modulating the microbiome to treat or reduce disease by repairing the function of a disease susceptible microbiome to a non-disease state. We have an advanced drug pipeline with late-stage clinical assets that are formulated for oral delivery and a differentiated microbiome therapeutics drug discovery and development platform including good manufacturing practices, or GMP, manufacturing capabilities for this novel drug modality.
Our highest priority is preparing a biologics license application, or BLA, for submission to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA, and preparing for potential commercialization of SER-109, an investigational oral microbiome therapeutic in development for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection, or CDI. We intend to seek agreement with the FDA to begin a rolling BLA submission for SER-109 in the first half of 2022 and to finalize the submission with data from the safety database in mid-2022. SER-109 has obtained Breakthrough Therapy designation, and as a result, we expect priority review by the FDA.
We are also designing microbiome therapeutics to decolonize pathogens and modulate host function to reduce and prevent infections. We believe that the scientific and clinical data from our SER-109 program validate this novel approach, which we refer to as infection protection. We believe the infection protection approach may be replicable across different bacterial pathogens to develop microbiome therapeutics with the potential to protect a range of medically compromised patients from infections. We are evaluating SER-155 in a Phase 1b study in patients receiving allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, or allo-HSCT, to reduce incidences of gastrointestinal infections, bloodstream infections and graft-versus-host disease, or GvHD. We are also evaluating additional preclinical stage programs in indications such as cancer neutropenia, solid organ transplant, and antimicrobial resistant infections more broadly.
We continue to focus our resources on evaluating SER-301 in a Phase 1b study in patients with mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis, or UC, and on analyzing additional biomarker data from our Phase 2b study evaluating SER-287 in patients with mild-to-moderate UC. In July 2021, we announced topline results from the SER-287 Phase 2b study, which did not meet its primary endpoint of improving clinical remission rates compared to placebo. Following the data readout, in December 2021, we completed preliminary microbiome drug pharmacology analyses that demonstrated the successful engraftment of SER-287 bacterial species. However, unlike the Phase 1b study, anticipated changes in disease-relevant metabolites post-administration with SER-287 in the Phase 2b study were not observed. In addition, we have completed preliminary analysis of data from the first cohort of the SER-301 Phase 1b study, which included 15 subjects. Evaluation of the first cohort data by an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board indicated that it would be safe to proceed to the placebo-controlled second cohort. While efficacy was not a defined endpoint in the first cohort, evaluation of clinical outcome data collected as part of the study indicated that no subjects in the first cohort achieved clinical remission as defined by the FDA using the Three-Component Modified Mayo Score after 10 weeks of treatment, though there were improvements in one or more individual components (endoscopic, stool frequency and rectal bleeding subscores) in some patients. Strains in SER-301 were observed to engraft in subjects across the trial period, and based on the assessment of metabolomic data, SER-301 demonstrated pharmacological properties consistent with its design and led to baseline-dependent modulation of the metabolic landscape in the gastrointestinal tract of patients treated. We continue to conduct analyses of data from our SER-287 and SER-301 UC clinical stage programs to inform next steps for further development.
In addition, we continue to evaluate opportunities to advance our technology in modulating host immunity to have an impact on and treat diseases such as cancer and various autoimmune diseases.
Since our inception in October 2010, we have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our programs, platforms, and technologies, building our intellectual property portfolio, developing our supply chain, business planning, raising capital and providing general and administrative support for these operations.
Many of our product candidates are still in preclinical development or early-stage discovery. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one
or more of our product candidates. Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our net loss was $65.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $614.4 million and cash, cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments totaling $291.2 million. Based on our current plans and forecasted expenses, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2021 and proceeds, net of facility fees and expenses, of $27.6 million received in February 2022 in connection with the Second Amendment, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, debt service obligations and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12-months from issuance of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
While we plan to focus our investment on our highest priority clinical programs in the near-term, our expenses may increase substantially in connection with our ongoing and planned activities, particularly as we:
•complete the clinical development, seek regulatory approval, and prepare for commercialization of SER-109 for patients with recurrent CDI;
•re-evaluate the clinical development of SER-287 for the treatment of UC in light of the Phase 2b clinical study results and in conjunction with the additional microbiome biomarker data;
•continue the clinical development of SER-301 for the treatment of UC;
•continue the clinical development of SER-155 to address gastrointestinal infections, bacteremia and graft-versus-host disease;
•make strategic investments in our research discovery and development platforms and capabilities, including identifying candidates for additional disease indications;
•make strategic investments in manufacturing capabilities;
•maintain and augment our intellectual property portfolio and opportunistically acquire complementary intellectual property;
•potentially establish a sales and distribution infrastructure and scale-up manufacturing capabilities to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•perform our obligations under our agreements with our collaborators;
•seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates; and
•experience any delays or encounter any issues with any of the above, including but not limited to failed studies, complex results, safety issues or other regulatory challenges.
In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution. Furthermore, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity or debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. For example, the trading prices for our and other biopharmaceutical companies’ stock have been highly volatile as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, we may face difficulties raising capital through sales of our common stock and any such sales may be on unfavorable terms. Our inability to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
We are monitoring the ongoing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and have taken steps to identify and mitigate the adverse impacts on, and risks to, our business posed by its spread and actions taken by governmental and health authorities to address it. The spread of COVID-19 has caused us to modify our business practices, including implementing a work from home policy for all employees who are able to perform their duties remotely and restricting all nonessential travel, and we expect to continue to take actions as may be required or recommended by government authorities or as we determine are in the best interests of our employees, and other business partners in light of COVID-19. The impact of COVID-19 on our future results will largely depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, such as the ultimate geographic spread of the disease, the duration and severity of the pandemic, the impact of variants, travel restrictions and social distancing recommendations and regulations in the United States and other countries, business closures or business disruptions, the ultimate impact on financial markets and the global economy, the effectiveness and uptake of vaccines and vaccine distribution efforts and the effectiveness of other actions taken in the United States and other countries to contain and treat the disease. See “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Operations-The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and could continue to adversely impact, our business, including our
preclinical studies and clinical trials, results of operations and financial condition” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
SER-109
SER-109 is an oral microbiome therapeutic candidate consisting of a consortium of purified Firmicutes spores. The SER-109 manufacturing purification process is designed to remove unwanted microbes in an effort to reduce the risk of pathogen transmission beyond donor screening alone. SER-109 is designed to reduce recurrent CDI in patients with a history of CDI by modulating the microbiome to a state that resists C. difficile germination and growth. SER-109, if approved, is designed to treat individuals with recurrent CDI, a patient population which includes approximately 170,000 cases per year in the United States.
The Phase 3 ECOSPOR III study was a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled study that enrolled 182 patients with multiply recurrent CDI. All patients who entered ECOSPOR III must have tested positive for C. difficile toxin. This inclusion criterion was implemented in an effort to ensure enrollment of only patients with active infection rather than simple colonization. The study was designed to evaluate patients for 24 weeks, with the primary endpoint comparing the C. difficile recurrence rate in subjects who received SER-109 verses placebo at up to eight weeks after dosing.
Previously reported topline data demonstrated that the study achieved its primary endpoint where SER-109 was superior to placebo in reducing CDI recurrence at eight weeks, reflecting a sustained clinical response rate of approximately 88% at eight weeks post-treatment. SER-109 resulted in a 27% absolute reduction of recurrence of CDI compared to placebo at eight weeks post-treatment, which is a relative risk reduction of 68%. The number-needed-to treat was 3.6. The rate of recurrence at 12 weeks in the SER-109 arm was 18.0%, compared to a rate of 46.2% in the placebo arm, representing an absolute risk reduction of 28% (relative risk 0.40; 95% CI 0.24-0.65; p <0.001 and p< 0.002 for the test sequence), and thereby consistent with the results seen at eight weeks. Results across stratifications of age and antibiotics remained similar. The study’s efficacy results related to the primary endpoint from all analyses exceeded the statistical threshold previously provided in consultation with the FDA that could allow this single clinical study to fulfill efficacy requirements for a BLA. The efficacy remained durable through 24 weeks of follow-up, as SER-109 was observed to significantly reduced recurrence rates compared to placebo over 24 weeks, 21.3% vs. 47.3%, respectively. In January 2022, these data were published in the New England Journal of Medicine (N Engl J Med 2022;386(3):220-229).
We believe the SER-109 safety results across completed studies have been favorable, with an adverse event profile comparable to placebo. In September 2021, we achieved target enrollment of 300 subjects with the ECOSPOR IV open-label study. The target enrollment of a minimum of 300 subjects for the SER-109 safety database was reached in conjunction with a prior completed Phase 3 study, ECOSPOR III. Seres is required by the FDA to demonstrate safety of SER-109 in at least 300 subjects who have received the dose to be commercialized, consistent with standard FDA guidance, with a 24-week follow-up period, to support a BLA submission. The ECOSPOR IV open-label study includes patients with recurrent CDI, including individuals with a first recurrence of CDI. We intend to seek agreement with the FDA to begin a rolling BLA submission for SER-109 in the first half of 2022 and finalize the submission with data from the safety database in mid-2022. SER-109 has obtained Breakthrough Therapy designation, and as a result, we expect priority review by the FDA.
In November 2021, we initiated a SER-109 expanded access program across the United States. The program is designed to enable eligible adults with recurrent CDI to obtain access to SER-109 prior to a potential FDA product approval.
SER-155
SER-155, an oral microbiome therapeutic candidate consisting of a consortium of cultivated bacteria, is designed to decrease infection and translocation of antibiotic resistant bacteria in the gastrointestinal tract and modulate host immune responses to decrease GvHD. The rationale for this program is based in part on published clinical evidence from our collaborators at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center showing that allo-HSCT patients with decreased diversity of commensal microbes are significantly more likely to die due to infection and/or lethal GvHD. SER-155 was designed using our reverse translational discovery platform to reduce incidences of gastrointestinal infections, bloodstream infections and GvHD in patients receiving allo-HSCT. The SER-155 Phase 1b study is designed to include approximately 70 patients in both an open-label and a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled cohort that will evaluate safety and tolerability before and after HSCT. Additionally, the engraftment of SER-155 bacteria (a measure of pharmacokinetics) and the efficacy of SER-155 in preventing infections and GvHD will be evaluated. In November 2021, we enrolled the first patient in the SER-155 Phase 1b study.
SER-287
SER-287, an oral microbiome therapeutic candidate consisting of a consortium of purified Firmicutes spores, is designed to restore a healthy gastrointestinal microbiome in individuals with UC. There are over 700,000 UC patients in the United States and fewer than one-third of patients on current therapies achieve remission. Approved treatments are often inadequate to control disease activity and are often associated with significant side effects, including immunosuppression. SER-287 has been granted Fast Track Designation by the FDA for the induction and maintenance of clinical remission in adult subjects with active mild-to-moderate UC. SER-287 has been designated an Orphan Drug for pediatric UC by the FDA.
In July 2021, we announced topline results from the Phase 2b study evaluating SER-287 in patients with mild-to-moderate UC. The study did not meet its primary endpoint of improving clinical remission rates compared to placebo. The primary objective of the induction portion of the Phase 2b study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of SER-287, after 10 weeks of induction dosing (following vancomycin pre-conditioning) in achieving clinical remission in participants with mild-to-moderate UC. The trial was a randomized, placebo controlled, double blind, parallel group multicenter study which enrolled 203 UC patients at approximately 100 sites throughout the U.S. and Canada. Dosing was explored in two SER-287 cohorts (full induction dose and step-down induction dose) versus placebo and patients were randomized according to a 1:1:1 ratio. Clinical remission was analyzed and defined by a 3-component modified Mayo Score. No statistically significant differences were observed in absolute clinical remission rates between the three treatment arms (10.3% for the full induction dose, n=68 and 10.6% for the step-down induction dose, n=66 versus 11.6% for placebo, n=69). There were also no statistically significant differences observed across the three treatment groups for endoscopic improvement, endoscopic remission or symptomatic remission.
Both dosing regimens of SER-287 were generally well tolerated. Treatment emergent adverse events, or AEs, were observed in 67.6%, 46.2% and 50.7% of subjects in the induction dose, step-down dose (both of which included six days of oral vancomycin preconditioning) and placebo treatment arms, respectively. The majority of observed AEs were mild or moderate in severity. The most commonly observed AEs were UC, diarrhea, nausea and abdominal distension. Four participants on active treatment reported serious treatment emergent adverse events (worsening UC, colonic dysplasia, congestive heart failure with decreased hemoglobin, and appendicitis), as did one on placebo (worsening UC).
Given the lack of a clinical efficacy signal identified in the Phase 2b study, we have closed the open label and maintenance portions of the study.
In December 2021, we completed preliminary microbiome drug pharmacology analyses from the Phase 2b study that demonstrated the successful engraftment of SER-287 bacterial species. Based on the SER-287 Phase 2b microbiome data analyses, engraftment of SER-287 bacteria, measured as the median number of bacteria observed across patients post treatment, was statistically significant in patients receiving SER-287 versus placebo (p ≤ 0.001 at all timepoints). The magnitude and kinetics of engraftment were comparable to our Phase 1b study. However, unlike the Phase 1b study, anticipated changes in disease-relevant metabolites post-administration with SER-287 in the Phase 2b study were not observed. Analysis of the genomic and metabolomic data characterizing the microbiome of SER-287 study participants at baseline and post dosing suggest potential biomarkers for inclusion of targeted patient subpopulations in future development efforts.
We continue to conduct analyses of data from our SER-287 and SER-301 UC clinical stage programs to inform next steps for further development.
SER-301
SER-301 is an oral microbiome therapeutics candidate comprised of a consortium of cultivated bacteria for the treatment of mild-to-moderate UC. SER-301 is a consortium of cultivated bacteria designed using our reverse translational discovery platform that incorporates analysis of microbiome biomarkers from human clinical data and preclinical assessments using human cell-based assays and in vitro/ex vivo and in vivo disease models. The design of SER-301 incorporates insights obtained from the SER-287 Phase 1b clinical and microbiome results, as well as from our clinical portfolio more broadly, and additional functional data from preclinical assessments, in an effort to optimize desired pharmacological properties.
SER-301 is designed to reduce induction of pro-inflammatory activity, improve epithelial barrier integrity and TNF-α driven inflammation in intestinal epithelial cells, or IECs, and modulate UC-relevant anti-inflammatory, innate and adaptive immune pathways. SER-301 is being produced by our advanced fermentation, formulation and delivery platforms. It includes strains delivered in spore form, as well as strains fermented in non-spore (vegetative) form and delivered using enterically-protected technology designed to release in the colon.
The SER-301 Phase 1b study is being conducted in Australia and New Zealand in subjects with mild-to-moderate UC and is designed to include approximately 65 patients distributed across two cohorts. In November 2020 we enrolled the first patient in the SER-301 Phase 1b study. As a result of enrolling the first patient in the clinical study, we received a $10.0 million milestone payment under our collaboration and license agreement, or the 2016 License Agreement, with Société des Produits Nestlé S.A., or, together with NHSc Pharma Partners, Nestlé, successor in interest to Nestec, Ltd.
We have completed preliminary analysis of data from the first cohort of the SER-301 Phase 1b study, which included 15 subjects. Evaluation of the first cohort data by an independent Data Safety Monitoring Board indicated that it would be safe to proceed to the placebo-controlled second cohort. While efficacy was not a defined endpoint in the first cohort, evaluation of clinical outcome data collected as part of the study indicated that no subjects in the first cohort achieved clinical remission as defined by the FDA using the Three-Component Modified Mayo Score after 10 weeks of treatment, though there were improvements in one or more individual components (endoscopic, stool frequency and rectal bleeding subscores) in some patients. Strains in SER-301 were observed to engraft in subjects across the trial period with the number of engrafting strains exceeding expectations at multiple sampling time points. A dual formulation was evaluated in the first cohort and the extent of engraftment across subjects was correlated with whether
bacteria were formulated as bacterial spores versus vegetative strains; the former demonstrating stronger engraftment across all patients.
Based on the assessment of metabolomic data, SER-301 demonstrated pharmacological properties consistent with its design and led to baseline-dependent modulation of the metabolic landscape in the gastrointestinal tract of patients treated; changes were observed in short-chain and medium-chain fatty acids, tryptophan-derived metabolites, bile acids, and other microbe-associated metabolites, as well as host metabolites associated with a non-disease state. These SER-301 metabolomic results were encouraging compared with the results observed in the SER-287 Phase 2b study, in which the metabolic changes were not observed in general across subjects administered with SER-287. Additionally, changes in disease-relevant metabolites in SER-301 were observed to be greater in a definable subpopulation of patients.
The degree of metabolic changes observed following SER-301 administration appeared to be dependent on the baseline metabolic profile of the study subjects, providing support for the potential for microbiome therapeutics to be developed in biomarker-identified UC patient subpopulations.
We continue to conduct analyses of data from our SER-287 and SER-301 UC clinical stage programs to inform next steps for further development.
SER-401
In March 2021, we announced that we, in collaboration with study partners, The Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy and The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, voluntarily discontinued further enrollment of our study evaluating the safety and drug activity of SER-401 or fecal microbiota transplant, or FMT, in combination with nivolumab in patients with metastatic melanoma.
A preliminary analysis of results from 10 subjects who received either SER-401 or placebo in combination with nivolumab indicated that SER-401 was safe and well-tolerated. There were no patients enrolled in the FMT portion of the study. Subjects currently enrolled in the study will complete the study protocol. Given challenges in enrollment due to the COVID-19 pandemic, subsequent anticipated time to study completion, and progress in our preclinical oncology pipeline, we have decided to deprioritize further development of SER-401. We will continue to advance our research and development efforts in cancer, applying learnings from the SER-401 trial.
Intellectual Property
Patent Portfolio
We have an extensive patent portfolio directed to rationally designed ecologies of spores and microbes. The portfolio includes both company-owned patents and applications, and those that we have rights to as licensee. For example, our portfolio includes an option to license foundational intellectual property related to the use of bacteria in combination with checkpoint inhibitors from MD Anderson. The patents and applications included in our portfolio cover both composition of matter and methods (e.g., method of treating). Our intellectual property rights related to SER-109 (C. difficile) and SER-287 (ulcerative colitis) extend through 2034. We plan on continuing to broaden our patent portfolio. Currently, we have 24 active patent application families, which includes 21 nationalized applications and three pending at the PCT stage. To date, we have obtained 18 issued U.S. patents and one U.S. patent application that has been allowed.
Regulatory Exclusivity
If we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to receive marketing exclusivity against biosimilar products. For a new biological composition approved by the FDA, a 12-year period of exclusivity in the United States may be obtained. In Europe, the European Medicines Agency awards 10 years of exclusivity for new molecular entities.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue	
To date we have not generated any revenues from the sale of products. Our revenues have been derived primarily from our agreements with our collaborators. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses since inception have consisted primarily of research and development activities and general and administrative costs.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our discovery efforts and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•expenses incurred under agreements with third parties, including contract research organizations, or CROs, that conduct research, pre-clinical activities and clinical trials on our behalf as well as contract manufacturing organizations that manufacture drug products for use in our pre-clinical and clinical trials;
•salaries, benefits and other related costs, including stock-based compensation expense, for personnel in our research and development functions;
•costs of outside consultants, including their fees, stock-based compensation and related travel expenses;
•the cost of laboratory supplies and acquiring, developing and manufacturing pre-clinical study and clinical trial materials;
•costs related to compliance with regulatory requirements; and
•facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. We recognize external development costs based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using information provided to us by our vendors and our clinical investigative sites. Payments for these activities are based on the terms of the individual agreements, which may differ from the pattern of costs incurred, and are reflected in our financial statements as prepaid or accrued research and development expenses.
Our primary focus of research and development since inception has been on our microbiome therapeutics platform and the subsequent development of our product candidates. Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program basis and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to investigators, consultants, CROs in connection with our pre-clinical studies and clinical trials, lab supplies and consumables, and regulatory fees. We do not allocate employee-related costs and other indirect costs to specific research and development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product programs under development and, as such, are classified as costs of our microbiome therapeutics platform research, along with external costs directly related to our microbiome therapeutics platform.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to increase in the foreseeable future as we complete clinical development, seek regulatory approval, and prepare for commercialization of SER-109, re-evaluate the clinical development of SER-287, continue to discover and develop additional product candidates, including SER-301 and SER-155 and pursue later stages of clinical development of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in our executive, finance, corporate, commercial, and business development and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters; professional fees for accounting, auditing, tax and consulting services; insurance costs; travel expenses; and facility-related expenses, which include direct depreciation costs and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities and other operating costs.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support the potential growth in our research and development activities and the potential commercialization of our product candidates, and as we conduct pre-launch activities to prepare for commercialization of SER-109. We also may continue to incur increased expenses associated with being a public company, including increased costs of accounting, audit, legal, regulatory and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and the requirements of the Securities and Exchange Commission, director and officer insurance costs and investor and public relations costs.
Collaboration (Profit) Loss Sharing - related party
Collaboration (profit) loss sharing - related party includes 50% sharing of the profit or loss related to the pre-launch activities and commercialization activities associated with the license agreement that we entered into with NHSc Pharma Partners (Nestle) in July 2021 as discussed in Note 12 to our consolidated financial statements.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Interest (Expense) Income, Net
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash, cash equivalents and investments.
Interest expense consists of interest incurred under our loan and security agreement with Hercules.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income primarily consists of amortization of premiums on investments, offset by sublease income.
Income Taxes
Since our inception in 2010, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or our earned research and development tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had federal and state net operating loss carryforwards of $402.5 million and $394.1 million, respectively, both of which begin to expire in 2035. As of December 31, 2021, we also had federal and state research and development tax credit carryforwards of $43.7 million and $11.9 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2031 and 2028, respectively. The federal research and development tax credits include an orphan drug credit carryforward of $23.7 million.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, in the United States. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We believe that the estimates and assumptions involved in the accounting policies described below may have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements and, therefore, consider these to be our critical accounting policies. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with the guidance under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. ASC 606 applies to all contracts with customers, except those contracts that are within the scope of other guidance, such as leases, insurance, and financial instruments. We enter into agreements that are within the scope of ASC 606, under which we license certain of our product candidates and perform research and development services in connection with such arrangements. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment of one or more of the following: nonrefundable up-front fees, reimbursement of research and development costs, development, clinical, regulatory and commercial sales milestone payments, and royalties on net sales of licensed products. Under ASC 606, we recognize revenue when our customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which we expect to receive in exchange for those goods or services. When determining the timing and extent of revenue recognition for arrangements that we determine are within the scope of ASC 606, we perform the following five steps:
(i)identify the contract(s) with a customer;
(ii)identify the performance obligation(s) in the contract;
(iii)determine the transaction price;
(iv)allocate the transaction price to the performance obligation(s) in the contract; and
(v)recognize revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation.
We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that we will collect the consideration to which we are entitled in exchange for the goods or services transferred to our customer.
At contract inception, once the contract is determined to be within the scope of ASC 606, we assess the goods or services promised within the contract to determine whether each promised good or service is a performance obligation. The promised goods or services in our arrangements typically consist of a license to our intellectual property and/or research and development services. We may provide options to additional items in such arrangements, which are accounted for as separate contracts when our customer elects to exercise such options, unless the option provides a material right to our customer. Performance obligations are promises in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to our customer that (i) our customer can benefit from on its own or together with other readily available resources, and (ii) is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. Goods or services that are not individually distinct performance obligations are combined with other promised goods or services until such combined group of promises meets the requirements of a performance obligation.
We determine transaction price based on the amount of consideration we expect to receive for transferring the promised goods or services in the contract. Consideration may be fixed, variable, or a combination of both. At contract inception for arrangements that include variable consideration, we estimate the probability and extent of consideration we expect to receive under the contract utilizing either the most likely amount method or expected amount method, whichever best estimates the amount expected to be received. We then consider any constraints on the variable consideration and include in the transaction price variable consideration to the extent it is deemed probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved.
We then allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation based on the relative standalone selling price and recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when (or as) control is transferred to our customer and the performance obligation is satisfied. For performance obligations which consist of licenses and
other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition.
We record amounts as accounts receivable when the right to consideration is deemed unconditional. When consideration is received, or such consideration is unconditionally due, from our customer prior to transferring goods or services to our customer under the terms of a contract, a contract liability is recorded for deferred revenue.
We do not assess whether a contract has a significant financing component if the expectation at contract inception is that the period between payment by our customer and the transfer of the promised goods or services to our customer will be one year or less. Incremental costs of obtaining a contract are expensed as and when incurred if the expected period over which we would have amortized the asset is one year or less, or the amount is immaterial.
Collaboration Revenue
Arrangements with collaborators may include licenses to intellectual property, research and development services, manufacturing services for clinical and commercial supply, and participation on joint steering committees. We evaluate the promised goods or services to determine which promises, or group of promises, represent performance obligations. In contemplation of whether a promised good or service meets the criteria required of a performance obligation, we consider the stage of development of the underlying intellectual property, the capabilities and expertise of our customer relative to the underlying intellectual property, and whether the promised goods or services are integral to or dependent on other promises in the contract. When accounting for an arrangement that contains multiple performance obligations, we must develop judgmental assumptions, which may include market conditions, reimbursement rates for personnel costs, development timelines and probabilities of regulatory success to determine the stand-alone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract.
When we conclude that a contract should be accounted for as a combined performance obligation and recognized over time, we must then determine the period over which revenue should be recognized and the method by which to measure revenue. We generally recognize revenue using a cost-based input method.
Licenses of Intellectual Property
If a license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we recognize revenue allocated to the license when the license is transferred to our customer and our customer is able to use and benefit from the license. For licenses that are bundled with other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue associated with the bundled performance obligation. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of progress and related revenue recognition.
Milestone Payments
At the inception of each arrangement that includes developmental and regulatory milestone payments, we evaluate whether the achievement of each milestone specifically relates to our efforts to satisfy a performance obligation or transfer a distinct good or service within a performance obligation. If the achievement of a milestone is considered a direct result of our efforts to satisfy a performance obligation or transfer a distinct good or service and the receipt of the payment is based upon the achievement of the milestone, the associated milestone value is allocated to that distinct good or service, otherwise it will be allocated to all performance obligations of the arrangement based on the initial allocation.
We evaluate each milestone to determine when and how much of the milestone to include in the transaction price. We first estimate the amount of the milestone payment that we could receive using either the expected value or the most likely amount approach. We primarily use the most likely amount approach as that approach is generally most predictive for milestone payments with a binary outcome. Then, we consider whether any portion of that estimated amount is subject to the variable consideration constraint (that is, whether it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue would not occur upon resolution of the uncertainty). We update the estimate of variable consideration included in the transaction price at each reporting date which includes updating the assessment of the likely amount of consideration and the application of the constraint to reflect current facts and circumstances.
Royalties
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). To date, we have not recognized any revenue related to sales-based royalties or milestone payments based on the level of sales.
Manufacturing Supply Services
For arrangements that include a promise of supply of clinical or commercial product, we determine if the supply is a promise in the contract or a future obligation at our customer’s option. If determined to be a promise at inception of the contract, we evaluate the promise to determine whether it is a separate performance obligation or a component of a bundled performance obligation. If determined to be an option, we determine if the option provides a material right to our customer and if so, account for the option as a separate performance obligation. If determined to be an option but not a material right, we account for the option as a separate contract when our customer elects to exercise the option.
Application of the above guidance requires significant judgment and requires us to make determinations based on the facts and circumstances under each arrangement.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated costs incurred for the services when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advanced payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•CROs in connection with performing research services on our behalf and clinical trials;
•investigative sites or other providers in connection with clinical trials;
•vendors in connection with preclinical and clinical development activities; and
•vendors related to product manufacturing, development and distribution of preclinical and clinical supplies.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple CROs that conduct and manage clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the clinical expense. Payments under some of these contracts depend on factors such as the successful enrollment of patients and the completion of clinical trial milestones. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of patients, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or amount of prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, we have not made any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Revenue
Total revenue was $144.9 million and $33.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in total revenue of $111.7 million is primarily driven by an increase in related party collaboration revenue due to the recognition of revenue for the license we granted to Nestlé under the 2021 License Agreement and related transfer of control of the license. The increase in related party collaboration revenue was partially offset by a decrease of $17.2 million in collaboration revenue associated with our Research Agreement with MedImmune, a wholly owned subsidiary of AstraZeneca Inc. The decrease in collaboration revenue in fiscal 2021 was due to AstraZeneca’s election to terminate the Research Agreement in December 2020. As the Research Agreement was terminated in December 2020, no collaboration revenue was recognized in fiscal 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $141.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $90.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $51.3 million was due primarily to the following:
•an increase of $9.0 million in research expenses related to our microbiome therapeutics platform due primarily to an increase of $3.6 million in external consulting expenses and $5.6 million in facilities costs, lab supplies, and consumables;
•an increase of $25.6 million in expenses related to our SER-109 program, due primarily to an increase of $6.4 million in clinical trial expenses, an increase of $6.8 million in facilities costs, lab supplies, and consumables, an increase of $8.7 million in external consulting expenses and an increase of $3.1 million in contract manufacturing costs;
•a decrease of $6.5 million in expenses of our SER-287 program primarily driven by a decrease of $4.8 million in clinical trial expenses and $1.5 million in facilities costs, lab supplies, and consumables;
•a decrease of $0.4 million in expenses of our early stage programs primarily driven by a decrease in external consulting expenses, partially offset by an increase in clinical trial expenses.
•an increase in personnel-related costs of $23.6 million primarily due to an increase of $18.2 million in salaries, payroll taxes and employee benefit expenses and a $5.4 million increase in stock-based compensation expense as a result of increased headcount; and
We expect that our research and development expenses will increase in the foreseeable future as we advance the clinical development of SER-109, SER-301, and SER-155, re-evaluate the clinical development of SER-287 in light of clinical study results and in conjunction with the additional microbiome biomarker data, and continue to discover and develop additional product candidates and pursue later stages of clinical development of our product candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $69.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $30.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $38.5 million was primarily due to the following:
•an increase in personnel-related costs of $12.9 million primarily due to an increase of $6.1 million in salaries, payroll taxes and employee benefit expenses, and a $6.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense; and
•an increase in professional fees of $20.0 million primarily due to a $15.7 million increase in professional service and consulting fees and pre-launch commercial expenses and a $2.4 million increase in recruiting fees.
•an increase in facility-related and other costs of $5.7 million due primarily to increases in IT-related expenses of $3.7 million and lab and office supplies of $2.1 million.
Collaboration (Profit) Loss Sharing - related party
Collaboration (profit) loss sharing - related party was $1.7 million of income to us for the year ended December 31, 2021. There was no collaboration (profit) loss sharing for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021 we incurred $5.6 million of pre-launch expenses which we recorded within research and development expense or general and administrative expense based on the nature of the underlying expense. Our collaborative partner incurred $2.0 million of pre-launch expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021. Therefore, the $1.7 million of income recorded represents the sharing of 50% of the pre-launch expenses and represents income to us because we performed more of the pre-launch activities than our collaborative partner.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net was $1.1 million of expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $1.0 million of income for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have generated revenue only from collaborations and have incurred recurring net losses. We anticipate that we will continue to incur losses for at least the next several years. Our research and development and general and administrative expenses may continue to increase and, as a result, we will need additional capital to fund our operations, which we may obtain from additional financings, public offerings, research funding, additional collaborations, contract and grant revenue or other sources.
In August 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering in which we sold 10,500,000 shares of our common stock at a public offering price of $21.50 per share. In addition, we granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to an additional 1,575,000 shares of its common stock at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions, which the underwriters exercised in full. We received aggregate net proceeds from the offering of approximately $243.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
In August 2020, we entered into a Securities Purchase Agreement with Nestlé for the sale of 959,002 shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $20.855 per share (the “concurrent placement”). We received aggregate net proceeds from the concurrent placement of approximately $19.9 million after deducting offering expenses payable by us.
In November 2019, we entered into a common stock sales agreement, or the 2019 Sales Agreement, with Cowen to sell shares of our common stock with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $25.0 million, from time to time, through an "at the market" equity offering program, or ATM, under which Cowen acts as sales agent. In March 2020, in connection with filing an updated registration statement on Form S-3 (File No. 333-237033), we entered into a new common stock sales agreement, or the 2020 Sales Agreement, with Cowen on substantially the same terms as the 2019 Sales Agreement and terminated the 2019 Sales Agreement. In May 2021, we entered into a new common stock sales agreement, or the 2021 Sales Agreement, with Cowen to sell shares of our common stock with aggregate gross sales proceeds of up to $150.0 million, from time to time, through an ATM under which Cowen acts as sales agent, and terminated the 2020 Sales Agreement. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold approximately 5.8 million shares of common stock under the 2019 Sales Agreement and the 2020 Sales Agreement, as applicable, at an average price of approximately $4.40 per share, raising aggregate net proceeds of approximately $24.8 million after deducting an aggregate commission of approximately 3%. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not sell any shares of common stock under the 2020 Sales Agreement or the 2021 Sales Agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments totaling $291.2 million and an accumulated deficit of $614.4 million. Based on our current plans and forecasted expenses, we believe that our cash, cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2021 and proceeds, net of facility fees and expenses, of $27.6 million received in February 2022 in connection with the Second Amendment, will enable us to fund our operating expenses, debt service obligations and capital expenditures for at least the next 12-months from issuance of our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could use our capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Collaboration and Manufacturing Agreements
License Agreement with Société des Produits Nestlé S.A. (Nestlé)
In January 2016, we entered into the 2016 License Agreement with Société des Produits Nestlé S.A., or, together with NHSc Pharma Partners, Nestlé, for the development and commercialization of certain of our product candidates in development for the treatment and management of CDI and IBD, including UC and Crohn’s disease. In exchange for the license, Nestlé agreed to pay us an upfront cash payment of $120.0 million, which we received in February 2016. Nestlé has also agreed to pay us tiered royalties, at percentages ranging from the high single digits to high teens, of net sales of certain products based on our microbiome technology that are being developed for the treatment of CDI and IBD, including SER-109, SER-262, SER-287 and SER-301, or collectively, the 2016 Collaboration Products, in markets outside of the United States and Canada, or the 2016 Licensed Territory. We are eligible to receive up to $285.0 million in development milestone payments, $375.0 million in regulatory payments and up to an aggregate of $1.1 billion for the achievement of certain commercial milestones related to the sales of 2016 Collaboration Products. The full potential value of the up-front payment and milestone payments payable by Nestlé is over $1.9 billion, assuming all products receive regulatory approval and are successfully commercialized. In September 2016, we received a $10.0 million milestone payment associated with the initiation of the Phase 1b clinical study for SER-262 in CDI. In June 2017, we initiated a Phase 3 clinical study of SER-109 (ECOSPOR III) in patients with multiply recurrent CDI. In July 2017, we received $20.0 million based on the achievement of this milestone under the 2016 License Agreement. In November 2018, we executed a letter agreement with Nestlé, or the Letter Agreement, modifying certain terms of the 2016 License Agreement. Under the Letter Agreement, Nestlé agreed to pay us the $20.0 million Phase 3 milestone payment upon commencement of the Phase 2b study for SER-287. In December 2018, we received $40.0 million in milestone payments in connection with the commencement of the Phase 2b study for SER-287. In August 2020, we received $10.0 million from Nestlé in connection with the initiation of the Phase 1b SER-301 study. To date, we have received $80.0 million in development milestones under the 2016 License Agreement with Nestlé.
For the development of 2016 Collaboration Products for IBD under a global development plan, we agreed to pay the costs of clinical trials of such products up to and including Phase 2 clinical trials, and 67% of the costs for Phase 3 and other clinical trials of such products, with Nestlé bearing the remaining 33% of such costs. The Letter Agreement also provides scenarios under which Nestlé’s reimbursement to us for certain Phase 3 development costs would be reduced or delayed depending on the outcomes of the SER-287 Phase 2b study. For other clinical development of 2016 Collaboration Products for IBD, we agreed to pay the costs of such activities to support approval in the United States and Canada, and Nestlé agreed to bear the cost of such activities to support approval of 2016 Collaboration Products in the 2016 Licensed Territory.
With respect to development of 2016 Collaboration Products for CDI under a global development plan, we agreed to pay all costs of Phase 2 clinical trials for SER-109 and for Phase 3 clinical trials for SER-109. We agreed to bear all costs of conducting any Phase 1 or Phase 2 clinical trials under a global development plan for 2016 Collaboration Products other than SER-109 for CDI. We agreed to pay 67% and Nestlé agreed to pay 33% of other costs of Phase 3 clinical trials conducted for 2016 Collaboration Products other than SER-109 for CDI under a global development plan. For other clinical development of 2016 Collaboration Products for CDI, we agreed to pay costs of such development activities to support approval in the United States and Canada, and Nestlé agreed to bear the cost of such activities to support approval of 2016 Collaboration Products in the 2016 Licensed Territory.
The 2016 License Agreement continues in effect until terminated by either party on the following bases: (i) Nestlé may terminate the 2016 License Agreement in the event of serious safety issues related to any of the 2016 Collaboration Products; (ii) we may terminate the 2016 License Agreement if Nestlé challenges the validity or enforceability of any of our licensed patents; and (iii) either party may terminate the 2016 License Agreement in the event of the other party’s uncured material breach or insolvency. Upon termination of the 2016 License Agreement, all licenses granted to Nestlé by us will terminate, and all rights in and to the 2016 Collaboration Products in the 2016 Licensed Territory will revert to us. If we commit a material breach of the 2016 License Agreement, Nestlé may elect not to terminate the 2016 License Agreement but instead apply specified adjustments to its payment obligations and other terms and conditions of the 2016 License Agreement.
License Agreement with NHSc Pharma Partners (Nestlé)
On July 1, 2021, we entered into a License Agreement, or the 2021 License Agreement, with NHSc Pharma Partners, or, together with Société des Produits Nestlé S.A., Nestlé. Pursuant to the 2021 License Agreement, we granted to Nestlé, under certain of our patent rights and know how, a co-exclusive, sublicensable (under certain circumstances) license to develop, commercialize and conduct medical affairs activities for (i) therapeutic products based on our microbiome technology (including our SER-109 product candidate) that are developed by us or on our behalf for the treatment of CDI and recurrent CDI, as well as any other indications pursued for the products upon mutual agreement of the parties, or the 2021 Field, in the United States and Canada, or the 2021 Licensed Territory, and (ii) our SER-109 product candidate and any improvements and modifications thereto developed pursuant to the terms of the 2021 License Agreement, or the 2021 Collaboration Products, for any indications in the 2021 Licensed Territory.
The 2021 License Agreement sets forth the parties’ respective obligations for development, regulatory, commercialization, medical affairs, and manufacturing and supply activities for the 2021 Collaboration Products with respect to the 2021 Field and the 2021 Licensed Territory. Pursuant to the 2021 License Agreement, we are responsible for, and will use commercially reasonable efforts in, conducting development of SER-109 in the 2021 Field in the United States until first regulatory approval for SER-109 is obtained in the 2021 Field in the United States and in accordance with a development and regulatory activity plan, at our cost, subject to certain exceptions specified in the 2021 License Agreement. We are also responsible for all regulatory affairs related to 2021 Collaboration Products in the 2021 Field in the 2021 Licensed Territory, at its cost, except that expenses incurred for regulatory activities approved by a joint steering committee pursuant to a life cycle management plan for 2021 Collaboration Products are shared equally between the parties. We will be solely responsible for manufacturing and supplying 2021 Collaboration Products for development in the 2021 Field in the 2021 Licensed Territory.
Nestlé has the sole right to commercialize the 2021 Collaboration Products in the 2021 Licensed Territory in accordance with a commercialization plan, subject to our right to elect to provide up to a specified percentage of all promotional details for a certain target audience. Each party will use commercially reasonable efforts to commercialize the 2021 Collaboration Products in the 2021 Licensed Territory in accordance with the commercialization plan. Both parties will perform medical affairs activities for 2021 Collaboration Products in the 2021 Licensed Territory in accordance with a medical affairs plan. We will be solely responsible for the manufacturing and supply of 2021 Collaboration Products for commercialization under a supply agreement that will be entered into between the parties. We will be responsible for commercialization and medical affairs activities costs incurred by the parties until first commercial sale of the first 2021 Collaboration Product in the 2021 Licensed Territory and in accordance with a pre-launch plan, up to a specified cap. Following first commercial sale of the first 2021 Collaboration Product, we will be entitled to a royalty in an amount equal to approximately 50% of the commercial profits.
In exchange for the grant of the licenses under the 2021 License Agreement, Nestlé agreed to pay us a non-refundable, non-creditable and non-cancellable upfront payment of $175.0 million, which was received in July 2021. Nestlé also agreed to pay us an additional $125.0 million due upon FDA approval of SER-109, $10.0 million upon Canadian regulatory approval of SER-109, and sales target milestones payments totaling up to $225.0 million.
The 2021 License Agreement continues in effect until all development and commercialization activities for all 2021 Collaboration Products in the 2021 Licensed Territory have permanently ceased. The 2021 License Agreement may be terminated by either party upon sixty days’ written notice for the other party’s material breach that remains uncured during such sixty-day period, or immediately upon written notice for the other party’s insolvency. Nestlé may also terminate the 2021 License Agreement at-will (i) with twelve months’ prior written notice, effective only on or after the third anniversary of first commercial sale of the first 2021 Collaboration Product in the 2021 Licensed Territory, (ii) if first commercial sale of the first 2021 Collaboration Product in the 2021 Licensed Territory has not occurred by the fifth anniversary of the effective date of the 2021 License Agreement, with one hundred eighty days’ prior written notice, which must be provided during a specified period set forth in the 2021 License Agreement, or (iii) if regulatory approval for SER-109 is not granted after submission by us of a filing seeking first regulatory approval as set forth in the development and regulatory activity plan, and the parties fail to agree on further development of SER-109 in accordance with the terms of the 2021 License Agreement, with one hundred eighty days’ prior written notice, which must be provided within a specified period set forth in the 2021 License Agreement. We may also terminate the 2021 License Agreement immediately upon written notice if Nestlé challenges any licensed patent in the 2021 Licensed Territory.
Upon termination of the 2021 License Agreement, all licenses granted to Nestlé by us will terminate. If we commit a material breach of the 2021 License Agreement, Nestlé may elect not to terminate the 2021 License Agreement but instead apply specified adjustments to the payment terms and other terms and conditions of the 2021 License Agreement. The 2021 License Agreement contains customary representations and warranties by the parties, intellectual property provisions including ownership, patent prosecution, enforcement and defense, certain indemnification rights in favor of each party, and customary confidentiality provisions and limitations of liability.
Bacthera Long Term Manufacturing Agreement
In November 2021, we entered into a Long Term Manufacturing Agreement, or the Bacthera Agreement with BacThera AG, or Bacthera, a joint venture between Chr. Hansen and a Lonza Group affiliate. The Bacthera Agreement governs the general terms under which Bacthera, or one of its affiliates, will (i) construct a dedicated full-scale production suite for us at Bacthera’s Microbiome Center of Excellence in Visp, Switzerland, which is currently under construction; and (ii) provide manufacturing services to us for our SER-109 product and, if agreed by the parties, SER-287 product.
Under the terms of the Bacthera Agreement, we agreed to pay Bacthera a total of at least 240 million CHF (or approximately $262 million) for the initial term of the agreement, inclusive of the construction fees and annual operating fees. The construction fees are payable upon the achievement of certain milestones related to the construction of the dedicated manufacturing suite. The annual operating fee includes the cost of a baseline annual batch production volume. We have also agreed to pay certain other ancillary fees and a per-batch fee in excess of the baseline batches. These fees are subject to adjustment during construction for certain items outside of Bacthera’s control and annually against an agreed index. We will supply the active pharmaceutical ingredients to Bacthera to enable it to perform the services and pay for certain other raw materials and manufacturing components, which will be acquired by Bacthera.
The Bacthera Agreement has an initial term that continues until the tenth anniversary of the earlier of (a) successful completion of construction and demonstration of Bacthera’s readiness for commercial production or (b) the commencement of manufacturing. The initial term is subject to renewals, which could extend the term to 16 years, and additional three-year terms thereafter. Each party has the ability to terminate the Bacthera Agreement upon the occurrence of certain customary conditions. We may also terminate the Bacthera Agreement for convenience after a defined period. In the event of a termination, we have certain financial obligations that would apply, and Bacthera has agreed to grant a license to Bacthera-developed manufacturing know how, if any, and provide technical assistance to us, so that we could transfer the manufacturing operations to ourselves or a third party. The Bacthera Agreement also contains representations, warranties and indemnity obligations as well as limitations of liability that are customary for agreements of this type.
Agreement with AstraZeneca
In March 2019, we entered into the Research Agreement with MedImmune, a wholly owned subsidiary of AstraZeneca. Pursuant to the Research Agreement, we and AstraZeneca agreed to conduct certain pre-clinical and development activities and may conduct certain clinical research with the goal of advancing the mechanistic understanding of the microbiome in augmenting the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy, including potential synergy with AstraZeneca compounds in accordance with a mutually agreed research plan. Pursuant to the Research Agreement, we agreed not to conduct research or development of any microbiome products specifically designed by us during the term of the Research Agreement for the treatment of cancer with or on behalf of any third party without the prior approval of the joint steering committee for the Research Agreement until at least three years after the effective date of the Research Agreement.
AstraZeneca agreed to bear all costs of conducting its activities under the research plan and to reimburse us for certain costs incurred under the research plan. Additionally, AstraZeneca agreed to pay to us a total of $20.0 million in three equal installments, the first of which we received in April 2019, the second of which we received in December 2019, and the third of which we received in January 2021. Such payments are payable even if the Research Agreement is terminated in accordance with its terms, unless the Research Agreement is terminated by AstraZeneca for our uncured material breach.
We also granted AstraZeneca an exclusive option to negotiate exclusive license rights to certain of our technologies and assets. If AstraZeneca exercises this option, we have agreed to enter into good faith negotiations with them for terms and conditions of such license agreement for a specified time period.
In December 2020, we received written notice from AstraZeneca that they elected to terminate the Research Agreement by and in accordance with its terms. The termination of the Research Agreement was effective on April 2, 2021.
Indebtedness
Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules
In October 2019, we entered into a loan and security agreement with Hercules, pursuant to which a term loan in an aggregate principal amount of up to $50.0 million, or the Original Credit Facility, was available to us in three tranches, subject to certain terms and conditions. We received the first tranche of $25.0 million upon signing the agreement on October 29, 2019. We did not meet the milestone requirements for the second tranche under the Original Credit Facility, and as such, the additional second tranche amount of up to $12.5 million is not available for us to borrow. We elected not to borrow the third tranche of $12.5 million, which was available upon Hercules’ approval until June 30, 2021. Commitments of Hercules to lend to us under the Original Credit Facility are subject to amendments made pursuant to the Second Amendment, as defined below. See “Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules” below.
Advances under the Original Credit Facility bore interest at a rate equal to the greater of either (i) the Prime Rate (as reported in The Wall Street Journal) plus 4.40%, and (ii) 9.65%. Following an interest-only period of 24 months, principal payments were due in 24 equal monthly installments commencing December 1, 2021 and ending November 1, 2023. We paid Hercules a commitment fee of $0.4 million at the closing. The interest rate, interest-only period and prepayments under the Original Credit Facility are subject to amendments made pursuant to the Second Amendment. See “Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules” below.
The Original Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of our assets, other than our intellectual property. We have agreed to not pledge or secure our intellectual property to others.
The Original Credit Facility includes affirmative and negative covenants applicable to us. The affirmative covenants include, among others, covenants requiring us to maintain our legal existence and governmental approvals, deliver certain financial reports and maintain insurance coverage. The negative covenants include, among others, restrictions on our transferring collateral, making changes to the nature of our business, incurring additional indebtedness, engaging in mergers or acquisitions, paying dividends or making other distributions, making investments, engaging in transactions with affiliates, creating liens and selling assets, in each case subject to certain exceptions, including, among others, the ability for us to issue up to $150.0 million in convertible notes and entering into exclusive outbound licenses for our intellectual property. Certain covenants under the Original Credit Facility were amended by the Second Amendment. See “Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules” below.
The Original Credit Facility also includes events of default, the occurrence and continuance of which provide Hercules with the right to demand immediate repayment of all principal and unpaid interest, and to exercise remedies against us and the collateral. These events of default include, among other things and subject to customary exceptions: (i) insolvency, liquidation, bankruptcy or similar events; (ii) failure to pay any debts due under the loan and security agreement with Hercules or other loan documents on a timely basis; (iii) failure to observe certain covenants under the loan and security agreement with Hercules; (v) occurrence of a material adverse effect; (vi) material misrepresentation by us; (vii) occurrence of any default under any other agreement involving material indebtedness; and (viii) certain material money judgments.
On April 16, 2020, we entered into an amendment to the loan and security agreement with Hercules (the “First Amendment”), permitting us to enter into a promissory note under the Paycheck Protection Program of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Stability Act. On April 17, 2020 we issued a Promissory Note to Bank of America, NA, pursuant to which we received loan proceeds of $2.9 million (the “Loan”), however, based on updated guidance related to this program, we decided to repay the full amount of the Loan, and repaid the Loan on May 4, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the outstanding principal under the Original Credit Facility was $24.1 million and $25.0 million, respectively. For a further description of the Original Credit Facility, see Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Amendment to Loan and Security Agreement with Hercules
Effective as of February 24, 2022 (the “Effective Date”), we entered into a Second Amendment to the Original Credit Facility (as amended by the First Amendment) pursuant to which term loans in an aggregate principal amount of up to $100.0 million (the “New Credit Facility”) have become available to us in five tranches including the first tranche under the Original Credit Facility, subject to certain terms and conditions.
The first tranche in an aggregate principal amount of $25.0 million is outstanding as of the Effective Date, after taking into account reborrowing by us on the Effective Date of a previously-repaid principal amount of approximately $2.9 million. The second tranche in an aggregate principal amount of $12.5 million and the third tranche in an aggregate principal amount of $12.5 million have
been advanced to us and are outstanding as of the Effective Date. The fourth tranche in an aggregate principal amount of $25.0 million is available upon satisfaction of certain conditions, including the approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration of a biologics license application in respect of SER-109 (the “Regulatory Approval Milestone”) by no later than December 15, 2023. The fifth tranche in an aggregate principal amount of up to $25.0 million is available through the Amortization Date (as defined below) upon satisfaction of certain conditions, including the Lenders’ investment committee approval.
All advances outstanding under the New Credit Facility will bear interest at a rate equal to the greater of either (i) the Prime Rate (as reported in The Wall Street Journal) plus 6.40%, and (ii) 9.65%. For all advances outstanding under the New Credit Facility, we will make interest only payments through December 31, 2023, extendable to December 31, 2024 upon satisfaction of certain conditions (such applicable date, the “Amortization Date”). The principal balance and interest of the advances will be repaid in equal monthly installments after the Amortization Date and continuing through October 1, 2024, extendable to October 1, 2025, upon satisfaction of certain conditions (such applicable date, the “Maturity Date”).
We may prepay advances under the New Credit Facility, in whole or in part, at any time subject to a prepayment charge equal to: (a) 2.0% of amounts so prepaid, if such prepayment occurs during the first year following the Effective Date; (b) 1.5% of the amount so prepaid, if such prepayment occurs during the second year following the Effective Date, and (c) 1.0% of the amount so prepaid, if such prepayment occurs during the third year following the Effective Date.
We will pay an end of term charge of 4.85% of the aggregate amount of the advances made under the Old Credit Facility on the earliest date of (i) November 1, 2023; (ii) the date that we prepay all of the outstanding principal in full, or (iii) the date the loan payments are accelerated due to an event of default. We will pay an additional end of term charge of 1.75% of the aggregate amount of the advances under the New Credit Facility (including the first tranche of $25.0 million) on the earliest date of (i) the Maturity Date; (ii) the date that we prepay all of the outstanding principal in full, or (iii) the date the loan payments are accelerated due to an event of default.
Other terms of the New Credit Facility remain generally identical to those under the Old Credit Facility, with certain covenants amended by the Second Amendment to provide us with additional operational flexibility, including the ability for us to issue up to $350.0 million in convertible notes. The New Credit Facility includes a conditional liquidity covenant commencing on June 15, 2023, which ceases to apply if certain conditions including the Regulatory Approval Milestone are satisfied.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $6.7 million, primarily due to changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $41.5 million and non-cash charges of $30.7 million, partially offset by a net loss of $65.6 million. Non-cash charges consisted primarily of $20.2 million of stock-based compensation expense, $3.3 million related to the amortization of right-of-use assets, $5.9 million of depreciation, and $2.5 million of net amortization of premiums related to our investments, partially offset by collaboration profit sharing of $1.7 million related to the license and collaboration agreement with Nestlé. Changes in our operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily consisted of a $43.0 million increase in accrued expenses and other liabilities, a $9.4 million increase in accounts payable and a $9.4 million decrease in accounts receivable, partially offset by a $12.3 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current and non-current assets, a $4.4 million decrease in deferred revenue and a $3.6 million decrease in operating lease liabilities. The increase in accrued expenses and other current and long-term liabilities was primarily due to the liability established for pre-launch activities in conjunction with the 2021 License Agreement with Nestlé. The decrease in deferred revenue is due to recognition of revenue during the year, partially offset by an increase of $8.2 million, which represents the portion of the transaction price for the 2021 License Agreement allocated to the research and development services. The decrease in operating lease liabilities was due to the cash payment of lease obligations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $93.6 million of cash, primarily due to a net loss of $89.1 million and by cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $23.2 million and partially offset by non-cash charges of $18.7 million. Net cash used in changes in our operating assets and liabilities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily consisted of a $11.6 million decrease in deferred revenue, a $4.5 million decrease in operating lease liabilities, a $1.2 million decrease in accounts payable, a $7.6 million increase in accounts receivable, a $2.2 million increase in prepaid expenses and other current
assets, and offset by a $3.8 million decrease in accrued expenses and other liabilities. The decrease in deferred revenue is due to recognition of revenue during the year and partially offset by $10.0 million associated with the increase in the transaction price for the 2016 License Agreement for the initiation of the Phase 1b study for SER-301. The decrease in operating lease liabilities was due to the cash payment of lease obligations.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $64.1 million, primarily due to maturities of investments of $169.6 million, partially offset by purchases of investments of $96.0 million and purchases of property and equipment of $9.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities used $158.9 million of cash, consisting of purchases of investments of $218.3 million, and purchases of property and equipment of $0.6 million; these amounts were partially offset by sales and maturities of investments of $60.0 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $1.2 million. This was a result of $1.3 million from the exercise of stock options and $0.8 million from the issuance of common stock under the ESPP plan, partially offset by $0.9 million of principal payments relating to our term loan.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $303.4 million. This was a result of $243.7 million from proceeds from public offering of common stock, net of costs, $19.9 million of proceeds from the Securities Purchase Agreement, $24.8 million of proceeds from the at market equity offering, net of commissions, and $14.4 million from the exercise of stock options.
Funding Requirements
Our expenses may increase substantially in connection with our ongoing and planned activities related to our pipeline products, which are in clinical development, and our follow-on therapeutic candidates and other programs. In addition, we expect to continue to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•complete the clinical development and prepare for commercialization of SER-109 for patients with recurrent CDI;
•re-evaluate the clinical development of SER-287 for the treatment of UC in light of the Phase 2b clinical study results and in conjunction with the additional microbiome biomarker data;
•continue the clinical development of SER-301 for the treatment of UC;
•conduct research and initiate clinical development of SER-155 for the prevention of mortality due to GvHD in patients receiving allo-HSCT;
•make strategic investments in manufacturing capabilities;
•make strategic investments in our research discovery and development platforms and capabilities;
•maintain and augment our intellectual property portfolio and opportunistically acquire complementary intellectual property;
•potentially establish a sales and distribution infrastructure and scale-up manufacturing capabilities to commercialize any products for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•perform our obligations under our agreements with our collaborators;
•seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates; and
•experience any delays or encounter any issues with any of the above, including but not limited to failed studies, complex results, safety issues or other regulatory challenges.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of our programs, we are unable to estimate the amounts of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our product candidates. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic;
•the progress and results of our clinical studies and pre-clinical development;
•the cost of manufacturing clinical supplies of our product candidates;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates and research activities;
•the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
•the costs and timing of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending any intellectual property-related claims;
•the effect of competing technological and market developments; and
•the extent to which we acquire or invest in businesses, products and technologies, including entering into licensing or collaboration arrangements for product candidates.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of products that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if ever. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funds to achieve our business objectives.
Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Additionally, market volatility resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic or other factors could also adversely impact our ability to access capital as and when needed. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our shareholders’ ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our shareholders’ rights as common stockholders. Our loan and security agreement with Hercules currently includes, and any additional debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include, covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends. Additional debt or preferred equity financing may also require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute our shareholders’ ownership interest.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, in addition to our existing collaboration agreements, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs, or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
As noted above, the magnitude and duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and its impact on our liquidity and future funding requirements is uncertain as of the filing date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K as this continues to evolve globally. See “Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic” above and “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Operations-The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted and could continue to adversely impact, our business, including our preclinical studies and clinical trials, results of operations and financial condition” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
As discussed in Note 1 of the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K we have the responsibility to evaluate whether conditions or events raise substantial doubt about our ability to meet our future financial obligations as they become due within one year after the date the financial statements are issued. We expect our cash, cash equivalents and short- and long-term investments at December 31, 2021 of $291.2 million, and proceeds, net of facility fees and expenses, of $27.6 million received in February 2022 in connection with the Second Amendment, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses, debt service obligations and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12-months from issuance of the financial statements.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The following table summarizes our contractual obligations at December 31, 2021 and the effect such obligations are expected to have on our liquidity and cash flows in future periods:
(1)Amounts in the table reflect payments due under our operating lease agreements that expire between May 2021 and December 2031.
(2)Amounts in the table reflect payments due for our term loan under an arrangement with Hercules for $25,000. The amounts in the table above reflect interest-only payments through December 1, 2021 with payments on principal beginning thereafter. For purposes of the table above, interest payments were calculated using an annual interest rate of 9.65%, which was the interest rate in effect as of December 31, 2021. Additionally, the table above includes a payment due upon maturity of the loan of $1,213. See Note 9 and Note 18 of the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of the Hercules term loan.
(3)Amounts in the table reflect fixed amounts due under our long-term manufacturing agreement with Bacthera, inclusive of construction fees and annual operating fees.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing, manufacturing and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination upon notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
For a discussion of recent accounting standards see Note 2, Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our consolidated financial statements included in this report.