Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” or in other sections of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Who We Are
Mister Car Wash, Inc. is the largest national car wash brand, offering express exterior and interior cleaning services to customers across 396 car wash locations in 21 states as of December 31, 2021. Founded in 1996, we employ an efficient, repeatable, and scalable process, which we call the “Mister Experience,” to deliver a clean, dry, and shiny car every time. The core pillars of the “Mister Experience” are greeting every customer with a wave and smile, providing them the highest quality car wash, and delivering the experience quickly and conveniently. We offer a monthly subscription program, which we call the Unlimited Wash Club ("UWC"), as a flexible, quick, and convenient option for customers to keep their cars clean. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately 1.7 million and approximately 1.2 million UWC Members, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, UWC sales represented 64% and 62% of our total wash sales, respectively, and UWC volume represented 72% and 68% of our total wash volume, respectively. Our scale and over 25 years of innovation allow us to drive operating efficiencies and invest in training, infrastructure and technology that improve speed of service, quality, and sustainability and realize strong financial performance.
Factors Affecting Our Business and Trends
We believe that our business and growth depend on a number of factors that present significant opportunities for us and may pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in Part I, Item 1A. "Risk Factors" included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
•Growth in comparable store sales. Comparable store sales have been a strong driver of our net revenue growth and we expect it to continue to play a key role in our future growth and profitability. We will seek to continue to grow our comparable store sales by increasing the number of UWC Members, increasing efficiency and throughput of our car wash locations, increasing marketing spend to add new customers, and increasing customer visitation frequency.
•Number and loyalty of UWC Members. The UWC program is a critical element of our business. UWC Members contribute a significant portion of our net revenue and provide recurring revenue through their monthly membership fees.
•Labor management. Hiring and retaining skilled team members and experienced management represents one of our largest costs. We believe people are the key to our success and we have been able to successfully attract and retain engaged, high-quality team members by paying competitive wages, offering attractive benefit packages, and providing robust training and development opportunities. While the competition for skilled labor is intense and subject to high turnover, we believe our approach to wages and benefits will continue to allow us to attract suitable team members and management to support our growth.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations
Our results have been affected by, and may in the future be affected by, the following factors, which must be understood in order to assess the comparability of our period-to-period financial performance and condition.
Impact of COVID-19
Keeping our customers and team members safe has been the highest priority for Mister Car Wash throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. We closely monitored the national and local government health guidelines in each of our communities, and we implement measures in response to COVID-19 and its variants throughout all aspects of our
business and in all of our locations. See Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors-Risks Relating to Our Business- The ongoing pandemic related to COVID-19 and its variants has materially and adversely affected our business, financial condition and results of operations and may continue to do so” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in March and April 2020, we temporarily suspended operations at more than 300 of our locations, furloughed approximately 5,500 of our hourly car wash team members and paused UWC membership billing.
By the end of May 2020, all of our locations were safely reopened and offering express exterior cleaning services, including exterior-only services at Interior Cleaning Locations, we rehired a majority of our team members and we surpassed all-time highs in UWC membership. By the end of 2020, we also repaid 100% of our deferred rent and successfully resumed both greenfield development initiatives and acquisition activity. Although our actions at the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic impacted our financial results in 2020, we believe that our people-first approach engendered goodwill and loyalty among our team members and our customers, and allowed us to emerge an even stronger business.
Greenfield Location Development
Our primary historical growth strategy has involved acquiring local and regional car wash operators, upgrading the facilities and equipment, training the team to provide the “Mister Experience” and converting the site to the “Mister” brand. More recently, we have also grown through greenfield development of Mister Car Wash locations, with particular focus on Express Exterior Locations, and anticipate further pursuit of this strategy in the future. During 2021, we successfully opened a total of 17 greenfield locations, with the expectation of driving the majority of our future location growth through greenfield development. We believe such a strategy will drive a more controllable pipeline of unit growth for future locations in existing and adjacent markets.
The comparability of our results may be impacted by the inclusion of financial performance of greenfield locations that have not delivered a full fiscal year of financial results nor matured to average unit volumes, which we typically expect after approximately three full years of operation.
Business Acquisitions
In 2021, we completed five business acquisitions of 37 properties. Following acquisition, we implement a variety of operational improvements to unify branding and enhance profitability. As soon as feasible, we fully integrate and transition acquired locations to the “Mister” brand and make investments to improve site flow, upgrade tunnel equipment and technology, and install our proprietary Unity Chemical system, which is a unique blend of our signature products utilizing the newest technology and services to make a better car wash experience for our customers. We also establish member-only lanes, optimize service offerings and implement training initiatives that we have successfully utilized to improve team member engagement and drive UWC growth post-acquisition. The costs associated with these onboarding initiatives, which vary by site, can impact the comparability of our results.
The comparability of our results may also be impacted by the inclusion of financial performance of our acquisitions that have not delivered a full fiscal year of financial results under Mister Car Wash’s ownership.
Divestitures
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not consummate any significant divestitures.
As of December 31, 2020, we closed or sold all of our quick lube facilities. This divestment did not meet the criteria to be reported as a discontinued operation and accordingly its results of operations have not been reclassified. We recognized a gain of $29.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. See Note 17 Dispositions in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Key Performance Indicators
We prepare and analyze various operating and financial data to assess the performance of our business and to help in the allocation of our resources. The key operating performance and financial metrics and indicators we use are set forth below, as of and for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Location Count (end of period)
Our location count refers to the total number of car wash locations operating at the end of a period, inclusive of new greenfield locations, acquired locations and offset by closed locations. The total number of locations that we operate, as well as the timing of location openings, acquisitions and closings, have, and will continue to have, an impact on our performance. In fiscal year 2021, we increased our location count by 54 locations, including 17 greenfield locations, 37 business acquisition locations, and one asset purchase location, partially offset by one closed location. In fiscal year 2020, we increased our location count by 20 locations, including 12 greenfield locations and 10 acquired locations, partially offset by two closed locations.
Comparable Store Sales Growth
A location is considered a comparable store on the first day of the 13th full calendar month following a location’s first day of operations. A location converted from an Interior Cleaning Location format to an Express Exterior Location format is excluded when the location did not offer interior cleaning services in the current period but did offer interior cleaning services in the prior year period. Comparable store sales growth is the percentage change in total wash sales of all comparable store car washes.
Opening new locations is a primary component of our growth strategy and as we continue to execute on our growth strategy, we expect that a significant portion of our sales growth will be attributable to non-comparable store sales. Accordingly, comparable store sales are only one measure we use to assess the success of our growth strategy. During 2021, comparable store sales increased to 32% compared to a decline of 11% in 2020.
UWC Members (end of period)
Members of our monthly subscription service are known as Unlimited Wash Club Members, or UWC Members. We view the number of UWC Members and the growth in the number of UWC Members on a net basis from period to period as key indicators of our revenue growth. The number of UWC Members has grown over time as we have acquired new customers and retained previously acquired customers. There were approximately 1.7 million and approximately 1.2 million UWC Members as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our UWC program grew by approximately 0.5 million UWC Members, from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021.
UWC Sales as a Percentage of Total Wash Sales
UWC sales as a percentage of total wash sales represents the penetration of our subscription membership program as a percentage of our overall wash sales. Total wash sales are defined as the net revenue generated from express exterior cleaning services and interior cleaning services for both UWC Members and retail customers. UWC sales as a percentage of total wash sales is calculated as sales generated from UWC Members as a percentage of total wash sales. We have consistently grown this measure over time as we educate customers as to the value of our
subscription offering. UWC sales were 64% and 62% of our total wash sales for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP measure of our financial performance and should not be considered as an alternative to net income as a measure of financial performance or any other performance measure derived in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America ("U.S. GAAP") and should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or nonrecurring items. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net (loss) income before interest expense, net, income tax provision (benefit), depreciation and amortization expense, (gain) loss on sale of assets, gain on sale of quick lube facilities, dividend recapitalization fees and payments, loss on early debt extinguishment, stock-based compensation expense, acquisition expenses, management fees, non-cash rent expense, expenses associated with securities offerings, and other nonrecurring charges. Adjusted EBITDA margin is defined as Adjusted EBITDA divided by net revenues for a given period.
We present Adjusted EBITDA because we believe it assists investors and analysts in comparing our operating performance across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our ongoing operating performance. You are encouraged to evaluate these adjustments and the reasons we consider them appropriate for supplemental analysis. In evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses that are the same as or similar to some of the adjustments in our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by unusual or non-recurring items. There can be no assurance that we will not modify the presentation of Adjusted EBITDA in future periods, and any such modification may be material. In addition, Adjusted EBITDA may not be comparable to similarly titled measures used by other companies in our industry or across different industries.
Our management believes Adjusted EBITDA is helpful in highlighting trends in our core operating performance compared to other measures, which can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the tax jurisdictions in which companies operate and capital investments. We also use Adjusted EBITDA in connection with establishing discretionary annual incentive compensation; to supplement U.S. GAAP measures of performance in the evaluation of the effectiveness of our business strategies; to make budgeting decisions; and because our Amended First Lien Credit Agreement (as defined below) uses measures similar to Adjusted EBITDA to measure our compliance with certain covenants.
•Adjusted EBITDA has its limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under U.S. GAAP. Some of these limitations include:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditure or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in our cash requirements for our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the interest expense and the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect cash requirements for replacement of assets that are being depreciated and amortized;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect non-cash compensation, which is a key element of our overall long-term compensation;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of certain cash charges or cash receipts resulting from matters we do not find indicative of our ongoing operations; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA differently than we do.
Our Adjusted EBITDA was approximately $254.3 million and $161.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Our Adjusted EBITDA margin was 34% and 28% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increases experienced in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the prior year are primarily attributable to our car wash locations remaining open and operating for the entirety of the year
ended December 31, 2021 and the increase in the number of UWC Members participating in our UWC program. The Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA margin results in 2020 are attributable to the impacts of COVID-19, the mix shift to exterior cleaning services, changes to our labor staffing model, other improvements in store operating costs and the divestiture of our quick lube facilities. The following is a reconciliation of our net (loss) income to Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented.
(a)Consists of (gains) and losses on the disposition of assets associated with sale leaseback transactions, store closures or the sale of property and equipment.
(b)Represents payments to holders of our stock options made pursuant to anti-dilution provisions in connection with dividends paid to holders of our common stock and legal fees related to dividend recapitalizations.
(c)Represents non-cash expense associated with our share-based payments, including approximately $201.9 million in stock-based compensation expense associated with our performance-based vesting stock options that vested on the consummation of our initial public offering in June 2021.
(d)Represents expenses incurred in strategic acquisitions, including professional fees for accounting and auditing services, appraisals, legal fees and financial services, one-time costs associated with supplies for rebranding the acquired stores, and distinct travel expenses for related, distinct integration efforts by team members who are not part of our dedicated integration team.
(e)Represents management fees paid to Leonard Green & Partners, L.P. ("LGP") in accordance with our management services agreement, which terminated on the consummation of our initial public offering in June 2021.
(f)Represents the difference between cash paid for rent expense and U.S. GAAP rent expense.
(g)Represents nonrecurring expenses associated with the consummation of our initial public offering in June 2021.
(h)Represents nonrecurring expenses incurred by us in connection with the secondary public offering in August 2021.
(i)Consists of other nonrecurring or discrete items as determined by management not to be reflective of our ongoing operating performance, such as costs associated with our one-time rebranding initiative costs, severance pay, non-deferred legal fees and other expenses related to credit agreement amendments, legal settlements and legal fees related to contract terminations, and nonrecurring strategic project costs.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Net Revenues
We recognize revenue in two main streams: (i) the UWC program that entitles the customer to unlimited washes for a monthly subscription fee, cancellable at any time and (ii) retail car washes and other services. In the UWC program, we enter into a contract with the customer that falls under the definition of a customer contract under ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Customers are automatically charged on a credit card or debit card on the same date of the month that they originally signed up. Our performance obligations are to provide unlimited car wash services for a monthly fee. Revenue from the UWC program is recognized ratably over the month in which it is earned and amounts unearned are recorded as deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheets; all amounts recorded as deferred revenue at year-end are recognized as revenue in the following year. Revenue from retail car wash and other services is recognized at the point in time at which services are rendered and the customer pays with cash, debit card, or credit card. Revenues are net of sales tax, refunds, and discounts applied as a reduction of revenue at the time of payment.
Store Operating Costs
Store operating costs consist of cost of labor and chemicals and other car wash store operating expenses.
Cost of Labor and Chemicals
Cost of labor and chemicals include compensation expenses associated with car wash employees, maintenance employees, warehouse employees, and chemicals and associated supplies. The related employee benefits for the aforementioned employees, such as taxes, insurance, and workers compensation, are also included in the cost of labor and chemicals in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Store Operating Expenses
Other store operating expenses includes all other costs related to the operations of car wash and warehouse locations such as credit card fees, car damages, office and lobby supplies, information technology costs associated with the locations, telecommunications, advertising, non-healthcare related insurance, rent, repairs and maintenance related to assets, utilities, property taxes, and depreciation expense on assets at the car wash and warehouse locations.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses include compensation expenses and the related employee benefits of headquarters employees, information technology expenses, administrative office expenses, professional services and other related expenses, depreciation expense on held-for-use assets used at our headquarters, and amortization expense associated with our intangible assets.
We will continue to incur significant expenses on an ongoing basis that we did not incur as a private company. Those costs include additional director and officer liability insurance expenses, as well as third-party and internal resources related to accounting, auditing, Sarbanes-Oxley Act compliance, legal, and investor and public relations expenses. We expect such expenses to further increase after we are no longer an emerging growth company. These costs will generally be expensed under general and administrative expenses in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(Gain) Loss on Sale of Assets
(Gain) loss on sale of assets includes gains or losses on the sale-leaseback of our locations and sale of property and equipment.
Interest Expense, net
Interest expense, net consists primarily of cash and non-cash interest expense on borrowings, partially offset by interest income earned on our cash balances.
Loss on Extinguishment of Debt
Loss on extinguishment of debt includes losses associated with amendments to our existing debt that are accounted for as extinguishments, as well as losses associated with partial or whole payments on our debt that qualify for extinguishment accounting.
Income Tax Provision (Benefit)
We recognize deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized differently in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax liabilities and assets are determined based on the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and tax basis of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates.
We have adopted a more likely than not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions in income tax provision (benefit) in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The results of operations data for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 have been derived from the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Net Revenues
Net revenues were $758.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $574.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $183.5 million, or 32%. The increase in revenue was primarily attributable
to an increase of $207.6 million in car wash revenue and was partially offset by a $23.7 million decrease in oil change revenue as a result of the sale of our quick lube facilities in December 2020. The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to December 31, 2020, also reflects the impact of actions taken in 2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a temporary suspension of operations at more than 300 car wash locations, as well as the temporary removal of all interior cleaning services through August 2020. Moreover, comparable store sales growth for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 32%, compared to a decline of 11% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Store Operating Costs
Cost of Labor and Chemicals
Cost of labor and chemicals was $265.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $194.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $71.2 million, or 37%. The increase in the cost of labor and chemicals was primarily driven by the recognition of stock-based compensation expense of $31.3 million related to our performance-based vesting stock options that vested on the consummation of our initial public offering in June 2021, an increase in labor and benefits of $41.9 million in connection with the increase in wash volume, and an increase in crew wage rates, partially offset by our redesigned labor staffing model. Further, these year over year increases were partially offset by a decrease of $12.0 million in labor and chemical costs from the sale of our quick lube facilities in December 2020.
Other Store Operating Expenses
Other store operating expenses were $266.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $224.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $41.7 million, or 19%. The increase in other store operating expenses was attributable to an increase in volume and other non-essential costs that were deferred into 2021 because of COVID-19. The increase is also attributable to increase in comparable store sales growth of 32% and the year-over-year addition of 54 locations, partially offset by a decrease in other store operating expenses from the sale of our quick lube facilities in December 2020. Rent expense increased with the addition of 26 new real estate leases, which was partially offset by rental income on subleases following the sale of our quick lube facilities in December 2020.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses were $254.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $51.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $203.5 million, or 396%. The increase in general and administrative expenses was primarily attributable to the recognition of stock-based compensation expense of $170.7 million related to our performance-based vesting stock options that vested on the consummation of our initial public offering in June 2021, $0.5 million of expenses associated with our August 2021 secondary offering, an increase of approximately $11.7 million in general and administrative expenses in 2021 due to increase in
headcount, in comparison to the 2020 decrease related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which was driven by a furlough of corporate employees, temporary reductions in pay, temporary closures of corporate offices, and reductions in other administrative expenses, and the increased costs of being a public company.
Gain on Sale of Assets
Gain on sale of assets reflected a gain of $23.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a gain of $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The gain on sale of assets in 2021 was primarily driven by gains associated with our sale-leaseback transactions. The gain on sale of assets in 2020 was attributable to the sale of our quick lube facilities and gains associated with our sale-leaseback transactions.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net reflected an expense of $42.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to an expense of $65.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $23.3 million, or 35%. The decrease in other expense was primarily driven by a $24.6 million reduction on interest expense, resulting from the June 2021 pay down of our First Lien Term Loan pursuant to the Amended First Lien Credit Agreement and the pay-off of our Second Lien Term Loan pursuant to the Amended Second Lien Credit Agreement, partially offset by a $1.3 million increase in loss on early extinguishment of debt.
Income Tax (Benefit) Provision
Income tax (benefit) provision reflected a benefit of $25.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to a provision of $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in income tax (benefit) was primarily attributable to the Company’s loss before income taxes recorded during 2021 as a result of stock-based compensation expense. Additional income tax benefits were also recorded in 2021 related to the Company’s expected income tax deductions related to stock option exercises, net of income tax expense related to non-deductible executive compensation.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Funding Requirements
Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are to fund our investments in our core business, pursue greenfield expansion and acquisitions and to service our indebtedness. Historically, these cash requirements have been met through funds raised by the sale of common equity, utilization of our Revolving Commitment, First Lien Term Loan, Second Lien Term Loan, sale-leaseback transactions and cash provided by operations. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $19.7 million and $114.6 million, respectively, and $149.5 million and $75.0 million, respectively, of available borrowing capacity under our Revolving Commitment. On June 4, 2021, we entered into an amendment to our amended and restated First Lien
Credit Agreement to, among other things, increase the commitments under the Revolving Commitment from $75.0 million to $150.0 million. In December 2021, in connection with the Clean Streak Ventures acquisition, we entered into Amendment No. 3 to Amended and Restated First Lien Credit Agreement (“Amended First Lien Credit Agreement”) increasing the principal term loan borrowings by $290 million to $903 million. For a description of our Credit Facilities, please see Note 9 Debt in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with the covenants under our Credit Facilities and we expect to comply with our covenants in the next 12 months from the issuance date of the financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
We believe that our sources of liquidity and capital will be sufficient to finance our growth strategy and resulting operations, planned capital expenditures, and the additional expenses we expect to incur as a public company for at least the next 12 months. However, we cannot assure you that cash provided by operating activities or cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to meet our future needs. If we are unable to generate sufficient cash flows from operations in the future, we may have to obtain additional financing. If we obtain additional capital by issuing equity, the interests of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we incur additional indebtedness, that indebtedness may contain significant financial and other covenants that may significantly restrict our operations. We cannot assure you that we could obtain additional financing on favorable terms or at all.
For 2022, we expect to invest approximately $285 million to $315 million in capital expenditures, with the majority of expenditures relating to the development and opening of approximately 33 greenfield locations. We also routinely enter into sale-leaseback agreements and expect to realize approximately $140 million to $150 million in proceeds through these transactions during fiscal year 2022.
Cash Flows for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table shows summary cash flow information for the periods presented:
Operating Activities. Net cash used in operating activities consists of net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including stock-based compensation expense, property and equipment depreciation, gains on disposal of property and equipment, amortization of leased assets and deferred income taxes, as well as the effect of changes in other working capital amounts.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $173.4 million and was comprised of net loss of $22.0 million, increased by $257.0 million related to non-cash adjustments and an increase of $216.6 million for stock-based compensation expense. Stock-based compensation expense included $201.9 million associated with performance vesting options which vested upon completion of the initial public offering in June 2021. Other non-cash adjustments included depreciation and amortization, loss on extinguishment of debt and deferred income tax. Changes in working capital decreased cash provided by operating activities by $61.6 million, primarily due to $34.3 million of payments towards operating lease liabilities, decreased other noncurrent liabilities coupled with a $18.5 million increase in other receivables. The increase in other receivables was driven by $8.5 million payroll tax withholding and exercise proceeds receivables, $4.9 million of income tax receivables, and $5.6 million of construction receivables associated with an increased number of build-to-suit arrangements.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $101.8 million and was comprised of net income of $60.4 million, increased by $67.9 million related to non-cash adjustments, comprised primarily of depreciation and amortization and deferred taxes, offset by gains on the disposal of property and equipment. The gains on sale of property and equipment consists mainly of the sale of the quick lube facilities. Changes in working capital decreased cash used in operating activities by $26.4 million, primarily due to a decrease in the operating lease liability, deferred revenue and accounts payable partially offset by the increase in accrued expenses.
Investing Activities. Our net cash used in investing activities primarily consists of purchases and sale of property and equipment and acquisition of car washes.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $543.8 million and was primarily comprised of investment in property and equipment to support our greenfield and other initiatives, and the acquisition of car washes, partially offset by sale-leaseback transactions and the sale of property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $13.4 million and was primarily comprised of investment in property and equipment primarily to support our greenfield and other initiatives, and the acquisition of car washes, partially offset by the sale of property and equipment including sale-leaseback transactions and the sale of our quick lube facilities.
Financing Activities. Our net cash provided by financing activities primarily consists of proceeds from our initial public offering along with proceeds and payments on our long-term debt and Revolving Commitment.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $272.5 million and was primarily comprised of proceeds from our initial public offering and long-term debt, partially offset by payments of offering costs pursuant to initial public offering, long-term debt, and debt issuance costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $22.7 million and was primarily comprised of proceeds from our long-term debt, partially offset by payments of debt on our revolver.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities.
On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions, including those related to revenue recognition, goodwill and other intangible assets, income taxes and stock-based compensation. We base our estimates on historical experience, current developments and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under these circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about carrying values of assets and liabilities that cannot readily be determined from other sources. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from those estimates.
See Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for a description of our other significant accounting policies. We believe that the following critical accounting policies are affected by significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize revenue in accordance with ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. Under ASC 606, revenue is recognized upon transfer of control of promised services or goods to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive for those services or goods. We have two primary sources of revenue. First, we offer the UWC program to our customers. UWC entitles a UWC Member to unlimited washes for a monthly fee, cancellable at any time. UWC Members are automatically charged on a credit or debit card on the same day of the month that they originally signed up. The UWC revenue is recognized ratably over the month in which it is earned and amounts unearned are recorded as deferred revenue on the consolidated balance sheets based on the date of the re-charge. Second, the revenue from car wash and, prior to 2021, quick lube services is recognized at the point in time services are rendered and the customer pays. Discounts are applied as a reduction of revenue at the time of payment.
The timing of recognition does not require significant judgment as it is based on the UWC monthly charge and deferral or the date of car wash sale, none of which require a significant amount of estimation. However, in determining the amount and timing of revenue from contracts with customers, we make judgments as to whether uncertainty as to collectibility of the consideration that we are owed precludes recognition of the revenue on an accrual basis. These judgments are based on the facts specific to each circumstance. Primary factors considered include past payment history and our subjective assessment of the likelihood of receiving payment in the future.
Long-lived assets
Long-lived assets, such as property and equipment and intangible assets, are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. If circumstances require a long-lived asset or asset group be tested for possible impairment, we first compare undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by that asset or asset group to its carrying amount. If the carrying amount of the long-lived asset or asset group is not recoverable on an undiscounted cash flow basis, an impairment is recognized to the extent that the carrying amount exceeds its fair value. Fair value is determined using various valuation techniques including discounted cash flow models, quoted market values and third-party independent appraisals, as considered necessary. No impairment losses associated with our long-lived assets were recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of cost over the fair value of the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired in a business combination. Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually on October 31 or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the asset may be impaired. We first assess qualitative factors to determine whether events or circumstances existed that would lead us to conclude it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is below its carrying amount. If we determine that it is more likely than not that the fair value of the reporting unit is below the carrying amount, a quantitative goodwill assessment is required. In the quantitative evaluation, the fair value of the reporting unit is determined and compared to the carrying value. If the fair value is greater than the carrying value, then the carrying value is deemed to be recoverable and no further action is required. If the fair value estimate is less than the carrying value, goodwill is considered impaired for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the reporting unit’s fair value and a charge is reported as impairment of goodwill in our consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss). No impairment losses associated with our goodwill were recognized during the years ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Income Taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the temporary differences between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. We classify all deferred income tax assets and liabilities as noncurrent on our balance sheet. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized within the provision for (benefit from) income taxes on the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss) in the period that includes the enactment date.
We reduce deferred tax assets, if necessary, by a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that we will not realize some or all of the deferred tax assets. In making such a determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence, including taxable income in prior carryback years (if carryback is permitted under the relevant tax law), the timing of the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences, tax planning strategies and projected future taxable income. We believe it is more likely than not that our federal deferred tax assets will be realized in the future based primarily on the timing and reversal of existing taxable temporary differences in that jurisdiction. However, we determined that an amount of our state deferred tax assets is not more likely than not to be realized in the future based primarily on prior years’ cumulative financial results in one state jurisdiction. Refer to Note 8 Income Taxes in our consolidated financial statements and for additional information on the composition of these valuation allowances and for information on the impact of U.S. tax reform legislation.
We file income tax returns in the U.S. federal and state jurisdictions and believe our accrual for tax liabilities is adequate for all open audit years based on many factors including past experience and interpretations of tax law. We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position if we believe it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained, in a court of last resort, based on the technical merits of the position. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and any changes in the recognition or measurement of these benefits or liabilities are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions within income tax (benefit) provision on our consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive income (loss).
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-based awards granted to employees. We measure stock-based compensation cost at grant date, based upon the estimated fair value of the award, and recognize cost as expense using the accelerate attribution method over the employee requisite service period. We estimate the fair value of stock options using Black-Scholes and Monte Carlo option models. We estimate the fair value of stock purchase rights using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. Restricted stock units are classified as equity and measured at the fair market value of the underlying stock at the grant date. Upon termination unvested time and performance-based options, stock-purchase rights, and restricted stock units are forfeited. We have made a policy election to estimate the number of stock-based compensation awards that are expected to vest to determine the amount of compensation expense recognized in earnings. Forfeiture estimates are revised if subsequent information indicates that the actual number of forfeitures is likely to differ from previous estimates.
We record deferred tax assets for awards that result in deductions in our income tax returns, based upon the amount of compensation cost recognized and our statutory tax rate. The tax effect of differences between the compensation cost of an award recognized for financial reporting purposes and the deduction for an award for tax purposes is recognized as an income tax expense or benefit in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive income (loss) in the period in which the tax deduction arises.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See the sections titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies-Recent Accounting Pronouncements” and “-Recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted” in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.