Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The Risk Factors in Part I, Item 1A and disclosures under “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
the audited financial statements and accompanying notes, included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
and this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations should be read together. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, or the Securities Act, and Section 21E of the Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, or the Exchange Act, that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. As disclosed in this report, our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and in the “Risk Factors” sections contained in Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our operating results are not necessarily indicative of results that may occur for the full fiscal year or any other future period.
About Madrigal Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Our Focus
. We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of innovative therapeutic candidates for the treatment of cardiovascular, metabolic, and liver diseases. Our lead product candidate, resmetirom, is a proprietary, liver-directed, selective thyroid hormone receptor-ß, or THR-ß,
agonist being developed as a once-daily oral pill that can potentially be used to treat a number of disease states with high unmet medical need, including non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis, or NASH.
Our Patient Market Opportunity.
NASH is a serious inflammatory form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or NAFLD. NAFLD has become the most common liver disease in the United States and other developed countries and is characterized by an accumulation of fat in the liver with no other apparent causes. NASH can progress to cirrhosis or liver failure, require liver transplantation and can also result in liver cancer. Progression of NASH to end stage liver disease will soon surpass all other causes of liver failure requiring liver transplantation. Importantly, beyond these critical conditions, NASH and NAFLD patients additionally suffer heightened cardiovascular risk and, in fact, die more frequently from cardiovascular events than from liver disease. NASH and NAFLD have grown as a consequence of rising worldwide obesity-related disorders. In the United States, NAFLD is estimated to affect approximately 25% of the population, and approximately 25% of those will progress from NAFLD to NASH. Current estimates place NASH prevalence at approximately 20 million people in the United States, or five to six percent of the adult population, with similar prevalence in Europe and Asia. The prevalence of NASH is also increasing in developing regions due to the adoption of a more sedentary lifestyle and a diet consisting of processed foods with high fat and fructose content.
Our Completed Studies.
For NASH, we enrolled 125 patients in a Phase 2 clinical trial with resmetirom. We achieved the 12-week
primary endpoint for this Phase 2 clinical trial and reported the results in December 2017, and we reported positive topline 36-week
results at the conclusion of the Phase 2 clinical trial in May 2018. We also completed a 36-week,
open-label extension study in 31 participating NASH patients from our Phase 2 clinical trial, which included 14 patients who received placebo in the main study. We also completed a 116 patient Phase 2 clinical trial and announced results in February 2018 for the use of resmetirom in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, or HeFH. In addition to the NASH and HeFH Phase 2 clinical trials, resmetirom has also been studied in multiple completed Phase 1 trials in a total of more than 300 subjects. Resmetirom was well-tolerated in these trials, which included a single ascending dose trial, a multiple ascending dose trial, several drug interaction studies, a multiple dose mass balance study, a single dose relative bioavailability study of tablet formulation versus capsule formulation, a multiple dose drug interaction study, a multiple dose drug interaction with food effect study, and a hepatic impairment study.
Our Ongoing and Planned Studies.
On March 28, 2019, the Company announced that it had initiated MAESTRO-NASH, a Phase 3 trial in NASH with its once daily, oral thyroid hormone receptor beta selective
agonist, resmetirom. This double-blind, placebo-controlled study is being conducted at more than 200 sites in the United States and the rest of the world. Patients with liver biopsy confirmed NASH with stage 2 or 3 fibrosis are being randomized 1:1:1 to receive a single oral daily dose of placebo, resmetirom 80 mg or resmetirom 100 mg. A second liver biopsy at week 52 in the first 900 patients will be the basis of filing for Subpart H-accelerated
approval; the primary endpoint pertains to the percent of patients treated with either dose of resmetirom as compared with placebo who achieve NASH resolution on the week 52 liver biopsy, defined as the absence of hepatocyte ballooning (score=0), and minimal lobular inflammation (score 0-1),
associated with at least a 2-point
reduction in NAS (NAFLD Activity Score), and no worsening of fibrosis stage. Two key secondary endpoints are reduction in LDL-cholesterol
and a 1-point
or more improvement in fibrosis stage on the week 52 biopsy with no worsening of NASH. Patients will continue in the study for a total of approximately 54 months, and will be evaluated for a composite clinical outcome including cirrhosis on liver biopsy, or a liver related event such as hepatic decompensation. The total anticipated enrollment is approximately 2,000 patients, and will include up to 15% high risk fibrosis stage NASH patients whose efficacy responses will be evaluated as exploratory endpoints. On June 30, 2021 we announced our achievement of the requisite enrollment of patients to support the planned Subpart H (Accelerated Approval of New Drugs for Serious or Life-Threatening Illnesses) submission to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). On December 18, 2019 the Company announced it had opened for enrollment MAESTRO-NAFLD-1,
a 52-week,
non-invasive,
multi-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase 3 clinical study of patients with biopsy-confirmed or presumed NASH recruited from sites in the U.S. Key endpoints are safety, including safety biomarkers. Secondary endpoints include LDL cholesterol, lipid biomarkers, MRI-PDFF,
NASH and fibrosis biomarkers. Except for serial liver biopsies, the study protocol is similar to the MAESTRO-NASH study with resmetirom doses of 80 mg or 100 mg or placebo. In October 2020, we completed enrollment of the double-blind, placebo-controlled arms of the study. Enrollment objectives for this study have been exceeded, with approximately 1,300 patients enrolled overall. The MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
study will help support the adequacy of the safety database at the time of NDA submission for Subpart H approval for treatment of NASH in patients with or fibrosis. On July 13, 2021 we announced first patient dosed in a planned 52-week
open label active treatment extension study of MAESTRO-NAFLD-1,
named MAESTRO-NAFLD-Open Label Extension (OLE). The OLE study allows patients who complete MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
to consent to 52 weeks of active treatment with resmetirom, making this treatment available to both patients who were assigned to placebo in MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
and patients who were on resmetirom in MAESTRO-NAFLD-1.
Key Developments
In January 2022, Madrigal announced topline results from the Phase 3 MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
safety study of resmetirom. Madrigal reported that resmetirom demonstrated statistical significance for primary and key secondary endpoints summarized above under “Business: Key Developments.”
COVID-19
Pandemic Effects on Madrigal
In April 2020 we announced that in response to guidance from regulatory agencies, measures for COVID-19
at impacted sites were put in place for our Phase 3 MAESTRO-NASH and MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
studies, allowing both studies to continue without changes to the protocol. Following a Data Monitoring Committee (DMC) meeting it was recommended that Phase 3 studies proceed without modification. The COVID-19
pandemic had no material adverse impact on our operating results, our conduct of the MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
study or our liquidity for previous periods. However, COVID-19
did introduce clinical trial and operational risks and uncertainties that are both general in nature and relate specifically to our MAESTRO-NASH study. In addition, at the height of COVID-19,
MAESTRO-NAFLD-1
double blind patients had an average of two missed visits and two dose interruptions, with the dose interruptions primarily related to third-parties. These risks and uncertainties, which are beyond our control, are summarized in the section entitled “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Basis of Presentation
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily consist of costs associated with our research activities, including the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates. We expense our research and development expenses as incurred. We contract with clinical research organizations to manage our clinical trials under agreed upon budgets for each study, with oversight by our clinical program managers. We account for nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities as expenses when the service has been performed or when the goods have been received. Manufacturing expense includes costs associated with drug formulation development and clinical drug production. We do not track employee and facility related research and development costs by project, as we typically use our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple research and development programs. We believe that the allocation of such costs would be arbitrary and not be meaningful.
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of:
•
salaries and related expense, including stock-based compensation;
•
external expenses paid to clinical trial sites, contract research organizations, laboratories, database software and consultants that conduct clinical trials;
•
expenses related to development and the production of nonclinical and clinical trial supplies, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•
expenses related to preclinical studies;
•
expenses related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements; and
•
other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for depreciation of equipment and other supplies.
We expect to continue to incur substantial expenses related to our development activities for the foreseeable future as we conduct our clinical studies programs, manufacturing and toxicology studies. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials, additional drug manufacturing requirements, and later stage toxicology studies such as carcinogenicity studies. Our research and development expenses have increased year over year in each of 2019, 2020, and 2021 and we expect that our research and development expenses will increase substantially in the future. The process of conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials necessary to obtain regulatory approval is costly and time consuming. The probability of success for each product candidate is affected by numerous factors, including preclinical data, clinical data, competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. Accordingly, we may never succeed in achieving marketing approval for any of our product candidates
Completion dates and costs for our clinical development programs as well as our research program can vary significantly for each current and future product candidate and are difficult to predict. As a result, we cannot estimate with any degree of certainty the costs we will incur in connection with the development of our product candidates at this point in time. We expect that we will make determinations as to which programs and product candidates to pursue and how much funding to direct to each program and product candidate on an ongoing basis in response to the scientific success of early research programs, results of ongoing and future clinical trials, our ability to enter into collaborative agreements with respect to programs or potential product candidates, as well as ongoing assessments as to each current or future product candidate’s commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries, benefits and stock-based compensation expenses for employees, management costs, costs associated with obtaining and maintaining our patent portfolio, professional fees for accounting, auditing, consulting and legal services, and allocated overhead expenses.
We expect that our general and administrative expenses may increase in the future as we expand our operating activities, maintain and expand our patent portfolio and incur additional costs associated with being a public company and maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements. We expect these potential increases will likely include management costs, legal fees, accounting fees, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance premiums and expenses associated with investor relations.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued research and development expenses. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Research and Development Costs
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Research and development costs are comprised of costs incurred in performing research and development activities, including internal costs (including stock-based compensation), costs for consultants, milestone payments under licensing agreements, and other costs associated with the Company’s preclinical and clinical programs. In particular, the Company has conducted safety studies in animals, optimized and implemented the manufacturing of our drug, and conducted Phase 1-3
clinical trials, all of which are considered research and development expenditures. Management uses significant judgment in estimating the amount of research and development costs recognized in each reporting period. Management analyzes and estimates the progress of its preclinical studies and clinical trials, completion of milestones events per underlying agreements, invoices received and contracted costs when estimating the research and development costs to accrue in each reporting period. Actual results could differ from the Company’s estimates. The Company’s historical estimates for research and development costs have not been materially different from the actual costs.
Stock-Based Compensation
The Company recognizes stock-based compensation expense based on the grant date fair value of stock options granted to employees, officers and directors. The Company uses the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the grant date fair value as management believes it is the most appropriate valuation method for its option grants. The Black-Scholes model requires inputs for risk-free interest rate, dividend yield, volatility and expected lives of the options. The expected lives for options granted represent the period of time that options granted are expected to be outstanding. The Company uses the simplified method for determining the expected lives of options. Expected volatility is based upon an industry estimate or blended rate including the Company’s historical trading activity. The risk-free rate for periods within the expected life of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of the grant. The Company estimates the forfeiture rate based on historical data. This analysis is re-evaluated
at least annually and the forfeiture rate is adjusted as necessary.
Certain of the employee stock options granted by the Company are structured to qualify as incentive stock options (ISOs). Under current tax regulations, the Company does not receive a tax deduction for the issuance, exercise or disposition of ISOs if the employee meets certain holding requirements. If the employee does not meet the holding requirements, a disqualifying disposition occurs, at which time the Company may receive a tax deduction. The Company does not record tax benefits related to ISOs unless and until a disqualifying disposition is reported. In the event of a disqualifying disposition, the entire tax benefit is recorded as a reduction of income
tax expense. The Company has not recognized any income tax benefit for its share-based compensation arrangements due to the fact that the Company does not believe it is more likely than not it will realize the related deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenue
We did not generate any revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating Expenses
The following table provides comparative results of our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expense
Our research and development expenses were $205.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $184.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Research and development expenses increased by $20.4 million in the 2021 period due primarily to the additional activities related to the Phase 3 clinical trials initiated in 2019, an increase in manufacturing costs to support ongoing clinical trials and to prepare for commercialization, and an increase in head count and related expenses. We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next couple years as we advance our clinical and preclinical development programs for resmetirom and as we increase our research and development efforts in connection therewith.
General and Administrative Expense
Our general and administrative expenses were $37.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. General and administrative expenses increased by $15.5 million in the 2021 period due primarily to an increase in non-cash
stock compensation from stock option awards and increase in other general and administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses may increase over time as we advance our clinical and preclinical development programs for resmetirom and expand our operating activities, which will likely result in an increase in our headcount, consulting services, and related overhead needed to support those efforts.
Interest Income
Our interest income was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income was due primarily to a lower average principal balance in our investment account in 2021 and decreased interest rates.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Revenue
We did not generate any revenue during the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Operating Expenses
The following table provides comparative results of our operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019 (in thousands):
Research and Development Expense
Our research and development expenses were $184.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $72.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Research and development expenses increased by $112.5 million in the 2020 period due primarily to the additional activities related to the initiation of the Phase 3 clinical trial in NASH, including a payment due related to a milestone achieved under our agreement with Roche, an increase in head count, and an increase in non-cash
stock compensation from stock option awards. We expect our research and development expenses to increase over the next several years as we advance our clinical and preclinical development programs for resmetirom and as we increase our research and development efforts in connection therewith.
General and Administrative Expense
Our general and administrative expenses were $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $22.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. General and administrative expenses decreased by $0.8 million in the 2020 period due primarily to a decrease in non-cash
stock compensation from stock option awards, partially offset by increases in other general and administrative expenses. We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase over the next several years as we advance our clinical and preclinical development programs for resmetirom and continue operating as a public company, both of which will likely result in an increase in our headcount, consulting services, and certain overhead needed to support those efforts.
Interest Income
Our interest income was $4.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to $11.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in interest income was due primarily to a lower average principal balance in our investment account in 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have incurred significant net losses and we have funded our operations primarily through the issuance of convertible debt, the issuance of shares of our common stock and shares of our preferred stock, and the proceeds from the merger. Our most significant use of capital pertains to salaries and benefits for
our employees, including clinical, scientific, operational, financial and management personnel, and external research and development expenses, such as clinical trials and preclinical activity related to our product candidates.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities totaling $270.3 million compared to $284.1 million as of December 31, 2020, with the decrease attributable to the funding of operations. Our cash and investment balances are held in a variety of interest-bearing instruments, including obligations of U.S. government agencies, U.S. Treasury debt securities, corporate debt securities and money market funds. Cash in excess of immediate requirements is invested in accordance with our investment policy with a view toward capital preservation and liquidity.
We anticipate continuing to incur operating losses for the foreseeable future. While our rate of cash usage will likely increase in the future, in particular to support our product development and clinical trial efforts, we believe our available cash resources as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our operations past one year from the issuance of the financial statements contained herein, and this outlook takes into account circumstances that are currently reasonably foreseeable in connection with the COVID-19
pandemic. For a description of COVID-19
pandemic risks, including risks and uncertainties beyond our control, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” of this Annual Report. Our future long-term liquidity requirements will be substantial and will depend on many factors. To meet future long-term liquidity requirements, we will need to raise additional capital to fund our operations through equity or debt financings, collaborations, partnerships or other strategic transactions. We regularly consider fundraising opportunities and may decide, from time to time, to raise capital based on various factors, including market conditions and our plans of operation. This includes, but is not limited to, the use of a $200 million at-the-market
sales agreement entered into in June of 2021, with Cowen and Company, LLC (the “2021 Sales Agreement”), pursuant to which we may, from time to time, issue and sell shares of our common stock up to established limits. Additional capital may not be available on terms acceptable to us, or at all. We also have the ability to delay certain research activities and related clinical expenses if necessary due to liquidity concerns until a date when those concerns are relieved. If adequate funds are not available, or if the terms of potential funding sources are unfavorable, our business and our ability to develop our product candidates would be harmed. Furthermore, any sales of additional equity securities may result in dilution to our stockholders, and any debt financing may include covenants that restrict our business.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our net cash flow activity (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $183.9 million, $157.6 million, and $41.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The use of cash in these periods resulted primarily from our losses from operations, as adjusted for non-cash
charges for stock-based compensation, and changes in our working capital accounts. Net cash used in the year ended December 31, 2021 increased from prior years predominately due to escalated clinical trial related activity.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of $394.1 million of purchase of marketable securities for our investment portfolio, partially offset by $389.3 million from sales and maturities of marketable securities.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $159.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of $489.5 million from sales and maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by $329.3 million of purchases of marketable securities for our investment portfolio.
Net cash provided in investing activities was $30.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of $650.2 million from sales and maturities of marketable securities, partially offset by $619.3 million of purchase of marketable securities for our investment portfolio.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $171.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and consisted primarily of sales of our common stock under the 2020 and 2021 Sales Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC and the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and consisted primarily of sales of our common stock under the 2020 Sales Agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC and the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 and consisted primarily of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Contractual Obligations and Commercial Commitments
As of December 31, 2021, we had contractual obligations and commercial commitments as follows (in thousands):
Operating leases relates to our corporate headquarters facility located in West Conshohocken, Pennsylvania.
The Company has entered into customary contractual arrangements in support of the Phase 3 clinical trials.
Off-Balance
Sheet Arrangements
We do not have any off balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of recent accounting pronouncements.