ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in Item 15. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on July 9, 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to raise capital or to complete our initial Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
As previously disclosed, the Company, entered into that certain Business Combination Agreement, dated as of July 21, 2021, as amended by that certain Amendment No. 1 to the Business Combination Agreement, dated as of December 30, 2021 (as amended, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to time, the “Business Combination Agreement”), by and among (i) Company, (ii) OP Group Holdings, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“OP Group”), (iii) Paylink Holdings Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Blocker”), (iv) Normandy Holdco LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“Blocker Owner”), (v) Olive Ventures Holdings, Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of Blocker (“PubCo”), (vi) Milestone Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of PubCo (“Milestone Merger Sub”), (vii) MDH Merger Sub Inc., a Delaware corporation and wholly-owned subsidiary of PubCo (“MDH Merger Sub”), and (viii) CF OMS LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (“CF OMS”, and collectively, the “Contracting Parties”).
On April 1, 2022, the Company and OP Group entered into a Termination of Business Combination Agreement (the “Termination Agreement”) pursuant to which the Company and OP Group mutually agreed to terminate the Business Combination Agreement.
As a result of the termination of the Business Combination Agreement, the Business Combination Agreement is of no further force and effect and none of the Contracting Parties shall have any further liability thereunder, with the exception of (i) the agreements contained in Section 9.9(a) (Communications; Press Release; SEC Filings), Section 9.10 (Expenses), Section 13.2 (Effect of Termination) and Article XIV (Miscellaneous) of the Business Combination Agreement, (ii) any corresponding definitions to the foregoing clause (i) set forth in Section 1.1 (Certain Definitions) of the Business Combination Agreement and (iii) the Confidentiality Agreement, dated as of February 8, 2021, by and between the Company and OP Group, each of which shall each survive the termination of the Business Combination Agreement and continue in full force and effect in accordance with their respective terms. Neither party will be required to pay the other a termination fee as a result of the mutual decision to enter into the Termination Agreement.
The termination of the Business Combination Agreement also terminates and makes void the Transaction Support Agreement (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement) and the Sponsor Letter Agreement (as defined in the Business Combination Agreement), each of which were executed concurrently with the Business Combination Agreement.
The foregoing descriptions of the Business Combination Agreement, the Termination Agreement, the Transaction Support Agreement, and the Sponsor Letter Agreement are not complete and are qualified in their entirety by reference to and the terms and conditions of, respectively, (i) the Business Combination Agreement, a copy of which was previously filed as Exhibit 2.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K on July 21, 2021, (ii) Amendment No. 1 to Business Combination Agreement, a copy of which was previously filed as Exhibit 2.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K on December 30, 2021, (iii) the Termination Agreement, a copy of which is filed with this Current Report on Form 8-K as Exhibit 10.1, and the terms of which are incorporated by reference herein, (iv)
the Transaction Support Agreement, a copy of which was previously filed as Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K on July 21, 2021, and (v) the Sponsor Letter Agreement, a copy of which was previously filed as Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K on July 21, 2021.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination and activities in connection with the proposed acquisition of Blocker and OP Group. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with searching for, and completing, a Business Combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $5,258,009, which consisted of a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,492,000 and income earned on our marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $29,717, partially offset by transaction costs allocable to warrant liabilities of $727,230 and operational costs of $3,536,478
For the period from July 9, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $1,000, which consisted of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 4, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 Units, at a price of $10.00 per Unit, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of their over-allotment option in the amount of 3,600,000 Units, generating gross proceeds of $276,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 6,550,000 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant generating gross proceeds of $6,550,000.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $907,188. Net income of $5,258,009 was affected by interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $29,717, the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $9,492,000 and transaction costs incurred in connection with warrant liabilities of $727,230. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,629,290 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from July 9, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $0. Net loss of $1,000 was affected by the changes in operating assets and liabilities.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $276,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $15,612,362 in transaction costs, including $5,520,000 of underwriting fees, $9,660,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $432,362 of other offering costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $276,029,717 of marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less deferred underwriting commissions and income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $92,993 of cash held outside of the Trust Account.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to a mutually agreed amount of
such loans may be convertible into warrants, at a price of $1.00 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. As of December 31, 2021, the Sponsor advances amounted to $377,543 and subsequently an additional $157,000 for an aggregate amount of $535,000, which are currently due on demand.
Going Concern
We will need to raise additional capital through loans or additional investments from our Sponsor, stockholders, officers, directors, or third parties. Our officers, directors and Sponsor may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds, from time to time or at any time, in whatever amount they deem reasonable in their sole discretion, to meet our working capital needs. Accordingly, we may not be able to obtain additional financing. If we are unable to raise additional capital, we may be required to take additional measures to conserve liquidity, which could include, but not necessarily be limited to, curtailing operations, suspending the pursuit of a potential transaction, and reducing overhead expenses. We cannot provide any assurance that new financing will be available to us on commercially acceptable terms, if at all. The Company has until February 4, 2023 to consummate a Business Combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate a Business Combination by this time. If a Business Combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should a Business Combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the caring amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after February 4, 2023. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the date that the financial statements are issued.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on January 28, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $9,660,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Warrants in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statements of operations.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid- in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. Shares subject to forfeiture are not included in basic and diluted weighted average shares outstanding until the forfeiture restrictions lapse. Remeasurement associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from income (loss) per common share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) the private placement since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 20,350,000 Class A common stock in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We early adopted ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021. The adoption of ASU 2020-06 did not have an impact on our financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.