ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the accompanying notes thereto included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data.” In addition to historical financial information, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. See “Forward-Looking Statements.” Our results and the timing of selected events may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors.
Plan of Operations
For the next 12 to 18 months, all of our operations will be performed by our sole officer and director, Michael Gelmon. During that period intend out-source third party contractors to design our website, we will also intend to have a strong presence on social media, such as Facebook and Instagram.
Going Concern
Conditions exist that raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern due to our recurring losses from operations, deficit in equity, and the need to raise additional capital to fund operations. The “going concern” opinion could impair our ability to finance our operations through the sale of debt or equity securities.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
We did not earn any revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
The Company reported operation expenses of $20,798 consisting primarily of legal, accounting and various other public company related expenses. The Company also reported an interest expense of $6,825 and other income in the form of a gain on forgiveness of debt of $65,599 comprised of a credit provided by the Company’s transfer agent of $55,599 and a payment of $10,000 to settle the payable by the Company’s former management, resulting in net income of $37,976 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The Company reported operation expenses of $13,728 consisting primarily of legal, accounting and various other public company related expenses. The Company also reported an interest expense of $6,825 resulting in a net loss of $20,553 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capital Resources and Liquidity
Since our director may be unwilling or unable to loan or advance us additional capital, we believe that if we do not raise additional capital over the next 12 months following the filing of this annual report, we may be required to suspend or cease the implementation of our business plans.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $0 of cash compared to $0 of cash as of December 31, 2020. We anticipate that our current cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from financing activities will be insufficient to satisfy our liquidity requirements for the next 12 months. To date, the Company has incurred operating losses since inception of $294,003. At December 31, 2021, the Company has working capital deficit of $230,798.
The Company requires additional funding to meet its ongoing obligations and to fund anticipated operating losses. Management has expressed substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The ability of the Company to continue as a going concern is dependent on raising capital to fund its initial business plan and ultimately to attain profitable operations. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability and classification of recorded asset amounts or amounts and classification of liabilities that might result from this uncertainty.
We expect to incur marketing, professional, and administrative expenses as well expenses associated with maintaining our filings with the Commission. We will require additional funds during this time and will seek to raise the necessary additional capital. If we are unable to obtain additional financing, we may be required to reduce the scope of our business development activities, which could harm our business plans, financial condition and operating results. Additional funding may not be available on favorable terms, if at all. The Company intends to continue to fund its business by way of equity or debt financing and advances from related parties. Any inability to raise capital as needed would have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operations.
If we cannot raise additional funds, we will have to cease business operations. As a result, investors in the Company’s common stock would lose all of their investment.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
There are no off-balance sheet arrangements currently contemplated by management or in place that are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on the business, financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenue or expenses, result of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures and/or capital resources.
Recent Accounting Standards
The Company has implemented all new accounting standards that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting standards that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.