Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis provides information that management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our consolidated results of operations and financial condition. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of the Form 10-K generally discusses fiscal 2022 and 2021 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2022 and 2021, as well as certain fiscal 2020 items. Discussions of fiscal 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between fiscal 2021 and 2020 that are not included in this Form 10-K can be found in "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" of our Current Report on Form 8-K filed with the SEC on June 21, 2021, including the audited consolidated financial statements of 23andMe, Inc. as of March 31, 2021 and 2020 filed as Exhibit 99.1 thereto and Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations included therein.
Unless the context otherwise requires, references in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” to the “Company,” “we,” “us,” and “our” refer to 23andMe Holding Co., a Delaware corporation formerly known as VG Acquisition Corp. and its consolidated subsidiaries. References to VG Acquisition Corp. or “VGAC” refer to the Company prior to the consummation of the Business Combination.
Overview
23andMe Holding Co., formerly known as VG Acquisition Corp., is a mission-driven company dedicated to empowering customers to live healthier lives. Our mission is to help people access, understand, and benefit from the human genome.
We pioneered direct-to-customer genetic testing through our PGS products and services. Our PGS business provides customers with a full suite of genetic reports, including information on customers’ genetic ancestral origins, personal genetic health risks, and chances of passing on certain rare carrier conditions to their children, as well as reports on how genetics can affect responses to medications. We believe that by providing customers with direct access to their genetic information, we can empower them to make better decisions by arming them with information about their risks of developing certain diseases or conditions and by highlighting opportunities for prevention and mitigation of disease. We provide customers with an engaging experience, including access to frequent updates to their genetic health and ancestry reports and new product features, the ability to connect with genetic relatives, and a subscription option for extended health insights. Customers have the option to participate in our research programs and over 80% of our customers have done so. We analyze consenting customers’ genotypic data together with phenotypic data they provide to us concerning their physical characteristics, family origins, lifestyle, and other habits. We analyze this data using our proprietary machine learning and other analytic techniques in order to discover insights into whether and how particular genetic variants affect the likelihood of individuals developing specific diseases. These insights may highlight opportunities to develop a drug to treat or cure a specific disease.
We completed our acquisition of Lemonaid Health on November 1, 2021. Lemonaid Health, an on-demand platform for accessing medical care and pharmacy services online, offers telemedicine, lab, and pharmacy services to patients in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.K. We believe that the addition of Lemonaid Health's telehealth services to our consumer business will enable us to bring better healthcare to individuals in an affordable and accessible way and offer personalized healthcare, based on a patient’s wellness, choices, and genetics.
Our Therapeutics business focuses on the use of genetic insights to validate and develop novel therapies to improve patients’ lives. We currently have research programs across several therapeutic areas, including oncology, respiratory, and cardiovascular diseases. In July 2018, we signed an exclusive agreement with GSK to leverage genetic insights to validate, develop, and commercialize promising drugs. This multi-year collaboration is expected to identify and prioritize genetically validated drug targets, enable rapid progression of clinical programs, and bring useful new drugs to market. In addition to our collaboration with GSK, we have several proprietary programs, one of which is being pursued in collaboration with Almirall, S.A.
Our second most advanced program, 23ME-00610, is an antibody that blocks the suppression of T-cells by tumors and reactivates their immune response. 23ME-00610 is wholly owned by the Company, and this program entered Phase 1 clinical trials in January 2022. Following the expiration of the GSK Agreement, we will have the opportunity to collaborate with, or out-license other wholly owned programs to third parties or to develop them independently.
We operate in two reporting segments: Consumer & Research Services and Therapeutics. The Consumer & Research Services segment consists of our PGS and telehealth business, as well as research services that we perform under agreements with third parties, including the GSK Agreement, relating to the use of our genotypic and phenotypic data to identify promising drug targets. The Therapeutics segment consists of revenues from the out-licensing of intellectual property associated with identified drug targets and expenses related to therapeutic product candidates under clinical development. For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, substantially all our revenues were derived from our Consumer & Research Services segment.
The table below reflects our revenue for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021:
The table below reflects our two segments’ Adjusted EBITDA (as defined below) for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021:
* Adjusted EBITDA is the measure of segment profitability reported to our Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”), who is our chief operating decision-maker (“CODM”). We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income before net interest expense (income), net other expense (income), changes in fair value of warrant liabilities, income tax benefit, depreciation and amortization of fixed assets, amortization of internal use software, amortization of acquired intangible assets, non-cash stock-based compensation expense, acquisition-related costs, litigation settlements not related to normal and continued business activities and expenses related to restructuring and other charges, if applicable, for the period. See “-Adjusted EBITDA” below for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss.
Key Factors Affecting Results of Operations
We believe that our performance and future success depend on several factors that present significant opportunities for us but also pose risks and challenges, including those discussed below and included (or incorporated by reference) in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K.
New Customer Acquisition
PGS. Our ability to attract new customers is a key factor for the future growth of our PGS business and our database. Our historical financial performance has largely been driven by, and in the future will continue to be affected by, the rate of sales of our PGS kits. Revenue from our PGS business, primarily composed of kit sales, represented approximately, 75% and 81% of our total revenues for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. In addition, kit sales are a source of subscribers to our new subscription service. We expect kit sales and our new subscription service to grow as we increase awareness of our current and new offerings in existing markets, expand into new ones, and enhance our subscription service with new features.
Purchasing patterns of our kits are largely influenced by product innovation, marketing spends, and varying levels of price discounting on our products. These promotional windows have typically aligned with gift-giving portions of the year, with an emphasis on the holiday period, other gift-giving and family-oriented holidays such as Mother’s Day and Father’s Day, and Amazon Prime Day, which may change from year to year. Historically, we have experienced higher revenue in the fourth quarter of the fiscal year compared to other quarters. Over time, we expect the seasonality of our business to continue, with pronounced increases in revenue recognized in the fourth fiscal quarter. We generally incur higher sales and marketing expenses during holiday promotional periods, which have included, among others, Mother’s Day, Father’s Day, and the November-December holidays.
Telehealth. Our ability to attract new patients and members is a key factor for the future growth of our telehealth business. Revenue from our telehealth business represented approximately 7% of our total revenues for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, which included the five month period from the close of the acquisition of Lemonaid Health on November 1, 2021 through March 31, 2022. Telehealth awareness, acceptance, and usage have been positively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to increased consumer acceptance of virtual care. While we anticipate continued growth, there are many participants in the telehealth market, including new entrants and traditional health care systems offering virtual care, and competition is intense.
Engagement of Research Participants
Our ability to conduct research and grow our database of genotypic and phenotypic information depends on our customers’ willingness to consent to participate in our research. Over 80% of our customers have consented to participate in research. These customers permit us to use their de-identified data in our research and many of them regularly respond to our research surveys, providing us with phenotypic data in addition to the genetic data in their DNA samples. We analyze this genotypic and phenotypic data and conduct genome-wide association studies and phenome-wide association studies, which enable us to determine whether particular genetic variants affect the likelihood of individuals developing certain diseases.
Our customers can withdraw their consent to participate in research at any time. If a significant number of our customers were to withdraw their consent, or if the percentage of consenting customers were to decline significantly in the future, our ability to conduct research successfully could be diminished, which could adversely affect our business.
Drug Target Productivity of Our Genetics Database
Our genetics database underpins our research programs and enables us to identify drug targets with novel genetic evidence. As of March 31, 2022, we have identified over 50 drug targets. We expect the current productivity of our genetics database to continue based on the increasing amounts of data that we expect to result from increased kit sales and customer engagement. Any significant decline in such productivity would have a negative impact on our ability to identify drug targets and ultimately to develop and commercialize new drugs.
Development of Therapeutic Product Candidates
Our ability to successfully identify and develop therapeutic product candidates will determine the success of our Therapeutics business over time. Developing therapeutic product candidates with novel genetic evidence requires a significant investment of resources over a prolonged period of time, and a core part of our strategy is to continue making sustained investments in this area. We have over 50 programs in our pipeline in various stages of research and development that have been selected and are being pursued.
We have one therapeutic product candidate, CD96, our joint immuno-oncology antibody program with GSK, in clinical development, for which we have elected to take a royalty option. Our wholly-owned immuno-oncology antibody, 23ME-00610, entered Phase 1 clinical trials in January 2022. Additional programs are in research or preclinical stages of development. We have incurred, and will continue to incur, significant research and development costs for preclinical studies and clinical trials. We expect that our research and development expenses will continue to constitute a significant portion of our expenses in future periods.
Collaborations
Substantially all of our research services revenues are generated from the GSK Agreement. In January 2022, GSK elected to exercise its option to extend the exclusive target discovery period of the ongoing collaboration with the Company for an additional year ending in July 2023. We will receive a one-time payment of $50.0 million to extend the period. In addition, the Company elected to take a royalty option on its joint immuno-oncology antibody collaboration program with GSK targeting CD96 (GSK6097608, a.k.a. GSK’608). GSK will be solely responsible for GSK’608’s subsequent development in later-stage clinical trials, including full development costs moving forward. Additionally, all of our Therapeutics revenue for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was derived from our agreements with GSK and Almirall, S.A. There was no Therapeutics revenue for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022.
Our ability to enter into new collaboration agreements, upon the expiration of the GSK Agreement, will affect our research services revenues. If we are unable to enter into additional collaboration agreements, our future research services revenue may decline.
Ability to Commercialize Our Therapeutics Products
Our ability to generate revenue from our therapeutic product candidates depends on our and our collaborators’ ability to successfully complete clinical trials for our therapeutic product candidates and receive regulatory approval, particularly in the United States, Europe, and other major markets.
We believe that our broad portfolio of therapeutic product candidates with novel genetic evidence and validated targets enhances the likelihood that our research and development efforts will yield successful therapeutic product candidates. Nonetheless, we cannot be certain if any of our therapeutic product candidates will receive regulatory approvals. Even if such approvals are granted, we will thereafter need to establish manufacturing and supply arrangements and engage in extensive marketing efforts and expenses prior to generating any revenue from such products. The ultimate commercial success of our products will depend on their acceptance by patients, the medical community, and third-party payors, their ability to compete effectively with other therapies in the market, and the appropriate pricing and reimbursement of the products by third-party payors.
The competitive environment is also an important factor with the commercial success of our therapeutic product candidates, and our ability to successfully commercialize a therapeutic product candidate will depend on whether there are competing therapeutic product candidates in development or already marketed by other companies.
Expansion into New Categories
We launched our 23andMe+ subscription service in October 2020, and through our acquisition of Lemonaid Health, we began providing access to telehealth services in November 2021. We expect to expand into new categories and innovative healthcare models with the goal of driving future growth. Those opportunities include product enhancements, such as our proprietary polygenic risk scores, new product offerings aimed at extending our personalized and customer-centric philosophy to primary healthcare, and potential additional acquisitions of other consumer-oriented healthcare businesses. Such expansion would allow us to increase the number of engaged customers who purchase or subscribe for additional products and services.
Success of our subscription service will depend upon our ability to acquire and retain subscribing customers over an extended period. Retention of customers will be based on the perceived value of the premium content and features they receive. If we are unable to provide sufficiently compelling new content and features, subscribers may not renew.
Similarly, the success of our telehealth business is dependent on our ability to attract and retain patients and members. Category expansion allows us to increase the number of patients to whom we can provide products and services. It also allows us to offer access to treatment of additional conditions that may already affect our current patients. Expanding into new categories will require financial investments in additional headcount, marketing and customer acquisition expenses, additional operational capabilities, and may require the purchase of new inventory. If we are unable to generate sufficient demand in new categories, we may not recover the financial investments we make into new categories and revenue may not increase in the future.
Investments in Growth and Innovation
Our research platform is based on a continually growing database of genotypic and phenotypic information. Our database allows us to conduct analyses in a multi-directional fashion, by searching for genetic signatures of particular diseases or the likelihood of a particular genetic variant causing disease in a particular individual or group of individuals who share the same trait. Our platform enables us to rapidly and serially conduct studies across an almost unlimited number of conditions at unprecedented statistical power, yielding insights into the causes and potential treatments of a wide variety of diseases.
We believe that our research platform enables us to rapidly identify genetically validated drug targets with improved odds of clinical success. With our state-of-the-art bioinformatics capabilities, we analyze the trillions of data points in our database, optimizing the use of our resources, to genetically validate drug targets, inform patient selection for clinical trials, and increase the probability of success of our programs. We plan to advance new drugs through the rapid selection of those with compelling clinical promise.
We expect to continue investing in our business to capitalize on market opportunities and the long-term growth of our company. We intend to make significant investments in therapeutics research and development efforts and in marketing to acquire new customers and drive brand awareness, and also expect to incur software development costs as we work to enhance our existing products, expand the depth of our subscription service, and design new offerings, including additional primary care offerings. In addition, we expect to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company. The expenses we incur may vary significantly by quarter depending, for example, on when significant hiring takes place, and as we focus on building out different aspects of our business.
COVID-19 Impact
We are continuing to closely monitor the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in all aspects of our business. We rely entirely on third-party vendors in our PGS and telehealth supply chain, including our PGS kit and array manufacturers, order fulfillment vendor, our DNA-processing lab vendor, and drug suppliers for our pharmacy business. These vendors have independent responses to managing the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic, and we have not experienced any significant disruptions in our ability to fulfill and process PGS or telehealth orders to date. If we experience delays or other challenges in obtaining supplies necessary for the production, fulfillment, or distribution of the products or services we offer, it could negatively affect our ability to satisfy our obligations to customers and maintain our operations in a cost-efficient manner and have a material adverse effect on our business.
With respect to our telehealth services, the COVID-19 pandemic has increased awareness, acceptance, and usage of virtual medical care and pharmacy services, resulting in greater consumer trial and use of telehealth. While we believe that these trends present significant opportunities for our telehealth services, it is uncertain whether the increase in demand caused by COVID-19 will continue.
In our Therapeutics segment, the advancement of our programs requires our scientists to have physical access to our laboratory facilities on a continuing basis, and we have implemented health and safety protocols and procedures to keep our laboratory facilities operating during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, despite the introduction and continued administration of COVID-19 vaccines, the pandemic remains highly volatile and continues to evolve. We cannot accurately predict the duration or extent of the impact of the COVID-19 virus, including the Omicron, Delta, and other variants and other areas that may affect our business operations. Despite our mitigation efforts, we may experience delays or an inability to execute on our clinical and preclinical development plans, reduced revenues or other adverse impacts to our business, which are described in more detail in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. The duration of the COVID-19 pandemic and the impact of the efforts being made to contain it or to flatten the spread of the disease cannot be predicted with any accuracy, and this uncertainty could have a material impact on our financial results for the foreseeable future.
We have taken other measures in response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, including closing our offices and implementing a work-from-home policy for most of our workforce, and amplifying monitoring of our inventory levels and supply chain. Notwithstanding these measures, the spread of COVID-19 has at certain times impacted our staffing and attendance in our laboratory facilities. We may take further actions that alter our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, and stockholders or as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities.
Basis of Presentation
The consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes of the Company included elsewhere in this Form 10-K include the accounts of 23andMe Holding Co. and its consolidated subsidiaries and variable interest entities and were prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP"). As 23andMe, Inc. is considered the Company’s accounting predecessor, all historical financial information presented in the consolidated financial statements represents the accounts of 23andMe, Inc. and its wholly owned subsidiary. Certain prior period amounts within the “Results of Operations” section have been reclassified in order to conform with the current year presentation of separately reported research and development expenses and sales and marketing expenses.
As discussed above, we operate in two reporting segments: Consumer & Research Services and Therapeutics. The Consumer & Research Services segment consists of our PGS and telehealth business, as well as research services that we perform under agreements with third parties, including the GSK Agreement, relating to the use of our genotypic and phenotypic data to identify promising drug targets. The Therapeutics segment consists of revenues from the out-licensing of intellectual property associated with identified drug targets and expenses related to therapeutic product candidates under clinical development. Substantially all our revenues are derived from our Consumer & Research Services segment.
Key Business Metrics
We monitor the following key metrics to help us evaluate our business, identify trends, formulate business plans, and make strategic decisions. We believe the following metrics are useful in evaluating our business:
•PGS Customers. When we refer to our “Customers,” this means individuals who have registered a PGS kit and provided their DNA sample. We view Customers as an important metric to assess our financial performance because each Customer has registered a kit and has engaged with us by providing us with their DNA sample. These Customers may be interested in purchasing additional PGS products and services or in becoming subscribers to our new 23andMe+ subscription service, especially if they consent to participate in our research. We had approximately 12.8 million and 11.3 million Customers as of March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
•Consenting Customers. “Consenting Customers” are Customers who have affirmatively opted in to participate in our research program. Consenting Customers are critical to our research programs and to the continuing growth of our database, which we use to identify drug targets and to generate new and interesting additional ancestry and health reports. Moreover, Consenting Customers respond to our research surveys, providing useful phenotypic data about their traits, habits, and lifestyles, which we analyze using de-identified data to determine whether a genetic variant makes an individual more or less likely to develop certain diseases. A Consenting Customer is likely to be more engaged with our brand, which may lead to the purchase of our 23andMe+ subscription service and to participation in further research studies, helping us to advance our research. Over 80% of our Customers are Consenting Customers.
•Subscribers. This metric represents the number of subscribers who have signed up for our 23andMe+ subscription service, which was launched in October 2020. We believe that 23andMe+ will position us for future growth, as the annual membership model represents a previously untapped source of recurring revenue. We are continually investing in new reports and features to provide to subscribers as part of the 23andMe+ membership, which we believe will enhance customer lifetime value as customers can make new discoveries about themselves. We believe that this, in turn, will help to scale our customer acquisition costs and create expanding network effects. As of March 31, 2022 and 2021, our 23andMe+ membership base had approximately 425,000 and 125,000 subscribers, respectively.
•Adjusted EBITDA. Adjusted EBITDA is the measure of segment profitability reported to our CEO, the CODM. See “-Adjusted EBITDA” below for a reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net loss.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We recognize revenue in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“ASC 606”), when we transfer promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services.
Our consolidated revenue is composed primarily of sales of PGS kits to customers and telehealth services which include online medical visits, pharmacy services, and memberships, as well as revenues from target discovery activities as part of our research collaborations through our Consumer & Research Services segment. Additionally, revenue is generated through our collaboration agreements in our Therapeutics segment primarily as a result of the out-licensing of intellectual property to collaboration partners.
See Note 2 to our accompanying consolidated financial statements for a more detailed discussion of our revenue recognition policy.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit, and Gross Margin
Cost of revenue for PGS primarily consists of cost of raw materials, lab processing fees, personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, shipping and handling, and allocated overhead. Cost of revenue for telehealth primarily consists of personnel-related expenses that we incur for medical services, prescription drug costs, packaging and shipping, and amortization of intangible assets. Cost of revenue for research services primarily consists of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, and allocated overhead. We expect cost of revenue to increase in the foreseeable future in absolute dollars but gradually decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term.
Our gross profit represents total revenue less our total cost of revenue, and our gross margin is our gross profit expressed as a percentage of our total revenue. Our gross profit and gross margin have been and will continue to be affected by a number of factors, including the volume of PGS kit sales recognized, the prices we charge for our PGS products and research services, the prices we charge for telehealth services (medical visits, pharmacy services, and memberships), the fees we incur for lab processing PGS kits, the costs we incur for medical services and prescription drug costs, and revenues from our collaboration agreements. We expect our Consumer & Research Services gross margin to increase over the long term as subscription revenues become a higher percentage of revenue mix, although our gross margin may fluctuate from period to period. Substantially all our research services revenue is currently derived from the GSK Agreement. If we are unable to add new research services agreements, our research services revenue may decline substantially following the expiration of the GSK Agreement in July 2023.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses primarily consist of research and development, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses. Personnel-related expenses, which include salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, is the most significant component of research and development and general and administrative expenses. Advertising and brand-related spend and personnel-related expenses represent the primary components of sales and marketing expenses. Operating expenses also include allocated overhead costs. Overhead costs that are not substantially dedicated for use by a specific functional group are allocated based on headcount. Allocated overhead costs include shared costs associated with facilities (including rent and utilities) and related personnel, information technology and related personnel, and depreciation of property and equipment.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses support our efforts to add new services and new features to our existing services, and to ensure the reliability and scalability of our services across our Consumer and Research Services segment. Research and development expenses also include our efforts to discover and genetically validate new therapeutic product candidates and continue to develop our portfolio of existing therapeutic product candidates, either our own proprietary programs or those in collaboration with partners across our Therapeutics segment. Research and development expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation associated with our research and development personnel, collaboration expenses, preclinical and clinical trial costs, laboratory services and supplies costs, third-party data services, and allocated overhead.
We plan to continue to invest in personnel to support our research and development efforts. We intend to make significant investments in therapeutics research and development efforts as we ramp up our clinical trials and the GSK collaboration. This multi-year collaboration with GSK is expected to validate drug targets with novel genetic evidence, enable rapid progression of clinical programs, and bring useful new drugs to market. We expect that research and development expenses will increase on an absolute dollar basis in the foreseeable future as we continue to invest in our products, pipeline, and infrastructure for long-term growth. In addition, our research and development expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to the timing and amount of these expenses.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising costs, personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation associated with our sales and marketing personnel, amortization of intangible assets, and outside services. Outside services are primarily related to sales consultants that support sales of PGS kits.
Advertising and brand costs consist primarily of direct expenses related to television and radio advertising, including production and branding, paid search, online display advertising, direct mail, affiliate programs, marketing collateral, market research and public relations. Advertising production costs are expensed the first time the advertising takes place, and all other advertising costs are expensed as incurred. Deferred advertising costs primarily consist of vendor payments made in advance to secure media spots across varying media channels, as well as production costs incurred before the first time the advertising takes place. Deferred advertising costs are expensed on the first date the advertisements occur. In addition, advertising costs include platform fees due to brokers related to our third-party retailers.
We expect our sales and marketing expenses to gradually decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term, although our sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate as a percentage of revenue from period to period due to promotional strategies that drive the timing and amount of these expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses primarily consist of personnel-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation associated with corporate management, including our CEO office, finance, legal, compliance, regulatory, and other administrative personnel. In addition, general and administrative expenses include professional fees for external legal, accounting, and other consulting services, net litigation settlement as well as credit card processing fees related to PGS kit sales and telehealth services.
We expect general and administrative expenses to increase for the foreseeable future as we increase headcount with the growth of our business. We also expect general and administrative expenses to increase in the near term as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses associated with compliance with SEC rules and regulations, and related increases in legal, audit, insurance, investor relations, professional services, and other administrative expenses. However, we anticipate general and administrative expenses to gradually decrease as a percentage of revenue over the long term, although it may fluctuate as a percentage of total revenue from period to period due to the timing and amount of these expenses.
Other (Expense) Income
Other (expense) income includes interest (expense) income, net, change in fair value of warrants liabilities, effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates, and other (expense) income, net. Interest (expense) income, net primarily consists of interest income earned on our cash deposits. Other (expense) income, net primarily consists of other non-operating income and expenditures.
Benefit for Income Taxes
The income tax benefit primarily consists of a partial release in valuation allowance. Deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance to the extent management believes it is not more likely than not to be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income. Management makes estimates and judgments about future taxable income based on assumption that are consistent with our plans and estimates.
Results of Operations
Comparisons for years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, and the dollar and percentage change between the periods:
(1)Includes stock-based compensation expense as follows:
(2)Includes stock-based compensation expense related to secondary sale transactions as follows:
During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, there were no secondary sale transactions.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of revenue for the periods indicated:
Revenue
Total revenue increased by $28.0 million, or 11%, for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The increase was due primarily to an increase of $24.4 million in consumer services revenue, driven mainly by the Lemonaid Acquisition, which resulted in $19.2 million in telehealth services revenue, subscription services revenue of $5.9 million, as well as higher PGS kit sales volume, which resulted from increased marketing spending and growth in consumer demand. The increase was also due to an increase of $3.6 million in research services revenue, driven mainly by an increase in GSK revenue of $6.1 million, partially offset by a decrease of $2.5 million in revenue for other (non-GSK) research services projects. The increase in GSK revenue was primarily attributable to a cumulative revenue adjustment of $9.0 million as a result of a change in estimate related to a change in total project resources resulting in a higher percentage of completion to date and was partially offset by $2.9 million of decreased revenue due to lower project hours incurred during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. This change in estimate only impacted the timing of revenue recognition as the total revenue to be recognized for the GSK research services project will remain the same. This change in estimate is discussed further in Note 7 of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Cost of Revenue, Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Total cost of revenue increased by $12.0 million, or 9%, for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, compared to the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The increase in cost of revenue was due primarily to a $10.8 million increase in costs related to consumer services revenue, driven mainly by the addition of $13.1 million in costs associated with telehealth services from the Lemonaid Acquisition, which primarily related to personnel-related expenses, and $1.4 million in amortization expense for developed technology. The foregoing increases in costs related to consumer services revenue was partially offset by a decrease of $2.3 million related to PGS kit sales mainly due to lower lab processing and overhead costs. Additionally, costs associated with research services revenue increased by $1.2 million.
Our gross profit increased by $15.9 million, or 14%, to $132.9 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 from $117.0 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. The increase in gross profit was primarily due to the increases in consumer services revenue and research services revenue as discussed above, as well as lower lab processing costs.
Our gross margin improved year over year, from 48% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 to 49% for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, due to increased revenue from subscription services, which generates a higher gross margin than our PGS kit sales, operating efficiencies and lower costs in lab processing, slightly offset by telehealth services margin.
Research and Development Expenses
The following table sets forth our research and development expenses for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, and the dollar and percentage change between the periods:
Research and development expenses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 was $189.4 million, compared to $159.9 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021. This increase of $29.5 million, or 18%, is primarily attributable to the increase in personnel-related expenses of $15.8 million, due to growth in headcount and stock-based compensation for new equity awards granted. In addition, facilities, other overhead allocation, and other increased by $8.6 million due to higher allocated overhead costs related to increased research and development headcount, as well as increased personnel-related expenses for shared costs departments and a $2.1 million increase in consulting services during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. Lab-related research services related to funding for our programs with GSK and to advancing our Therapeutics portfolio also increased by $7.6 million. These increases were partially offset by a $2.5 million decrease in depreciation, equipment and supplies primarily due to an operating lease amendment to extend the lease term of the Company's facility located in South San Francisco, California, which increased the asset life leasehold improvement assets.
For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, 53% and 55% of total research and development expenses are attributable to the Consumer and Research Services business, respectively, and 47% and 45% are attributable to our Therapeutics business, respectively. The increase attributable to the Therapeutics business is driven by our continued investment in drug discovery and advancement of ongoing programs.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
The following table sets forth our sales and marketing expenses for fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, and the dollar and percentage change between the periods:
Sales and marketing expenses for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 amounted to $100.3 million, compared to $43.2 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, representing an increase of $57.1 million, or 132%. This increase was primarily driven by the $49.2 million increase in advertising and brand-related spend in our marketing programs to grow our consumer business. Depreciation and amortization increased $5.6 million due to amortization of acquired intangible assets from the Lemonaid Acquisition.
General and Administrative Expenses
Total general and administrative expenses decreased by $1.8 million, or 2%, from $99.1 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 to $97.4 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. The decrease in general and administrative expenses was due primarily to a $34.6 million decrease in personnel-related expenses, mainly due to a $39.7 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense, offset by a $5.1 million increase in other personnel-related expenses due to increased headcount. The $39.7 million decrease in stock-based compensation expense was attributable to a $51.1 million decrease arising from an option modification that occurred in the prior fiscal year and secondary transactions that also occurred during the prior fiscal year, partially offset by an $11.3 million increase related to new equity award grants, including shares granted in connection with the Lemonaid Acquisition. The foregoing decreases were partially offset by a $21.8 million increase in outside services, mainly attributable to increased advisory, legal and consulting services related to the Business Combination and the Lemonaid Acquisition, integration fees and $10.0 million in net litigation settlement, and a $9.2 million increase in other operating expenses, mainly due to an increase in director and officer insurance as a public company and credit card processing fees related to the increase in PGS kit sales and telehealth services. There was also a $1.9 million increase in facilities expenses and other overhead allocation due to higher allocated overhead costs and increased headcount.
Interest (Expense) Income, Net
Interest (expense) income, net was $0.3 million for both the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Change in Fair Value of Warrant Liabilities
Change in fair value of warrant liabilities increased by $33.0 million, or 100%, from nil for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 to $33.0 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. This increase was due to a reduction in the fair value of the Warrants that were assumed in connection with the Business Combination, which was primarily driven by movements in our stock price and volatility measurements.
As of March 31, 2022, all Warrants were exercised or redeemed. Accordingly, there are no warrant liabilities outstanding.
Other (Expense) Income, Net
Other (expense) income, net decreased by $1.4 million, or 106%, from $1.3 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 to less than $(0.1) million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. This decrease was primarily due to a lease reassessment that occurred in June 2020, which resulted in a one-time $0.9 million gain during for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021.
Benefit for Income Taxes
Benefit for income taxes, net increased by $3.5 million, or 100%, from nil for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 to $3.5 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022. This increase was primarily due to the partial release of valuation allowance totaling $3.5 million as a result of acquisitions.
Adjusted EBITDA
We evaluate the performance of each segment based on Adjusted EBITDA, which is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as net income before net interest expense (income), net other expense (income), changes in fair value of warrant liabilities, income tax benefit, depreciation and amortization of fixed assets, amortization of internal use software, amortization of acquired intangible assets, non-cash stock-based compensation expense, acquisition-related costs, litigation settlements not related to normal and continued business activities, and expenses related to restructuring and other charges, if applicable for the period. Adjusted EBITDA is a key measure used by our management and our Board of Directors to understand and evaluate our operating performance and trends, to prepare and approve our annual budget, and to develop short- and long-term operating plans. In particular, we believe that the exclusion of the items eliminated in calculating Adjusted EBITDA provides useful measures for period-to-period comparisons of our business. Accordingly, we believe that Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information in understanding and evaluating our operating results in the same manner as our management and our Board of Directors. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation of, or as an alternative to, measures prepared in accordance with GAAP. Other companies, including companies in our industry, may calculate similarly-titled non-GAAP financial measures differently or may use other measures to evaluate their performance, all of which could reduce the usefulness of Adjusted EBITDA as a tool for comparison. There are a number of limitations related to the use of these non-GAAP financial measures rather than net loss, which is the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP.
Some of the limitations of Adjusted EBITDA include (i) Adjusted EBITDA does not properly reflect capital commitments to be paid in the future, and (ii) although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the underlying assets may need to be replaced and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect these capital expenditures. In evaluating Adjusted EBITDA, you should be aware that in the future we will incur expenses similar to the adjustments in this presentation. Our presentation of Adjusted EBITDA should not be construed as an inference that our future results will be unaffected by these expenses or any unusual or non-recurring items. When evaluating our performance, you should consider Adjusted EBITDA alongside other financial performance measures, including our net loss and other GAAP results.
The following tables reconcile net loss to Adjusted EBITDA for fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 on a company-wide basis and for each of our segments:
(1)Certain expenses such as Finance, Legal, Regulatory and Supplier Quality, and CEO Office are not reported as part of the reporting segments as reviewed by the CODM. These amounts are included in Unallocated Corporate.
(2)For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022, acquisition-related costs primarily consisted of advisory, legal and consulting fees related to the Lemonaid Acquisition.
(3)For the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, litigation settlement is litigation cost net of insurance recoveries, which is not expected to occur on a recurring basis and not part of the Company's normal and continued business activity.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through sales of equity securities and revenue from sales of PGS, telehealth, and research services. We received gross proceeds of $309.7 million from the Business Combination and $250.0 million from the PIPE Investment (as defined in Note 3 of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K). Our primary requirements for liquidity and capital are to fund operating needs and finance working capital, capital expenditures, and general corporate purposes.
As of March 31, 2022, our principal source of liquidity was our cash balance of $553.2 million, which is held for working capital purposes. We have generated significant operating losses as reflected in our accumulated deficit and negative cash flows from operations. We had accumulated deficit of $1.2 billion and $1.0 billion as of March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. As of the date of this Form 10-K, we believe our existing cash resources are sufficient to continue operating activities for the next 12 months.
We expect to continue to incur operating losses and generate negative cash flows from operations for the foreseeable future due to the investments we intend to continue to make in research and development, and additional general and administrative costs we expect to incur in connection with operating as a public company. Cash from operations could also be affected from our customers and other risks detailed in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Form 10-K. We expect to continue to maintain financing flexibility in the current market conditions. As a result, we may require additional capital resources to execute strategic initiatives to grow our business.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors including our revenue growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support further sales and marketing, and research and development efforts. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we raise additional funds by issuing equity or equity-linked securities, our stockholders may experience dilution. Future debt financing, if available, may involve covenants restricting our operations or our ability to incur additional debt. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be materially and adversely affected.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities of $166.8 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022 was primarily related to a net loss of $217.5 million and changes in fair value of warrant liabilities of $33.0 million, partially offset by non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $57.9 million, depreciation and amortization of $23.7 million and amortization of internal-use software of $2.4 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $0.5 million were primarily related to an increase in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $10.1 million primarily due to increases in prepaid insurance and other receivables, a decrease in deferred revenue of $8.8 million primarily due to more kit sales from holiday sales than revenue recognized during the period, a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $7.1 million primarily due to lease payments, an increase in inventories of $4.3 million due to increased purchases aligned with higher forecasted sales, an increase in deferred cost of revenue of $2.2 million primarily due to an increase in PGS kit sales for the holiday season, an increase in other assets of $1.8 million primarily due to an increase in long-term prepaid expenses, and an increase in accounts receivable of $0.9 million primarily attributable to seasonal holiday sales through Amazon.com. These were offset by an increase in accounts payable of $22.9 million primarily due to the timing of payments, an increase in accrued expenses and other current liabilities of $8.3 million primarily due to timing of vendor invoice receipts, a decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets of $7.1 million primarily due to right-of-use assets amortization, and a decrease in other liabilities of $3.6 million mainly related to a deferred income tax benefit recognized for partial release of valuation allowance.
Net cash used in operating activities of $74.3 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021 was primarily related to a net loss of $183.6 million, partially offset by non-cash charges for stock-based compensation of $88.4 million and depreciation and amortization of $18.1 million. The net changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.5 million were primarily related to a decrease in deferred revenue of $16.2 million as a result of reduced deferred revenue balance related to GSK, and a decrease in operating lease liabilities of $8.5 million primarily due to lease payments. These were offset by a decrease in operating lease right-of-use assets of $10.3 million due to right-of-use assets amortization and adjustment to the carrying amount of the right-of-use assets, a decrease in inventories of $7.9 million due to decreased purchase aligned with lower forecasted sales, a decrease in accounts receivable of $3.9 million, as well as a decrease in deferred cost of revenue of $1.2 million due to decrease in PGS kit sales, and a decrease in prepaid expenses and other current assets of $2.1 million due to decrease in deferred advertising and other receivables.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Cash flows from investing activities primarily relate to purchase of property and equipment, prepayments for intangible assets, as well as capitalization of internal-use software costs.
Net cash used in investing activities was $108.1 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, which consisted of cash paid for acquisitions, net of cash acquired of $94.2 million, purchases of intangible assets of $5.5 million related to a patent rights purchase, capitalization of internal-use software costs of $4.5 million and purchases of property and equipment of $4.0 million.
Net cash used in investing activities was $6.5 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, which consisted of purchases of property and equipment of $4.0 million and capitalization of internal-use software costs of $3.3 million, partially offset by proceeds from sale of property and equipment of $0.8 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $546.0 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, which consisted of $309.7 million in proceeds from the Business Combination, $250.0 million of proceeds from the PIPE Investment, and $17.0 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, which were partially offset by $30.6 million in payments of deferred offering costs, and $0.1 million in payments for Warrant redemptions.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $155.3 million for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, which consisted of $82.2 million in proceeds from the issuance of convertible preferred stock, net of issuance costs, and $76.2 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options, which were partially offset by $3.1 million in payments of deferred offering costs.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our lease portfolio includes leased offices, dedicated lab facility and storage space, and dedicated data center facility space, with remaining contractual periods from 1.8 years to 9.3 years. Refer to Note 11 of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a summary of our future minimum lease obligations.
In the normal course of business, we enter into non-cancelable purchase commitments with various parties for purchases. Refer to Note 11 of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a summary of our commitments as of March 31, 2022.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of consolidated financial statements also requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results could differ significantly from the estimates made by management. To the extent that there are differences between our estimates and actual results, our future financial statement presentation, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows will be affected. We believe the following are the critical accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, as well as the significant estimates and judgments affecting the application of these policies. This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this report.
Our significant accounting policies are described in Note 2 of our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K. These are the policies that we believe are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We generate revenue from our Consumer & Research Services segment, which includes revenue from PGS, telehealth, and research services, and our Therapeutics segment. In accordance with ASC 606, revenue is recognized when a customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of revenue recognized reflects the consideration that we expect to receive in exchange for these goods or services.
We sell through multiple channels, including direct-to-consumer via our website and through online retailers. If the customer does not return the Kit, services cannot be completed by us, potentially resulting in unexercised rights (“breakage”) revenue. To estimate breakage, we apply the practical expedient available under ASC 606 to assess our customer contracts on a portfolio basis as opposed to individual customer contracts, due to the similarity of customer characteristics, at the sales channel level. We recognize the breakage amounts as revenue, proportionate to the pattern of revenue recognition of the returning kits in these respective sales channel portfolios. We estimate breakage for the portion of Kits not expected to be returned using an analysis of historical data and consider other factors that could influence customer Kit return behavior. We update our breakage rate estimate periodically and, if necessary, adjust the deferred revenue balance accordingly. If actual return patterns vary from the estimate, actual breakage revenue may differ from the amounts recorded. We recognized breakage revenue from unreturned kits of $21.9 million and $24.1 million for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
We generate telehealth revenues from patient fees, pharmacy fees, and membership fees.
In providing telehealth services that include professional medical consultations, we maintain relationships with various affiliated PMCs, which are professional entities owned by licensed physicians and that engage licensed healthcare professionals (each, a “Provider” and collectively, the “Providers”) to provide consultation services. We account for service revenue as a principal in the arrangement with our patients.
Additionally, with respect to our telehealth services involving the sale of prescription products, we maintain relationships with affiliated pharmacies (collectively, the “Affiliated Pharmacies”) to fill prescriptions that are ordered by our patients. We account for prescription product revenue as a principal in the arrangement with our patients.
Business Combinations
We account for our business combinations using the acquisition method of accounting, which requires, among other things, allocation of the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. The results of businesses acquired in a business combination are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of acquisition. Acquisition costs, such as legal and consulting fees, are expensed as incurred.
Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenue and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. The estimates and assumptions used to determine the fair values and useful lives of identified intangible assets could change due to numerous factors, including market conditions, technological developments, economic conditions, and competition. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, not to exceed one year from the date of acquisition, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with a corresponding offset to goodwill if new information is obtained related to facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date. After the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are reflected in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
When we issue stock-based or cash awards to an acquired company’s stockholders, we evaluate whether the awards are consideration or compensation for post-acquisition services. The evaluation includes, among other things, whether the vesting of the awards is contingent on the continued employment of the acquired company’s stockholders beyond the acquisition date. If continued employment is required for vesting, the awards are treated as compensation for post-acquisition services and recognized as expense over the requisite service period.
Uncertain tax positions and tax-related valuation allowances are initially established in connection with a business combination as of the acquisition date. We continue to collect information and reevaluate these estimates and assumptions quarterly. We will record any adjustments to our preliminary estimates to goodwill, provided that it is within the one-year measurement period.