Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to assist in the understanding and assessing the trends and significant changes in our results of operations and financial condition. Historical results may not be indicative of future performance. This discussion includes forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Such statements involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those contemplated by these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited consolidated financial statements and the notes thereto included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In this discussion, we use certain financial measures that are not prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). Explanation of these non-GAAP financial measures and reconciliation to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures are included in this Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations. Investors should not consider non-GAAP financial measures in isolation or as substitutes for financial information presented in compliance with GAAP.
All amounts are presented in thousands except share amounts, per share data, years and ratios.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Critical accounting policies are those policies that, in management’s view, are most important in the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations. The notes to the consolidated financial statements include full disclosure of significant accounting policies. The methods, estimates, and judgments that we use in applying our accounting policies have a significant impact on the results that we report in our financial statements. These critical accounting policies require us to make difficult and subjective judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates regarding matters that are inherently uncertain. Those critical accounting policies and estimates that require the most significant judgment are discussed further below. See Note 1 - Nature of Business and summary of significant accounting policies, in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for more specifics.
Goodwill, Other Intangibles and Other Long-Lived Assets
Our long-lived assets consist primarily of property, equipment, purchased intangible assets and goodwill. The valuation and the impairment testing of these long-lived assets involve significant judgments and assumptions, particularly as they relate to the identification of reporting units, asset groups and the determination of fair market value.
We test our tangible and intangible long-lived assets subject to amortization for impairment whenever facts and circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. We test goodwill and indefinite lived intangible assets for impairment annually, or more frequently if triggering events occur indicating that there may be impairment.
We have recorded goodwill and perform testing for potential goodwill impairment at a reporting unit level. A reporting unit is an operating segment, or a business unit one level below an operating segment for which discrete financial information is available, and for which management regularly reviews the operating results. Additionally, components within an operating segment can be aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. We have performed testing on our one reporting unit.
We determine the fair value of our reporting unit using an income approach. Under the income approach, we calculate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated future cash flows. The income approach is dependent on several key management assumptions, including estimates of future sales, gross margins, operating costs, interest expense, income tax rates, capital expenditures, changes in working capital requirements and the weighted average cost of capital or the discount rate. Discount rate assumptions include an assessment of the risk inherent in the future cash flows of the reporting unit. Expected cash flows used under the income approach are developed in conjunction with our budgeting and forecasting process.
We test our goodwill for impairment on an annual basis, and more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that it might be impaired. Due to the economic conditions during the second quarter of 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, we determined that an impairment triggering event occurred, which required an interim quantitative impairment assessment of goodwill. Based on our interim quantitative assessments, the fair value of our reporting unit exceeded our related carrying value by more than 50%, thus no impairment of goodwill was indicated. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were no events or changes in circumstances that would indicate a material impairment of our goodwill.
Changes to management assumptions and estimates utilized in the income approach could negatively impact the fair value conclusions for our reporting unit resulting in goodwill impairment. All key assumptions and valuations are determined by and are the responsibility of management. The factors used in the impairment analysis are inherently subject to uncertainty. We believe that the estimates and assumptions are reasonable to determine the fair value of our reporting unit, however, if actual results are not consistent with these estimates and assumptions, goodwill and other intangible assets may be overstated which could trigger an impairment charge.
For impairment testing of long-lived assets, we identify asset groups at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets and liabilities. Recoverability of assets to be held and used is measured by a comparison of the carrying amount of an asset group to estimated undiscounted future cash flow expected to be generated by the assets. If the carrying amount of an asset group exceeds its estimated future cash flows, an impairment charge is recognized by the amount by which the carrying amount of the asset exceeds the estimated fair value of the asset group. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no events or changes in circumstances that indicated a material impairment of our long-lived assets. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded an impairment of its long-lived assets in the amount of $16,151. Please refer to Note 24 - Subsequent Event in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further discussion of the facts and circumstances that led to this impairment.
Determining the useful life of an intangible asset also requires judgment. Certain intangible assets are expected to have indefinite lives based on their history and our plans to continue to support and build the acquired brands. Other acquired intangible assets such as customer relationships, trade names, and non-compete agreements are expected to have determinable useful lives. The costs of determinable-lived intangibles are amortized to expense over their estimated lives.
Income Taxes
The provision for, or benefit from, income taxes includes deferred taxes resulting from temporary differences in income for financial and tax purposes using the liability method. Such temporary differences result primarily from differences in the carrying value of assets and liabilities. Future realization of deferred income tax assets requires sufficient taxable income within the carryback and/or carryforward period available under tax law.
The Company evaluates on a quarterly basis whether, based on all available evidence, it is probable that the deferred income tax assets are realizable. Valuation allowances are established when it is estimated that it is more likely than not that the tax benefit of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The evaluation includes the consideration of all available evidence, both positive and negative, regarding the estimated future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, estimated future taxable income exclusive of reversing temporary differences and carryforwards, historical taxable income in prior carryback periods if carryback is permitted, and potential tax planning strategies which may be employed to prevent an operating loss or tax credit carryforward from expiring unused. The verifiable evidence such as future reversals of existing temporary differences and the ability to carryback are considered before the subjective sources such as estimate future taxable income exclusive of temporary differences and tax planning strategies. Additionally, we record uncertain tax positions at their net recognizable amount, based on the amount that management deems is more likely than not to be sustained upon ultimate settlement with the tax authorities in jurisdictions in which we operate.
Revenue recognition
The Company adopted Accounting Standards Codification 606 January 1, 2019, where the Company recognizes revenue for the transfer of goods or services to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration it expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. The Company enters into supply agreements and purchase orders that include both free on board (FOB) origin and FOB destination shipping terms. Depending on the terms of the agreement, the customer takes ownership at shipment or at delivery, and this is when control transfers. Sales are supported by documentation such as supply agreements and purchase orders, which specify certain terms and conditions including product specifications, quantities, fixed prices, delivery dates and payments terms. Revenue related to services is recognized in the period in which the services are performed, thus the Company recognizes revenue at a point in time.
There are many customers where the Company designs, engineers and builds production tooling, which is purchased by the customer. Most of the tooling revenue is complete at the point the customer signs off on the product through the Product Part Approval Process (PPAP) and the tool is placed into service. Revenue is recognized when control of the tooling promised under a contract is transferred to the customer either at a point in time or over a period of time in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for the goods or services.
The Company offers certain customers discounts for early payments. These discounts are recorded against net sales in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income (Loss) and accounts receivable in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company does not offer any other customer incentives, rebates or allowances.
ESOP
Under the Mayville Engineering Company, Inc. Employee Stock Ownership Plan (the ESOP), the Company can make annual contributions to the trust for the benefit of eligible employees in the form of cash or shares of common stock of the Company upon the approval of the Board of Directors’. Prior to December 31, 2019, the annual contribution was discretionary except that it must have been at least 3% of the compensation for all safe harbor participants for the plan year. Beginning on January 1, 2020, all contributions are discretionary. The stock in the ESOP is held in trust for the sole benefit of the participants. Shares allocated to a participant’s account are fully vested. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, the Company’s ESOP expense amounted to $0, $0, $5,453, respectively. The Company elected to make annual discretionary contributions to the Mayville Engineering
Company, Inc. 401(k) Plan in 2020 and 2021, providing participants the opportunity to diversify their shares of common stock of the Company if they choose to.
Upon retirement, death, termination of employment or exercise of diversification rights, the eligible portion of a participant’s ESOP account is redeemable annually at the current price per share of the stock. Under the terms of the ESOP prior to the IPO, we were obligated to redeem eligible participant account balances for cash (in accordance with the redemption schedule and subject to the limitations set forth in the ESOP). Following the IPO, (i) we no longer redeem participants’ ESOP interests, as distributions from the ESOP made to a participant following retirement, death or termination of employment, or the exercise of diversification rights under the Traditional ESOP, will be made in our common stock, and upon receiving a distribution of our common stock from the ESOP a participant will be able to sell such shares of common stock in the market, subject to any requirements of federal securities law; and (ii) with respect to any participant who exercises statutory diversification rights under the ESOP, the ESOP Trustee will sell, on behalf of the participant, the shares that the participant has elected to diversify and reinvest the sale proceeds in an alternate investment option as directed by the participant.
Emerging Growth Company
The JOBS Act permits an “emerging growth company” like us to take advantage of an extended transition period to comply with new or revised accounting standards applicable to public companies. We are choosing to use this provision and, as a result, we will comply with new or revised accounting standards as required for private companies.
Internal Controls and Procedures
Our management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting for our company. Internal control over financial reporting is a process to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of our financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP. Internal control over financial reporting includes maintaining records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect our transactions; providing reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary for preparation of our financial statements; providing reasonable assurance that receipts and expenditures of our assets are made in accordance with management’s authorization; and providing reasonable assurance that unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of our assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements would be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting is not intended to provide absolute assurance that a misstatement of our financial statements would be prevented or detected. Furthermore, our controls and procedures can be circumvented by the individual acts of some persons, by collusion of two or more people or by management override of the control, and misstatements due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected on a timely basis.
While preparing for the IPO in 2019 and as of December 31, 2019, we identified material weaknesses in the design and operation of our internal control over financial reporting that were remediated as of December 31, 2020. In 2019 and 2020, we took numerous steps to enhance our internal control environment and remediate the prior material weaknesses. Despite these actions, we may identify additional material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting in the future.
If we identify future material weaknesses in our internal control over financial reporting or if we are unable to comply with the demands that are placed upon us as a public company, including the current and future requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, in a timely manner, we may be unable to accurately report our financial results, or report them within the timeframes required by the SEC. In addition, if we are unable to assert that our internal control over financial reporting is effective in future years, or if our independent registered public accounting firm is unable to express an opinion as to the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting when required, investors may lose confidence in the accuracy and completeness of our financial reports, we may face restricted access to the capital markets and our stock price may be adversely affected.
Overview
MEC is a leading U.S.-based value-added manufacturing partner that provides a broad range of prototyping and tooling, production fabrication, coating, assembly and aftermarket components. Our customers operate in diverse end markets, including heavy- and medium-duty commercial vehicles, construction & access equipment, powersports, agriculture, military and other end markets. We have developed long-standing relationships with our blue-chip customers based upon a high level of experience, trust and confidence.
Our one operating segment focuses on producing metal components that are used in a broad range of heavy- and medium-duty commercial vehicles, construction & access equipment, powersports, agricultural, military and other products.
In May 2019, we completed our IPO. In conjunction with the IPO, the Company’s legacy business converted from an S Corporation to a C Corporation. As a result, the consolidated business is subject to paying federal and state corporate income taxes on its taxable income from May 9, 2019 forward.
COVID-19 Impact
The COVID-19 pandemic has had and will continue to have a negative impact on our business, financial condition, cash flows, results of operations, supply chain, and raw material availability, although the full extent is still uncertain.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, net sales reflected the significant disruption we encountered primarily due to COVID-19 pandemic with customer shutdowns, demand changes, and continued destocking, which were most apparent in the commercial vehicle, agriculture and construction & access equipment end markets served. Despite MEC and its customer base carrying the essential business designation, customer production facilities shut down for 5 - 6 weeks on average during the second quarter of 2020 due to the pandemic. As a direct result of the customer shutdowns, MEC temporarily halted production at some of its facilities during the second quarter. Customer manufacturing facilities gradually reopened toward the end of the second quarter, but MEC production volumes remained below pre-pandemic levels through the remainder of the year with all MEC facilities open. Despite the decline in volumes for the second, third and fourth quarters of 2020 due to the pandemic, all pre-existing customer relationships and manufacturing programs remained intact.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, net sales reflected the supply chain issues encountered by original equipment manufacturers’ that led to lower production demand at times, which can be directly attributed to microchip shortages in the commercial vehicle market and port issues that impacted nearly all end markets served. Additionally, we experienced inflationary pressures on wages, benefits, materials, and manufacturing supplies due to a higher level of competition for employees and materials. We are unable to predict the future impact of the labor and supply chain shortages and inflation, and the resulting impact on our business, financial condition, cash flows, and results of operations.
The future financial effects of the continuing COVID-19 pandemic are unknown due to many factors. These factors include uncertainty related to the Delta and Omicron variants, uncertainty of the effectiveness of governmental actions to address the pandemic, including health, monetary and fiscal policies, the effect of elevated levels of sovereign and state debt, capital market disruptions, changes in demand and pricing, trade agreements, other geopolitical events, and the availability and volatility in the price of raw materials and other commodities. As a result, predicting the Company’s forecasted financial performance is difficult and subject to many assumptions.
The Company’s first priority has been to safeguard the health and well-being of its employees while fulfilling its obligations as an essential business serving its customer base. This proactive approach has kept employees safe and production facilities operational based on customer demand. Our goal is to continue to successfully manage through the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and strengthen our position serving customers in the future.
How We Assess Performance
Net Sales. Net sales reflect sales of our components and products net of allowances for returns and discounts. Several factors affect our net sales in any given period, including general economic conditions, weather, timing of acquisitions and the production schedules of our customers. Net sales are recognized at the time of shipment to the customer.
Manufacturing Margins. Manufacturing margins represents net sales less cost of sales. Cost of sales consists of all direct and indirect costs used in the manufacturing process, including raw materials, labor, equipment costs, depreciation, lease expenses, subcontract costs and other directly related overhead costs. Our cost of sales is directly affected by the fluctuations in commodity prices, primarily sheet steel and aluminum, but these changes are largely mitigated by contractual agreements with our customers that allow us to pass through these price variations based upon certain market indexes.
Depreciation and Amortization. We carry property, plant and equipment on our balance sheet at cost, net of accumulated depreciation and amortization. Depreciation on property, plant and equipment is computed on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful life of the asset. Amortization expense is the periodic expense related to leasehold improvements and intangible assets. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the lesser of the life of the underlying asset or the remaining lease term. Our intangible assets were recognized as a result of certain acquisitions and are generally amortized on a straight-line basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets.
Other Selling, General, and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and personnel costs for our sales and marketing, finance, human resources, information systems, administration and certain
other managerial employees and corporate level administrative expenses such as incentive compensation, audit, accounting, legal and other consulting and professional services, travel, and insurance.
Other Key Performance Indicators
EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin
EBITDA represents net loss before interest expense, benefit for income taxes, depreciation and amortization. EBITDA Margin represents EBITDA as a percentage of net sales for each period.
Adjusted EBITDA represents EBITDA before transaction fees incurred in connection with the DMP acquisition and the IPO, the loss on debt extinguishment relating to our December 2018 credit agreement, non-cash purchase accounting charges including costs recognized on the step-up of acquired inventory and contingent consideration fair value adjustments, one-time increases in deferred compensation and long term incentive plan expenses related to the IPO, stock-based compensation, restructuring expenses related to the closure of the Greenwood facility, and impairment charges on long-lived assets and inventory specifically purchased to meet obligations under the agreement with our fitness customer. Adjusted EBITDA Margin represents Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales for each period. These metrics are supplemental measures of our operating performance that are neither required by, nor presented in accordance with, GAAP. These measures should not be considered as an alternative to net income or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP as an indicator of our operating performance. We present Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin as management uses these measures as key performance indicators, and we believe they are measures frequently used by securities analysts, investors and other parties to evaluate companies in our industry. These measures have limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP.
Starting in the first quarter of 2020, we excluded stock-based compensation expense from Adjusted EBITDA. Management excludes this charge when evaluating the performance of the business because it is a non-cash charge, and the Company is able to fund vesting obligations through its Omnibus Incentive Plan. Further, the exclusion of these charges aligns with the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA for purposes of our covenant calculations under the Credit Agreement. And finally, revaluations of grant date fair values can vary significantly with the passage of time without any accounting impact.
Our calculation of EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin may not be comparable to the similarly named measures reported by other companies. Potential differences between our measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA compared to other similar companies’ measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA may include differences in capital structure and tax positions.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA, and the calculation of EBITDA Margin and Adjusted EBITDA Margin for each of the periods presented.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020
Net Sales. Net sales were $454,826 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $357,606 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily driven by the improvement in market conditions from the prior year period and commercial pricing increases implemented in the fourth quarter of 2021 to combat inflationary pressures, which were slightly offset by customer supply chain issues and the timing lag related to contractual raw material price pass-throughs to customers. The prior year period was impacted by customer facility shutdowns driven by the pandemic, along with lower market demand and related destocking activities, which were most apparent in the Commercial Vehicle, Agricultural and Construction & Access Equipment end markets served.
Manufacturing Margins. Manufacturing margins were $51,375 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $31,501 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was driven by production volume increases and higher scrap income. Furthermore, the improved production volumes, the utilization of the Company’s investments in new technology and
automation, and efficiencies following the closure of the Greenwood, SC facility in 2020 resulted in significant improvements in absorbed manufacturing overhead costs. This was partially offset by the timing of raw material pricing passed through to customers, inflationary pressures on wages, benefits, materials, and general manufacturing supply costs during 2021, and increased utility, freight, repair, and other costs related to the improved sales volumes. Additionally, the Company incurred approximately $2.9 million in launch costs and $700 of inventory write-offs related to the agreement with the new fitness customer during 2021. Further, the prior year period was negatively impacted by the following: market demand changes, customer shutdowns related to the COVID-19 pandemic, approximately $775 of inventory obsolescence, and health care charges specific to the estimated potential impacts of the pandemic, and $2,524 of restructuring costs related to the Greenwood facility closure.
Manufacturing margin percentages were 11.3% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to 8.8% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, an increase of 2.5%, which can be attributed to the items discussed above.
Profit Sharing, Bonuses and Deferred Compensation Expenses. Profit sharing, bonuses and deferred compensation expenses were $11,500 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $8,250 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily driven by the return of normalized discretionary 401(k) and bonus accruals as business activity and sales volumes improved.
Other Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $20,409 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $19,043 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The increase was mainly driven by higher salary and payroll expenses which were unusually low in the prior year period due to the pandemic.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and Loss on Contracts. On February 18, 2022, the new customer in the fitness market informed the Company that it does not forecast any demand for any products or parts that are the subject of the agreement between the Company and the customer for the remainder of the agreement’s term, which ends March 2026. Given the circumstances, GAAP required the Company to assess whether the assets were impaired. As a result of this assessment, the Company recorded an impairment on the assets specifically purchased to meet obligations under the agreement with the fitness customer. As a result, the Company recorded an impairment of long-lived assets and loss on contracts of $16,151 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $2,003 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $2,668 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. On average, the Company carried a lower debt balance throughout the current year coupled with lower interest rates in 2021.
Benefit for Income Taxes. Income tax benefit was $1,943 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to income tax benefit of $2,074 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Please reference Note 9 - Income Taxes in the Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements for further details.
Due to the factors described in the preceding paragraphs, net loss, comprehensive loss, EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin increased during 2021.
Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Net Sales. Net sales were $357,606 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $519,704 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was driven by volume reductions across nearly all end markets served due to the COVID-19 pandemic, along with continued market demand changes and customer destocking activities which were most apparent in the Commercial Vehicle, Agriculture and Construction & Access Equipment end markets served. Despite MEC and its customer base carrying the essential business designation, customer production facilities shut down for 5 - 6 weeks on average during the second quarter of 2020 due to the pandemic. As a direct result of the customer shutdowns, MEC temporarily halted production at some of its facilities during this time period. Customer manufacturing facilities gradually reopened, but MEC production volumes remained below pre-pandemic levels through the remainder of the year. Despite these volume declines, all pre-existing customer relationships and manufacturing programs remained intact.
Manufacturing Margins. Manufacturing margins were $31,501 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $58,718 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decline was mainly driven by the aforementioned volume reductions propelled by the COVID-19 pandemic along with the continued impact of market demand changes and destocking activities resulting in higher under-absorbed manufacturing costs, and $2,524 of restructuring costs related to the Greenwood facility consolidation, the details of which are outlined in Note 22 - Greenwood Facility Closure and Restructuring of the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, cost of sales includes approximately $775 of inventory obsolescence and health care charges specific to the estimated potential impacts of the pandemic.
Our traditional methods of determining inventory obsolescence and health care accruals significantly rely upon historical data. When estimating the approximately $775 of COVID-19 reserves during 2020, we had neither historical information, nor much other data from which to compute an estimated impact for this type of event. Nevertheless, the Company believed the obvious risk posed by the pandemic had a financial impact in these areas. The charges for these COVID-19 specific accruals represented our best good faith estimate of the potential financial impact to the Company based on information available to us at the time. Due to the continued risk posed by the pandemic, these reserves remained mostly unchanged since establishment during the first quarter of 2020.
Manufacturing margin percentages were 8.8% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 11.3% for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019, a decline of 2.5%. This decline was mostly attributable to the aforementioned impacts of the pandemic, market demand changes and destocking activities resulting in under-absorbed fixed overhead costs along with Greenwood facility restructuring costs and COVID-19 specific reserves.
Profit Sharing, Bonuses and Deferred Compensation. Profit sharing, bonuses and deferred compensation expense were $8,250 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $25,105 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The prior year included $20,080 of one-time IPO expenses, including $10,159 for deferred compensation and $9,921 for our long-term incentive plan. Excluding these items from the prior year, these expenses increased $3,225. The increase was primarily due to increased stock-based compensation expense during 2020 due to the timing of awards.
Employee Stock Ownership Plan Expense. Employee stock ownership plan expense was zero for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $5,453 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. Prior to December 31, 2019, the annual
ESOP contribution was discretionary except that it must have been at least 3% of the compensation for all safe harbor participants for the plan year. Beginning in 2020, all contributions are discretionary. The change is due to the decision to eliminate this particular discretionary gain sharing contribution for the fiscal year 2020 as a result of lower financial performance due to the adverse impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Other Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Other selling, general and administrative expenses were $19,043 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $25,466 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The prior year includes $5,744 of one-time other IPO and DMP acquisition related expenses. Excluding these one-time charges, these expenses decreased $679. The decrease was driven by synergies achieved through the integration of DMP, lower travel and entertainment expenses in 2020 due to the pandemic restrictions, and other cost saving initiatives initiated during 2020, slightly offset by an increase in costs associated with being a publicly traded company.
Contingent Consideration Revaluation. The DMP purchase agreement provided for a payout to the previous shareholders of DMP of $7,500, but not more than $10,000 if a certain level of EBITDA was generated during the twelve-month period ended September 30, 2019. We estimated the fair value of the contingent consideration payable balance of $6,076 as of the acquisition date of December 14, 2018. We then remeasured the fair value each quarter through September 30, 2019, with the change recorded as a contingent consideration revaluation adjustment. Based on our calculations in accordance with the purchase agreement, and as agreed to by DMP’s former shareholders, it was determined DMP’s EBITDA fell short of the payout threshold and as a result, the contingent consideration payable balance was adjusted to zero in the third quarter of 2019, resulting in income of $6,054 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019.
Interest Expense. Interest expense was $2,668 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $6,728 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The change is due to lower borrowings during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the same prior year period along with lower interest rates attributable to the more favorable terms afforded under our amended and restated Credit Agreement.
Benefit for Income Taxes. Income tax benefits were $2,074 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $4,088 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The decrease is due to a smaller pretax loss in 2020. As of December 31, 2020, our federal net operating loss (NOL) carryforward was $11,833 driven by the pretax losses incurred during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 and 2019.
The Company completed its IPO in May of 2019. The following tax adjusted pro forma amounts reflect income tax adjustments as if the Company was a taxable entity as of the beginning of 2019 using a 26% effective tax rate.
Due to the factors described in the preceding paragraphs, net loss and comprehensive loss increased, while EBITDA, EBITDA Margin, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Margin decreased during 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following is a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows:
Cash Flows Analysis Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $14,457 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $36,523 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $22,066 decrease in operating cash flows was primarily due to changes in net working capital, more specifically, accounts receivable rose relative to the growth in sales, while inventories and accounts payable were elevated due to higher raw material prices and other costs as production levels rebounded from the pandemic lows. Additionally, the Company carried more inventory at the end of 2021 due to the deferment of customer orders into 2022 as they navigate supply chain issues impacting their production schedules.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $33,961 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $5,774 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $28,187 increase in cash used in investing activities was driven by the Company’s continued investment in technology and automation in 2021 as compared to leveraging our investments in new technology and automation and preserving cash during the prior year period. Additionally, the Company invested $19,658 into the new Hazel Park, MI facility during 2021. The Company also recorded $5,348 in proceeds from the sale of property, plant and equipment mainly driven by the sale of the Greenwood, SC facility during the current period.
Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities was $19,501 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to cash used in financing activities of $30,629 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The $50,130 change was driven by higher borrowings in excess of debt repayments in the second half of 2021 compared to debt repayments in excess of borrowings during the prior year. The Company repurchased 147,785 shares of our common stock in 2021 under our share repurchase program at a total cost of $2,153 and an average cost of $14.57 per share. In 2020, the Company repurchased 320,245 shares of our common stock under our share repurchase program at a total cost of $2,435 and an average cost of $7.60 per share. The Company’s decision to repurchase shares in 2022 will depend on business conditions, free cash flow generation, other cash requirements and stock price. See Item 5. Market for Registrants Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities, for additional information regarding share repurchases.
Cash Flows Analysis Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2019
Operating Activities. Cash provided by operating activities was $36,523 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 as compared to $33,402 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The 3,121 increase in operating cash flows was primarily due to a greater reduction in inventory, prepaids and other assets, along with beneficial changes in a variety of other operating assets and liability categories in 2020 as compared to the same prior year period. Changes to pricing, payment terms and credit terms did not have a significant impact on changes to working capital items, or any other element of the operating cash flow activities for the periods presented.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities was $5,774 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to $28,090 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $22,316, or 79.4%, decrease in cash used in investing activities was driven by our capital spend changing from a focus on investments in new technology and automation in 2019, to leveraging those investments and preserving cash in 2020. In addition, due to the Greenwood facility closure, the Company generated more proceeds from the sale of equipment in 2020 as compared to 2019.
Financing Activities. Cash used by financing activities was $30,629 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, as compared to cash used in financing activities of $8,400 for the twelve months ended December 31, 2019. The $22,229 change was driven by the use of operating cash flow in 2020 to pay down debt as compared to net cash used in 2019 driven by IPO proceeds to pay down debt.
Amended and Restated Credit Agreement
On September 26, 2019, and as last amended as of March 31, 2021, we entered into the Credit Agreement with certain lenders and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent (the Agent). The Credit Agreement provides for a $200,000 Revolving Loan, with a letter of credit sub-facility in an aggregate amount not to exceed $5,000, and a swingline facility in an aggregate amount of $20,000. The Credit Agreement also provides for an additional $100,000 of capacity through an accordion feature. All amounts borrowed under the Credit Agreement mature on September 26, 2024.
Our obligations under the Credit Agreement are secured by first priority security interests in substantially all of our personal property and guaranteed by, and secured by first priority security interests in, substantially all of the personal property of, our direct and indirect subsidiaries: Center Manufacturing, Inc., Center Manufacturing Holdings, Inc., Center-Moeller Products LLC, Defiance Metal Products Co., Defiance Metal Products of Arkansas, Inc., Defiance Metal Products of PA., Inc. and Defiance Metal Products of WI, Inc.
Borrowings under the Credit Agreement bear interest at a fluctuating London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) (which may be adjusted for certain reserve requirements), plus 1.00 to 2.00% depending on the current Consolidated Total Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Credit Agreement). Under certain circumstances, we may not be able to pay interest based on LIBOR. If that happens, we will be required to pay interest at the Base Rate, which is the sum of (a) the higher of (i) the Prime Rate (as publicly announced by the Agent from time to time) and (ii) the Federal Funds Rate plus 0.50%, plus (b) 0.00% to 1.00%, depending on the current Total Consolidated Leverage Ratio. The Credit Agreement also includes provisions for determining a replacement rate when LIBOR is no longer available.
At December 31, 2021, the interest rate on outstanding borrowings under the Revolving Loan was 1.75%. At December 31, 2021, we had availability of $132,390 under the Revolving Loan.
We must pay a commitment fee at a rate of 0.20% per annum on the average daily unused portion of the aggregate unused revolving commitments under the Credit Agreement. We must also pay fees as specified in the Fee Letter (as defined in the Credit Agreement) and with respect to any letters of credit issued under the Credit Agreement.
The Credit Agreement contains usual and customary negative covenants for agreements of this type, including, but not limited to, restrictions on our ability to, subject to certain exceptions, create, incur or assume indebtedness, create or incur liens, make certain investments, merge or consolidate with another entity, make certain asset dispositions, pay dividends or other distributions to shareholders, enter into transactions with affiliates, enter into sale leaseback transactions or make capital expenditures. The Credit Agreement also requires us to satisfy certain financial covenants, including a minimum interest coverage ratio of 3.00 to 1.00. At December 31, 2021, our interest coverage ratio was 10.36 to 1.00. The Credit Agreement also requires us to maintain a consolidated total leverage ratio not to exceed 3.25 to 1.00, although such leverage ratio can be increased in connection with certain acquisitions. As of December 31, 2021, our consolidated total leverage ratio was 2.43 to 1.00.
The Credit Agreement includes customary events of default, including, among other things, payment default, covenant default, breach of representation or warranty, bankruptcy, cross-default, material ERISA events, material money judgments, and failure to maintain subsidiary guarantees. If an event of default occurs, the Agent will be entitled to take various actions, including the acceleration of amounts due under the Credit Agreement, termination of the credit facility, and all other actions permitted to be taken by a secured creditor.
On June 30, 2020 and March 31, 2021, the Company entered into amendments to the Credit Agreement. Please refer to Note 4 - Bank Revolving Credit Notes in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a more detailed discussion.
Capital Requirements and Sources of Liquidity
During the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our capital expenditures were $39,356 and $7,794, respectively. The increase of $31,562 was driven by our continued focus on investment in technology and automation in the current period as compared to leveraging our investments and preserving cash during the same prior year period. Additionally, the Company invested $19,658 into the new Hazel Park, MI facility during the current year period.
We have historically relied upon cash available through credit facilities, in addition to cash from operations, to finance our working capital requirements and to support our growth. At December 31, 2021, we had immediate availability of $132,390 through our Revolving Loan and another $100,000 through an accordion feature under our Credit Agreement, subject to covenants under the Credit Agreement. We regularly monitor potential capital sources, including equity and debt financings, in an effort to meet our planned capital expenditures and liquidity requirements. Our future success will be highly dependent on our ability to access outside sources of capital. We will continue to have access to the availability currently provided under the Credit Agreement as long as we remain compliant with the financial covenants. Based on our estimates of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic at this time, we expect to be in compliance with these financial covenants through 2022 and the foreseeable future.
We believe that our operating cash flow and available borrowings under the Credit Agreement are sufficient to fund our operations for 2022 and beyond when taking into consideration the estimated impacts of the pandemic based on the information we have available at this time. However, future cash flows are subject to a number of variables, and additional capital expenditures will be required to conduct our operations. There can be no assurance that operations and other capital resources will provide cash in sufficient amounts to maintain planned or future levels of capital expenditures. In the event we make one or more acquisitions and the amount of capital required is greater than the amount we have available for acquisitions at that time, we could be required to reduce the expected level of capital expenditures and/or seek additional capital. If we seek additional capital, we may do so through borrowings under the Credit Agreement, joint ventures, asset sales, offerings of debt or equity securities or other means. We cannot guarantee that this additional capital will be available on acceptable terms or at all. If we are unable to obtain the funds we need, we may not be able to complete acquisitions that may be favorable to us or finance the capital expenditures necessary to conduct our operations.
Contractual Obligations
The following table presents our obligations and commitments to make future payments under contracts and contingent commitments at December 31, 2021:
(1)
Principal payments under the Company’s Credit Agreement, which expires in 2024.
(2)
Financing agreements entered into to purchase manufacturing equipment. Current and long-term portions are classified in other current liabilities and other long-term liabilities, respectively, on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
(3)
Forecasted interest on debt obligations are based on the debt balance, interest rate, and unused fee of the Company’s revolver credit facility as of December 31, 2021, and the debt balances and interest rates of the Company’s equipment finance agreements.
(4)
See Note 5 - Capital Lease Obligations in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
(5)
See Note 6 - Operating Lease Obligations in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Capital expenditures for the full year 2022 are expected to be above 2021 levels as we make final payments for capital equipment commitments previously made to meet contractual obligations related to the fitness customer, as well as continued investments in new technologies and automation for our base business.