Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “Minority Equality Opportunities Acquisition Inc.,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Minority Equality Opportunities Acquisition Inc. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those made, projected or implied in the forward-looking statements. Please see the “Risk Factors” section for a discussion of the uncertainties, risks and assumptions associated with these statements.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This Form 10-K includes forward-looking statements within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the “Securities Act”), and Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”). We have based these forward-looking statements on our current expectations and projections about future events. These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and assumptions about us that may cause our actual results, levels of activity, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, levels of activity, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “expect,” “plan,” “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “continue,” or the negative of such terms or other similar expressions. Such statements include, but are not limited to, possible business combinations and the financing thereof, and related matters, as well as all other statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission’s (the “SEC’s”) website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated on February 18, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”).
Our sponsor is Minority Equality Opportunities Acquisition Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on August 25, 2021. On August 30, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) of 12,650,000 Units, which included the full exercise by the underwriters of the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,650,000 Units, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $126,500,000. Transaction costs amounted to $8,998,713, consisting of $2,403,500 of underwriting fees, $4,554,000 of deferred underwriting fees, $586,779 of other offering costs, and $1,454,434 of the fair value of the representative’s common stock. Of the $8,998,713 aggregate transaction costs, $741,209 was allocated to expense associated with the warrant liability.
We issued 158,125 shares of Class A common stock, with a fair value of $1,454,434, to Maxim, the representative of the underwriters, which is deemed compensation by FINRA and therefore subject to a lock-up for a period of 180 days immediately following the commencement of sales of the IPO. Additionally, Maxim has agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any such shares until the completion of our initial Business Combination. In addition, Maxim has agreed (i) to waive its redemption rights with respect to such shares in connection with the completion of our initial Business Combination and (ii) to waive its rights to liquidating distributions from the trust account with respect to such shares if we fail to complete our initial Business Combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or 21 months from the closing of the IPO if we extend the period of time to consummate the initial Business Combination).
Simultaneously with the closing of the IPO, we consummated the sale of an aggregate of 6,027,500 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per warrant in a private placement to our Sponsor and to Maxim Partners LLC, generating gross proceeds to us of $6,027,500. A total of 5,395,000 Private Placement Warrants were issued to the Sponsor and a total of 632,500 Private Placement Warrants were issued to Maxim Partners LLC.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, an amount of $128,397,500 ($10.15 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in a trust account (the “Trust Account”) and will only be invested in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to our company to pay our franchise and income tax obligations (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), the proceeds from the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants will not be released from the Trust Account until the earliest of: (a) the completion of our initial Business Combination; (b) the redemption of any public shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our certificate of incorporation: (i) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to redeem 100% of the public shares if we do not complete the initial Business Combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or 21 months from the closing of the IPO if we extend the period of time to consummate a Business Combination); or (ii) with respect to any other material provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-Business Combination activity; and (c) the redemption of the public shares if we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or 21 months from the closing of the IPO if we extend the period of time to consummate a Business Combination), subject to applicable law.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
We will have only 12 months from the closing of the IPO (or 21 months from the closing of the IPO if we extend the period of time to consummate the initial Business Combination) (the “Combination Period”) to complete the initial Business Combination. However, if we anticipate that we may not be able to consummate the initial Business Combination within 12 months, we may extend the period of time to consummate a Business Combination by up to three additional three-month periods (up to a maximum of 21 months from the closing of the IPO). Pursuant to the terms of our certificate of incorporation and the trust agreement entered into between us and Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, in order to extend the time available for us to consummate our initial Business Combination, the sponsor or its affiliates or designees must deposit into the trust account, for each additional three-month period, $1,100,000, or up to $1,265,000 if the underwriters exercise the over-allotment option in full ($0.10 per share), on or prior to the date of the deadline with respect to such three-month extension period. Our sponsor and its affiliates or designees are not obligated to fund the trust account to extend the time for us to complete our initial Business Combination. If we are unable to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay the franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law; and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to the warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to complete the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period.
Liquidity, Capital Resources and Going Concern Considerations
As of December 31, 2021, we had $264,755 in cash and working capital of $372,947.
Our liquidity needs up to December 31, 2021 had been satisfied through a capital contribution from our Sponsor of $25,000 for the founder shares and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from our Sponsor of up to $300,000. After consummation of the IPO on August 30, 2021, we had approximately $1.6 million in our operating bank account, and working capital of approximately $0.8 million. On September 3, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to provide us with loans in such amounts as may be required to fund our working capital requirements up to an aggregate of $500,000. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will not have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from IPO filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
The Company is within 12 months of its mandatory liquidation date as of the time of filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” this raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. If the Company is unable to complete a Business Combination by August 30, 2022, the Company will cease all operations except for the purpose of liquidating.
These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of its operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statement included in this report. The financial statement included in this report do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 18, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the Initial Public Offering and search for a target for our initial Business Combination. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the Initial Public Offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 18, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a net income of approximately $5.9 million, which included a gain from the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7.2 million and interest income of $2,577, offset by a loss from operations of $560,530 and offering cost expense allocated to warrants of $741,209.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt obligations, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations, purchase obligations or long-term liabilities.
Administrative Services Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities are first listed on the NASDAQ Capital Market, we agreed to pay to an affiliate of the Sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support services. Upon the earlier of the completion of the initial Business Combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying such monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, representative’s common stock, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the founder shares) will be entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement dated August 25, 2021, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to Class A common stock). The holders of these securities will be entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial Business Combination. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the underwriters may not exercise their demand and “piggyback” registration rights after five and seven years after the effective date of the registration statement for the IPO and may not exercise their demand rights on more than one occasion.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriter had a 45-day option from the date of the IPO to purchase up to an aggregate of 1,650,000 additional Units at the public offering price less the underwriting commissions to cover over-allotments, if any. On August 30, 2021, the underwriter fully exercised its over-allotment option.
The underwriter is entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.6% of the gross proceeds of the Initial Public Offering, which included the exercise of the over-allotment option, or $4,554,000, held in the Trust Account upon the completion of our initial Business Combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Financial Advisory Agreements
In November 2021, we entered into agreements with PGP Capital Advisors and Vaughan Capital Advisors whereby such entities would provide financial advisory services to our company. Pursuant to such agreements, we would pay monthly fees to such advisors in the aggregate amount of $25,000 and would reimburse such advisors for their out-of-pocket costs and expenses. We also agreed to pay to such advisors an aggregate success fee upon the closing of a business combination transaction equal to the sum of: (i) three percent of the transaction value of the target company in such business combination up to $100 million, plus (ii) two percent of the transaction value of the target company greater than $100 million up to $200 million, plus (iii) one percent of the transaction value of the target company above $200 million. The success fee shall be reduced by the monthly fees previously paid to the financial advisors. The financial advisors shall have the option to receive an equivalent dollar amount of warrants and/or shares of our Class A common stock in lieu of cash up to twenty percent of the success fee payable.
Critical Accounting Policies
Deferred Offering Costs
We comply with the requirements of ASC 340-10-S99-1. Deferred offering costs consists of legal, accounting, underwriting fees and other costs incurred through the balance sheet date that are directly related to the Public Offering. Offering costs are allocated to the separable financial instruments to be issued in the IPO based on a relative fair value basis, compared to total proceeds received. Upon closing of the IPO on August 30, 2021, offering costs associated with warrant liabilities were expensed, and offering costs associated with the Class A common stock were charged to temporary equity. Transaction costs amounted to $8,998,713, of which $741,209 were allocated to expense associated with the warrant liability.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified in temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, the 12,650,000 Class A common stock is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
Net Income Per Common Stock
We have two classes of shares, Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. We have not considered the effect of the outstanding warrants to purchase 18,677,500 shares of Class A common stock in the calculation of diluted income per share, since their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net income per common stock is the same as basic net income per common stock for the periods.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluated the financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are initially recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statement of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified in the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Warrant Liability
We evaluated the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants to be issued in the IPO (collectively, “Warrants”) in accordance with ASC 815-40, “Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity”, and concluded that a provision in the Warrant Agreement related to certain tender or exchange offers precludes the Warrants from being accounted for as components of equity. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants will be recorded as derivative liabilities on the balance sheet and measured at fair value at inception (on the date of the IPO) and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the Jumpstart our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”), and may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in its periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statement with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.