Item 7.Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to our historical consolidated financial information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to these differences include those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, particularly in Part I, Item 1A, "Risk Factors." For a discussion of limitations in the measurement of certain of our community metrics, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
To supplement our consolidated financial statements, which are prepared and presented in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP), we present revenue on a constant currency basis and free cash flow, which are non-GAAP financial measures. Revenue on a constant currency basis is presented in the section entitled "-Revenue-Foreign Exchange Impact on Revenue." To calculate revenue on a constant currency basis, we translated revenue for the full year 2021 using 2020 monthly exchange rates for our settlement or billing currencies other than the U.S. dollar. For a full description of our free cash flow non-GAAP measure, see the section entitled "-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Free Cash Flow."
These non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to be considered in isolation or as a substitute for, or superior to, financial information prepared and presented in accordance with GAAP. These measures may be different from non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies, limiting their usefulness for comparison purposes. Moreover, presentation of revenue on a constant currency basis is provided for year-over-year comparison purposes, and investors should be cautioned that the effect of changing foreign currency exchange rates has an actual effect on our operating results. We believe these non-GAAP financial measures provide investors with useful supplemental information about the financial performance of our business, enable comparison of financial results between periods where certain items may vary independent of business performance, and allow for greater transparency with respect to key metrics used by management in operating our business.
Executive Overview of Full Year 2021 Results
Our key community metrics and financial results for 2021 are as follows:
Family of Apps metrics:
•Family daily active people (DAP) was 2.82 billion on average for December 2021, an increase of 8% year-over-year.
•Family monthly active people (MAP) was 3.59 billion as of December 31, 2021, an increase of 9% year-over-year.
•Facebook daily active users (DAUs) were 1.93 billion on average for December 2021, an increase of 5% year-over-year.
•Facebook monthly active users (MAUs) were 2.91 billion as of December 31, 2021, an increase of 4% year-over-year.
•Ad impressions delivered across our Family of Apps increased by 10% year-over-year in 2021, and the average price per ad increased by 24% year-over-year in 2021.
Consolidated and segment results:
Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, we report our financial results based on two reportable segments: Family of Apps (FoA) and Reality Labs (RL). FoA includes Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, WhatsApp, and other services. RL includes our augmented and virtual reality related consumer hardware, software, and content.
•Net income was $39.37 billion with diluted earnings per share of $13.77 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Capital expenditures, including principal payments on finance leases, were $19.24 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Effective tax rate was 16.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021.
•Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were $48.0 billion as of December 31, 2021.
•Headcount was 71,970 as of December 31, 2021, an increase of 23% year-over-year.
Our mission is to give people the power to build community and bring the world closer together. All of our products, including our apps, share the vision of helping to bring the metaverse to life.
In 2021, we continued to focus on our main revenue growth priorities: (i) helping marketers use our products to connect with consumers where they are and (ii) making our ads more relevant and effective. We also continued to invest based on the following company priorities: (i) continue making progress on the major social issues facing the internet and our company, including privacy, safety, and security; (ii) build new experiences that meaningfully improve people's lives today and set the stage for even bigger improvements in the future; (iii) keep building our business by supporting the millions of businesses that rely on our services to grow and create jobs; and (iv) communicate more transparently about what we're doing and the role our services play in the world.
Our advertising revenue growth in the second half of 2021 was adversely affected by reduced marketer spending as a result of limitations on our ad targeting and measurement tools arising from changes to the iOS operating system. We expect that future advertising revenue growth will continue to be adversely affected by these and other limitations on our ad targeting and measurement tools arising from changes to the regulatory environment and third-party mobile operating systems and browsers.
Our business and results of operations have also been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and the preventative measures implemented by authorities from time to time to help limit the spread of the illness, which have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in certain affected countries and regions. Beginning in the first quarter of 2020, we experienced significant increases in the size and engagement of our active user base across a number of regions as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. More recently, we have seen these pandemic-related trends subside, particularly in certain developed markets. We are unable to predict the impact of the pandemic on user growth and engagement with any certainty and these trends may continue to be subject to volatility.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also had a varied impact on the demand for and pricing of our ads from period to period. While we experienced a reduction in demand and a related decline in pricing during the onset of the pandemic, we believe the pandemic subsequently contributed to an acceleration in the growth of online commerce, particularly during the second half of 2020, and we experienced increasing demand for advertising as a result of this trend. More recently, we believe this growth has moderated in many regions, which to some extent adversely affected our advertising revenue growth in the second half of 2021. We may experience reduced advertising demand and related declines in pricing in future periods to the extent this trend continues, which could adversely affect our advertising revenue growth. However, the impact of the
pandemic on user growth and engagement, the demand for and pricing of our advertising services, as well as on our overall results of operations, remains highly uncertain for the foreseeable future.
User growth and engagement were also impacted by a number of other factors in the second half of 2021. For example, competitive products and services have reduced some users' engagement with our products and services, and in response to competitive pressures, we have introduced new features such as Reels, which is growing in usage but is not currently monetized at the same rate as our feed or Stories products. We also saw a deceleration in our community growth rates as the size of our community continued to increase. In addition, we experienced year-over-year declines in ad impressions delivered in the United States & Canada region. These trends adversely affected advertising revenue growth in the second half of 2021 and we expect will continue to affect our advertising revenue growth in the foreseeable future. Other global and regional business and macroeconomic conditions also have had, and we believe will continue to have, an impact on our user growth and engagement and advertising revenue growth.
We anticipate that additional investments in our data center capacity, servers, network infrastructure, and office facilities, as well as scaling our headcount to support our growth, including in our Reality Labs initiatives, will continue to drive expense growth in 2022. We expect 2022 capital expenditures to be in the range of $29-34 billion and total expenses to be in the range of $90-95 billion. In 2022, we also expect that our year-over-year total expense growth rates may significantly exceed our year-over-year revenue growth rates, which would adversely affect our operating margin and profitability.
Trends in Our Family Metrics
The numbers for our key Family metrics, our DAP, MAP, and average revenue per person (ARPP), do not include users on our other products unless they would otherwise qualify as DAP or MAP, respectively, based on their other activities on our Family products.
Trends in the number of people in our community affect our revenue and financial results by influencing the number of ads we are able to show, the value of our ads to marketers, the volume of Payments transactions, as well as our expenses and capital expenditures. Substantially all of our daily and monthly active people (as defined below) access our Family products on mobile devices.
•Daily Active People (DAP). We define a daily active person as a registered and logged-in user of Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and/or WhatsApp (collectively, our "Family" of products) who visited at least one of these Family products through a mobile device application or using a web or mobile browser on a given day. We do not require people to use a common identifier or link their accounts to use multiple products in our Family, and therefore must seek to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people. Our calculations of DAP rely upon complex techniques, algorithms, and machine learning models that seek to estimate the underlying number of unique people using one or more of these products, including by matching user accounts within an individual product and across multiple products when we believe they are attributable to a single person, and counting such group of accounts as one person. As these techniques and models require significant judgment, are developed based on internal reviews of limited samples of user accounts, and are calibrated against user survey data, there is necessarily some margin of error in our estimates. We view DAP, and DAP as a percentage of MAP, as measures of engagement across our products. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
DAP/MAP: 78% 79% 79% 79% 79% 79% 79% 78% 79%
Note: We report the numbers of DAP and MAP as specific amounts, but these numbers are estimates of the numbers of unique people using our products and are subject to statistical variances and errors. While we expect the error margin for these estimates to vary from period to period, we estimate that such margin generally will be approximately 3% of our worldwide MAP. At our scale, it is very difficult to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people, and it is possible that the actual numbers of unique people using our products may vary significantly from our estimates, potentially beyond our estimated error margins. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the second quarter of 2020, we updated our Family metrics calculations to reflect recent data from a periodic WhatsApp user survey and to incorporate certain methodology improvements, and we estimate such updates contributed an aggregate of approximately 40 million DAP to our reported worldwide DAP in June 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, we updated our Family metrics calculations to maintain calibration of our models against recent user survey data, and we estimate such update contributed an aggregate of approximately 60 million DAP to our reported worldwide DAP in March 2021.
Worldwide DAP increased 8% to 2.82 billion on average during December 2021 from 2.60 billion during December 2020.
•Monthly Active People (MAP). We define a monthly active person as a registered and logged-in user of one or more Family products who visited at least one of these Family products through a mobile device application or using a web or mobile browser in the last 30 days as of the date of measurement. We do not require people to use a common identifier or link their accounts to use multiple products in our Family, and therefore must seek to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people. Our calculations of MAP rely upon complex techniques, algorithms, and machine learning models that seek to estimate the underlying number of unique people using one or more of these products, including by matching user accounts within an individual product and across multiple products when we believe they are attributable to a single person, and counting such group of accounts as one person. As these techniques and models require significant judgment, are developed based on internal reviews of limited samples of user accounts, and are calibrated against user survey data, there is necessarily some margin of error in our estimates. We view MAP as a measure of the size of our global active community of people using our products. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Note: We report the numbers of DAP and MAP as specific amounts, but these numbers are estimates of the numbers of unique people using our products and are subject to statistical variances and errors. While we expect the error margin for these estimates to vary from period to period, we estimate that such margin generally will be approximately 3% of our worldwide MAP. At our scale, it is very difficult to attribute multiple user accounts within and across products to individual people, and it is possible that the actual numbers of unique people using our products may vary significantly from our estimates, potentially beyond our estimated error margins. For additional information, see the section entitled "Limitations of Key Metrics and Other Data" in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In the second quarter of 2020, we updated our Family metrics calculations to reflect recent data from a periodic WhatsApp user survey and to incorporate certain methodology improvements, and we estimate such updates contributed an aggregate of approximately 50 million MAP to our reported worldwide MAP in June 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, we updated our Family metrics calculations to maintain calibration of our models against recent user survey data, and we estimate such update contributed an aggregate of approximately 70 million MAP to our reported worldwide MAP in March 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, we had 3.59 billion MAP, an increase of 9% from 3.30 billion as of December 31, 2020.
•Average Revenue Per Person (ARPP). We define ARPP as our total revenue during a given quarter, divided by the average of the number of MAP at the beginning and end of the quarter. While ARPP includes all sources of revenue, the number of MAP used in this calculation only includes users of our Family products as described in the definition of MAP above. We estimate that the share of revenue from users who are not also MAP was not material.
ARPP: $7.38 $6.03 $6.10 $6.76 $8.62 $7.75 $8.36 $8.18 $9.39
Note: Non-advertising revenue includes RL revenue generated from the delivery of consumer hardware products and FoA Other revenue, which consists of net fees we receive from developers using our Payments infrastructure and revenue from various other sources.
Our annual worldwide ARPP in 2021, which represents the sum of quarterly ARPP during such period, was $33.68, an increase of 22% from 2020.
Trends in Our Facebook User Metrics
The numbers for our key Facebook metrics, our DAUs, MAUs, and average revenue per user (ARPU), do not include users on Instagram, WhatsApp, or our other products, unless they would otherwise qualify as DAUs or MAUs, respectively, based on their other activities on Facebook.
Trends in the number of users affect our revenue and financial results by influencing the number of ads we are able to show, the value of our ads to marketers, the volume of Payments transactions, as well as our expenses and capital expenditures. Substantially all of our daily and monthly active users (as defined below) access Facebook on mobile devices.
•Daily Active Users (DAUs). We define a daily active user as a registered and logged-in Facebook user who visited Facebook through our website or a mobile device, or used our Messenger application (and is also a registered Facebook user), on a given day. We view DAUs, and DAUs as a percentage of MAUs, as measures of user engagement on Facebook.
DAU/MAU: 66% 67% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66% 66%
DAU/MAU: 77% 77% 77% 77% 76% 75% 75% 75% 74% DAU/MAU: 75% 75% 74% 74% 74% 73% 73% 73% 72%
DAU/MAU: 62% 62% 61% 62% 62% 62% 62% 63% 63% DAU/MAU: 65% 65% 65% 65% 65% 65% 65% 66% 65%
Note: For purposes of reporting DAUs, MAUs, and ARPU by geographic region, Europe includes all users in Russia and Turkey and Rest of World includes all users in Africa, Latin America, and the Middle East.
Worldwide DAUs increased 5% to 1.93 billion on average during December 2021 from 1.84 billion during December 2020. Users in India, Bangladesh, and Vietnam represented the top three sources of growth in DAUs during December 2021, relative to the same period in 2020.
•Monthly Active Users (MAUs). We define a monthly active user as a registered and logged-in Facebook user who visited Facebook through our website or a mobile device, or used our Messenger application (and is also a registered Facebook user), in the last 30 days as of the date of measurement. MAUs are a measure of the size of our global active user community on Facebook.
As of December 31, 2021, we had 2.91 billion MAUs, an increase of 4% from December 31, 2020. Users in India, Vietnam, and Bangladesh represented the top three sources of growth in 2021, relative to the same period in 2020.
Trends in Our Monetization by Facebook User Geography
We calculate our revenue by user geography based on our estimate of the geography in which ad impressions are delivered, virtual and digital goods are purchased, or consumer hardware products are shipped. We define ARPU as our total revenue in a given geography during a given quarter, divided by the average of the number of MAUs in the geography at the beginning and end of the quarter. While ARPU includes all sources of revenue, the number of MAUs used in this calculation only includes users of Facebook and Messenger as described in the definition of MAU above. While the share of revenue from users who are not also Facebook or Messenger MAUs has grown over time, we estimate that revenue from users who are Facebook or Messenger MAUs represents the substantial majority of our total revenue. See "Average Revenue Per Person (ARPP)" above for our estimates of trends in our monetization of our Family products. The geography of our users affects our revenue and financial results because we currently monetize users in different geographies at different average rates. Our revenue and ARPU in regions such as United States & Canada and Europe are relatively higher primarily due to the size and maturity of those online and mobile advertising markets. For example, ARPU in 2021 in the United States & Canada region was more than 12 times higher than in the Asia-Pacific region.
ARPU: $8.52 $6.95 $7.05 $7.89 $10.14 $9.27 $10.12 $10.00 $11.57
ARPU: $ 41.41 $ 34.18 $ 36.49 $ 39.63 $ 53.56 $ 48.03 $ 53.01 $ 52.34 $ 60.57 ARPU: $13.21 $10.64 $11.03 $12.41 $16.87 $15.49 $17.23 $ 16.50 $ 19.68
ARPU: $3.57 $3.06 $2.99 $3.67 $4.05 $3.94 $4.16 $4.30 $4.89 ARPU: $2.48 $1.99 $1.78 $2.22 $2.77 $2.64 $3.05 $3.14 $3.43
Note: Non-advertising revenue includes RL revenue generated from the delivery of consumer hardware products and FoA Other revenue, which consists of net fees we receive from developers using our Payments infrastructure and revenue from various other sources.
Our revenue by user geography in the charts above is geographically apportioned based on our estimation of the geographic location of our users when they perform a revenue-generating activity. This allocation differs from our revenue disaggregated by geography disclosure in Note 2 - Revenue in our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplemental Data" where revenue is geographically apportioned based on the addresses of our customers.
Our annual worldwide ARPU in 2021, which represents the sum of quarterly ARPU during such period, was $40.96, an increase of 28% from 2020. For 2021, ARPU increased by 40% in Rest of World, 35% in Europe, 31% in the United States & Canada, and 26% in Asia-Pacific, as compared with 2020. In addition, user growth was more rapid in geographies with relatively lower ARPU, such as Asia-Pacific and Rest of World. We expect that user growth in the future will be primarily concentrated in those regions where ARPU is relatively lower, such that worldwide ARPU may continue to increase at a slower rate relative to ARPU in any geographic region, or potentially decrease even if ARPU increases in each geographic region.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. Our actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
An accounting policy is deemed to be critical if the nature of the estimates or assumptions is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment necessary to account for highly uncertain matters or the susceptibility of such matters to change, and the impact of the estimates and assumptions on our consolidated financial statements is material. We believe that the assumptions and estimates associated with gross vs. net in revenue recognition, valuation of equity investments, income taxes, loss contingencies, and valuation of long-lived assets including goodwill, intangible assets, and property and equipment, and their associated estimated useful lives, when applicable, have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements. Therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies and estimates. For further information on all of our significant accounting policies, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Gross vs. Net in Revenue Recognition
For revenue generated from arrangements that involve third parties, there is significant judgment in evaluating whether we are the principal, and report revenue on a gross basis, or the agent, and report revenue on a net basis. In this assessment, we consider if we obtain control of the specified goods or services before they are transferred to the customer, as well as other indicators such as the party primarily responsible for fulfillment, inventory risk, and discretion in establishing price. The assessment of whether we are considered the principal or the agent in a transaction could impact our revenue and cost of revenue recognized on the consolidated statements of income.
Valuation of Equity Investments
For our equity securities without readily determinable fair values accounted for using the measurement alternative, determining whether an equity security issued by the same issuer is similar to the equity security we hold may require judgment in (a) assessment of differences in rights and obligations associated with the instruments such as voting rights, distribution rights and preferences, and conversion features, and (b) adjustments to the observable price for differences such as, but not limited to, rights and obligations, control premium, liquidity, or principal or most advantageous markets. In addition, the identification of observable transactions will depend on the timely reporting of these transactions from our investee companies, which may occur in a period subsequent to when the transactions take place. Therefore, our fair value adjustment for these observable transactions may occur in a period subsequent to when the transaction actually occurred. For equity investments, we perform a qualitative assessment at each reporting date to determine whether there are triggering events for impairment. The qualitative assessment considers factors such as, but not limited to, the investee's financial condition and business outlook; industry and sector performance; regulatory, economic or technological environment; operational and financing cash flows; and other relevant events and factors affecting the investee. When indicators of impairment exist, we estimate the fair value of our equity investments using the market approach and/or the income approach and recognize impairment loss in the consolidated statements of income if the estimated fair value is less than the carrying value. Estimating fair value requires judgment and use of estimates such as discount rates, forecast cash flows, holding period, and market data of comparable companies, among others.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and income tax assets and liabilities, including evaluating uncertainties in the application of accounting principles and complex tax laws.
We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if we believe that it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained on examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of the position. These uncertain tax positions include our estimates for transfer pricing that have been developed based upon analyses of appropriate
arms-length prices. Similarly, our estimates related to uncertain tax positions concerning research and development tax credits are based on an assessment of whether our available documentation corroborating the nature of our activities supporting the tax credits will be sufficient. Although we believe that we have adequately reserved for our uncertain tax positions (including net interest and penalties), we can provide no assurance that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be materially different. We make adjustments to these reserves in accordance with the income tax accounting guidance when facts and circumstances change, such as the closing of a tax audit or the refinement of an estimate. To the extent that the final tax outcome of these matters is different from the amounts recorded, such differences will affect the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made, and could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Loss Contingencies
We are involved in legal proceedings, claims, and regulatory, tax or government inquiries and investigations that arise in the ordinary course of business. Certain of these matters include speculative claims for substantial or indeterminate amounts of damages. Additionally, we are required to comply with various legal and regulatory obligations around the world, and we regularly become subject to new laws and regulations in the jurisdictions in which we operate. The requirements for complying with these obligations may be uncertain and subject to interpretation and enforcement by regulatory and other authorities, and any failure to comply with such obligations could eventually lead to asserted legal or regulatory action. With respect to these matters, asserted and unasserted, we evaluate the associated developments on a regular basis and accrue a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine there is a reasonable possibility that we may incur a loss and the loss or range of loss can be reasonably estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements to the extent material.
We review the developments in our contingencies that could affect the amount of the provisions that have been previously recorded, and the matters and related reasonably possible losses disclosed. We make adjustments to our provisions and changes to our disclosures accordingly to reflect the merits of our defenses and the impact of negotiations, settlements, regulatory proceedings, rulings, advice of legal counsel, and updated information. Significant judgment is required to determine the probability of loss and the estimated amount of loss, including when and if the probability and estimate has changed for asserted and unasserted matters. Certain factors, in particular, have resulted in significant changes to these estimates and judgments in prior quarters based on updated information available. For example, in certain jurisdictions where we operate, fines and penalties may be the result of new laws and preliminary interpretations regarding the basis of assessing damages, which may make it difficult to estimate what such fines and penalties would amount to if successfully asserted against us. In addition, certain government inquiries and investigations, such as matters before our lead European Union privacy regulator, the IDPC, are subject to review by other regulatory bodies before decisions are finalized, which can lead to significant changes in the outcome of an inquiry. As a result of these and other factors, we reasonably expect that our estimates and judgments with respect to our contingencies may continue to be revised in future quarters.
The ultimate outcome of these matters, such as whether the likelihood of loss is remote, reasonably possible, or probable or if and when the reasonably possible range of loss is estimable, is inherently uncertain. Therefore, if one or more of these matters were resolved against us for amounts in excess of management's estimates of losses, our results of operations and financial condition, including in a particular reporting period in which any such outcome becomes probable and estimable, could be materially adversely affected. See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies and Note 14 - Income Taxes of the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and Part I, Item 3, "Legal Proceedings" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding these contingencies.
Valuation of Long-lived Assets including Goodwill, Intangible Assets, and Property and Equipment and Estimated Useful Lives
We allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill to reporting units based on the expected benefit from the business combination. Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, estimated replacement costs and future expected cash flows from acquired users, acquired technology, acquired patents, and trade names from a market participant perspective, useful lives, and discount rates. Management's estimates of fair value are based
upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Allocation of purchase consideration to identifiable assets and liabilities affects our amortization expense, as acquired finite-lived intangible assets are amortized over the useful life, whereas any indefinite-lived intangible assets, including goodwill, are not amortized. During the measurement period, which is not to exceed one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level annually or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances would more likely than not reduce the fair value of a reporting unit below its carrying value. We have two reporting units subject to goodwill impairment testing. As of December 31, 2021, no impairment of goodwill has been identified.
Long-lived assets, including property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are reviewed for possible impairment whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets may not be recoverable. The evaluation is performed at the lowest level for which identifiable cash flows are largely independent of the cash flows of other assets and liabilities. Recoverability of these assets is measured by a comparison of the carrying amounts to the future undiscounted cash flows the assets are expected to generate from the use and eventual disposition. If such review indicates that the carrying amount of property and equipment and intangible assets is not recoverable, the carrying amount of such assets is reduced to fair value. We have not recorded any material impairment charges during the years presented.
The useful lives of our long-lived assets including property and equipment and finite-lived intangible assets are determined by management when those assets are initially recognized and are routinely reviewed for the remaining estimated useful lives. The current estimate of useful lives represents our best estimate based on current facts and circumstances, but may differ from the actual useful lives due to changes in future circumstances such as changes to our business operations, changes in the planned use of assets, and technological advancements. When we change the estimated useful life assumption for any asset, the remaining carrying amount of the asset is accounted for prospectively and depreciated or amortized over the revised estimated useful life.
In connection with our periodic reviews of the estimated useful lives of property and equipment, we extended the estimated average useful lives of our server and network assets category. The effect of the 2021 change was a reduction in depreciation expense of $620 million and an increase in net income of $516 million, or $0.18 per diluted share. The impact from the changes in our estimates was calculated based on the asset bases existing as of the effective dates of the changes and applying the revised useful lives prospectively. See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, for additional information regarding changes in the estimated useful lives of our property and equipment.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Family of Apps (FoA)
Advertising. We generate substantially all of our revenue from advertising. Our advertising revenue is generated by displaying ad products on Facebook, Instagram, Messenger, and third-party affiliated websites or mobile applications. Marketers pay for ad products either directly or through their relationships with advertising agencies or resellers, based on the number of impressions delivered or the number of actions, such as clicks, taken by users.
We recognize revenue from the display of impression-based ads in the contracted period in which the impressions are delivered. Impressions are considered delivered when an ad is displayed to a user. We recognize revenue from the delivery of action-based ads in the period in which a user takes the action the marketer contracted for. The number of ads we show is subject to methodological changes as we continue to evolve our ads business and the structure of our ads products. We calculate price per ad as total advertising revenue divided by the number of ads delivered, representing the effective price paid per impression by a marketer regardless of their desired objective such as impression or action. For advertising revenue arrangements where we are not the principal, we recognize revenue on a net basis.
Other revenue. Other revenue consists of net fees we receive from developers using our Payments infrastructure and revenue from various other sources.
Reality Labs (RL)
RL revenue is generated from the delivery of consumer hardware products, such as Meta Quest, Facebook Portal, and wearables, and related software and content.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
Cost of revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the delivery and distribution of our products. These include expenses related to the operation of our data centers and technical infrastructure, such as depreciation expense from servers, network infrastructure and buildings, as well as payroll and related expenses which include share-based compensation for employees on our operations teams, and energy and bandwidth costs. Cost of revenue also includes costs associated with partner arrangements, including traffic acquisition costs and credit card and other fees related to processing customer transactions; RL cost of products sold; and content costs.
Research and development. Research and development expenses consist primarily of payroll and related expenses which include share-based compensation, facilities-related costs for employees on our engineering and technical teams who are responsible for developing new products as well as improving existing products, and professional services.
Marketing and sales. Marketing and sales expenses consist primarily of marketing and promotional expenses and payroll and related expenses which include share-based compensation for our employees engaged in sales, sales support, marketing, business development, and customer service functions. Our marketing and sales expenses also include professional services such as content reviewers to support our community and product operations.
General and administrative. General and administrative expenses consist primarily of legal-related costs, which include accruals for estimated fines, settlements, or other losses in connection with legal and related matters, as well as other legal fees; payroll and related expenses which include share-based compensation for certain of our executives as well as our legal, finance, human resources, corporate communications and policy, and other administrative employees; other taxes, such as digital services taxes, other tax levies, and gross receipts taxes; and professional services.
Results of Operations
In this section, we discuss the results of our operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. For a discussion of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to Part II, Item 7, "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income data (in millions):
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of income data (as a percentage of revenue)(1):
_________________________
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Share-based compensation expense included in costs and expenses (in millions):
Share-based compensation expense included in costs and expenses (as a percentage of revenue)(1):
_________________________
(1)Percentages have been rounded for presentation purposes and may differ from unrounded results.
Revenue
The following table sets forth our revenue by segment. For comparative purposes, amounts in prior periods have been recast:
Family of Apps
FoA revenue in 2021 increased $30.83 billion, or 36%, compared to 2020. The increase was mostly driven by an increase in advertising revenue.
Advertising
Advertising revenue in 2021 increased $30.76 billion, or 37%, compared to 2020 as a result of increases in both the average price per ad and the number of ads delivered. In 2021, the average price per ad increased by 24%, as compared with a decrease of approximately 10% in 2020. The increase in average price per ad in 2021 was mainly caused by a recovery from declines in advertising demand in the first two quarters of 2020, due to the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, overall advertising demand increased, as compared to 2020, across our ad products and in all regions in part due to the continued growth of online commerce. In 2021, the number of ads delivered increased by 10%, as compared with an approximate 34% increase in 2020. The increase in the ads delivered in 2021 was driven by increases in users and the number and frequency of ads displayed across our products. We anticipate that future advertising revenue growth will be driven by a combination of price and the number of ads delivered.
Reality Labs
RL revenue increased $1.14 billion, or 100%, from 2020 to 2021, and $638 million, or 127%, from 2019 to 2020. The increases in both periods were mostly driven by increases in the volume of our consumer hardware products sold.
Revenue Seasonality and Customer Concentration
Revenue is traditionally seasonally strong in the fourth quarter of each year due in part to seasonal holiday demand. We believe that this seasonality in both advertising revenue and RL consumer hardware sales affects our quarterly results, which generally reflect significant growth in revenue between the third and fourth quarters and a decline between the fourth and subsequent first quarters. For instance, our total revenue increased 16%, 31%, and 19% between the third and fourth quarters of 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, while total revenue for the first quarters of 2021, 2020, and 2019 declined 7%, 16%, and 11% compared to the fourth quarters of 2020, 2019, and 2018, respectively. We note the decline in total revenue in the first quarter of 2020 was exacerbated by the non-seasonal impact of the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
No customer represented 10% or more of total revenue during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Foreign Exchange Impact on Revenue
The general weakening of the U.S. dollar relative to certain foreign currencies in the full year 2021 compared to the same period in 2020 had a favorable impact on revenue. If we had translated revenue for the full year 2021 using the prior year's monthly exchange rates for our settlement or billing currencies other than the U.S. dollar, our total revenue and advertising revenue would have been $116.29 billion and $113.31 billion, respectively. Using these constant rates, total revenue and advertising revenue would have been $1.64 billion and $1.62 billion lower than actual total revenue and advertising revenue, respectively, for the full year 2021. Using the same constant rates, full year 2021 total revenue and advertising revenue would have been $30.32 billion and $29.15 billion, respectively, higher than actual total revenue and advertising revenue for the full year 2020.
Cost of revenue
Cost of revenue in 2021 increased $5.96 billion, or 36%, compared to 2020. The majority of the increase was due to an increase in Reality Labs cost of products sold and an increase in operational expenses related to our data centers and technical infrastructure, partially offset by a decrease in the depreciation growth rate mostly due to increases in the useful lives of servers and network assets. To a lesser extent, costs associated with partner arrangements, including traffic acquisition and payment processing costs, also increased.
See Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the notes to the consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding changes in the estimated useful lives of our servers and network assets.
In 2022, we anticipate that cost of revenue will increase as we continue to expand our data center capacity and technical infrastructure to support user growth and engagement and the delivery of new products and services, and, to a lesser extent, due to higher content costs.
Research and development
Research and development expenses in 2021 increased $6.21 billion, or 34%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase in payroll and related expenses as a result of a 30% growth in employee headcount from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 in engineering and other technical functions supporting our continued investment in our family of products and Reality Labs. To a lesser extent, Realty Labs technology development costs also increased.
In 2022, we plan to continue to hire software engineers and other technical employees, and to increase our investment to support our research and development initiatives in our family of products and in Reality Labs.
Marketing and sales
Marketing and sales expenses in 2021 increased $2.45 billion, or 21%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in marketing and promotional expenses, payroll and related expenses, and product and community operations expenses. Our payroll and related expenses increased as a result of a 9% increase in employee headcount from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 in our marketing and sales functions.
In 2022, we plan to continue the hiring of marketing and sales employees to support our marketing, sales, and partnership efforts, and we anticipate marketing expenses will increase.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses in 2021 increased $3.27 billion, or 50%, compared to 2020. The increase was primarily due to increases in legal-related costs and payroll and related expenses. Our payroll and related expenses increased as a result of a 25% increase in employee headcount from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 in our general and administrative functions.
See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and Part I, Item 3, "Legal Proceedings" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding estimated fines, settlements, or other losses in connection with legal-related costs.
In 2022, we plan to continue to increase general and administrative expenses to support overall company growth. We may also incur significant discrete charges such as legal-related accruals and settlement costs in general and administrative expenses.
Segment profitability
The following table sets forth income (loss) from operations by segment. For comparative purposes, amounts in prior periods have been recast:
Family of Apps
FoA income from operations in 2021 increased $17.65 billion, or 45%, compared to 2020. The increase was due to the growth in advertising revenue partially offset by an increase in costs and expenses, the majority of which was due to an increase in payroll and related expenses as a result of higher employee headcount, higher legal-related costs, and increases in costs related to our data centers and technical infrastructure.
FoA income from operations in 2020 increased $10.81 billion, or 38%, compared to 2019. The increase was due to the growth in advertising revenue and a one-time $5.0 billion FTC settlement accrual recorded in 2019, partially offset by an increase in costs and expenses, the majority of which was due to an increase in payroll and related expenses as a result of higher employee headcount, increases in costs related to our data centers and technical infrastructure, and higher marketing and promotional expenses.
Reality Labs
RL loss from operations in 2021 increased $3.57 billion, or 54%, compared to 2020, and in 2020 increased $2.12 billion, or 47%, compared to 2019. The majority of the increases in loss from operations in both periods were driven by increases in payroll and related expenses primarily due to the growth in RL research and development headcount and higher gross losses from increases in volume of consumer hardware sales.
Interest and other income, net
Interest and other income, net in 2021 increased $22 million, or 4%, compared to 2020. The increase was due to an increase in other income from net unrealized gains recognized for our equity investments, partially offset by a decrease in interest income as a result of lower interest rates compared to 2020.
Provision for income taxes
Our provision for income taxes in 2021 increased $3.88 billion, or 96%, compared to 2020, primarily due to an increase in income from operations and the effects of the tax election described below.
Our effective tax rate in 2021 increased compared to 2020, mostly due to the effects of the tax election described below and tax effects of a shift in jurisdictional mix of earnings.
In the third quarter of 2020, as part of finalizing our U.S. income tax return, we elected to capitalize and amortize certain research and development expenses for U.S. income tax purposes. As a result, we recorded a total of $1.07 billion income tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Effective Tax Rate Items. Our effective tax rate in the future will depend upon the proportion between the following items and income before provision for income taxes: U.S. tax benefits from foreign-derived intangible income, tax effects from share-based compensation, tax effects of integrating intellectual property from acquisitions, settlement of tax contingency items, tax effects of changes in our business, and the effects of changes in tax law.
The accounting for share-based compensation may increase or decrease our effective tax rate based upon the difference between our share-based compensation expense and the deductions taken on our tax return, which depend upon the stock price at the time of employee award vesting. If our stock price remains constant to the January 28, 2022 price, and absent U.S. tax legislation changes and other one-time events, we expect our effective tax rate for the full year 2022 to be similar to the effective tax rate for the full year 2021. This includes the effects of the mandatory capitalization and amortization of research and development expenses starting in 2022, as required by the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (Tax Act). The mandatory capitalization requirement increases our cash tax liabilities but also decreases our effective tax rate due to increasing the foreign-derived intangible income deduction. If the mandatory capitalization requirement is deferred, our effective tax rate in 2022 could be a few percentage points higher when compared to current law and our cash tax liabilities could be several billion dollars lower.
Integrating intellectual property from acquisitions into our business generally involves intercompany transactions that have the impact of increasing our provision for income taxes. Consequently, our provision for income taxes and our effective tax rate may initially increase in the period of an acquisition and integration. The magnitude of this impact will depend upon the specific type, size, and taxing jurisdictions of the intellectual property as well as the relative contribution to income in subsequent periods.
See Note 14 - Income Taxes in the notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding income tax contingencies.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are our cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, and cash generated from operations. Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities consist mostly of cash on deposit with banks, investments in money market funds, investments in U.S. government securities, U.S. government agency securities, and investment grade corporate debt securities. Cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities were $48.0 billion as of December 31, 2021, a decrease of $13.96 billion from December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to $44.54 billion for repurchases of our Class A common stock, $19.24 billion for capital expenditures, including principal payments on finance leases, and $5.51 billion of taxes paid related to net share settlement of employee restricted stock units (RSU) awards, offset by $57.68 billion of cash generated from operations for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cash paid for income taxes was $8.52 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of December 31, 2021, our federal net operating loss carryforward was $10.61 billion and our federal tax credit carryforward was $527 million. We anticipate the utilization of a significant portion of these net operating losses and credits within the next two years.
Our board of directors has authorized a share repurchase program of our Class A common stock, which commenced in January 2017 and does not have an expiration date. In 2021, we repurchased and subsequently retired 136 million shares of our Class A common stock for $44.81 billion. As of December 31, 2021, $38.79 billion remained available and authorized for repurchases.
As of December 31, 2021, $10.61 billion of the $48.0 billion in cash and cash equivalents and marketable securities was held by our foreign subsidiaries. The Tax Act imposed a mandatory transition tax on accumulated foreign earnings and eliminated U.S. taxes on foreign subsidiary distributions. As a result, earnings in foreign jurisdictions are available for distribution to the U.S. without incremental U.S. taxes.
We currently anticipate that our available funds and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to meet our operational cash needs and fund our share repurchase program for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future.
The following table presents our cash flows (in millions):
Cash Provided by Operating Activities
Cash provided by operating activities during 2021 mostly consisted of $39.37 billion net income adjusted for certain non-cash items, including $9.16 billion of share-based compensation expense and $7.97 billion of depreciation and amortization. The increase in cash flow from operating activities during 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to higher net income as adjusted for certain non-cash items, such as share-based compensation expense and deferred income taxes, partially offset by changes in working capital.
Cash Used in Investing Activities
Cash used in investing activities during 2021 primarily consisted of $18.57 billion of purchases of property and equipment as we continued to invest in data centers, servers, office facilities, and network infrastructure offset by $12.18 billion of net sales and maturities of marketable securities. The decrease in cash used in investing activities during 2021 compared to 2020 was mostly due to decreases in net purchases of marketable securities and equity investments, partially offset by an increase in purchases of property and equipment.
We anticipate making capital expenditures of approximately $29 billion to $34 billion in 2022.
Cash Used in Financing Activities
Cash used in financing activities during 2021 mostly consisted of $44.54 billion for repurchases of our Class A common stock and $5.51 billion of taxes paid related to net share settlement of RSUs. The increase in cash used in financing activities during 2021 compared to 2020 was mostly due to the increase in repurchases of our Class A common stock.
Free Cash Flow
In addition to other financial measures presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, we monitor free cash flow (FCF) as a non-GAAP measure to manage our business, make planning decisions, evaluate our performance, and allocate resources. We define FCF as net cash provided by operating activities reduced by net purchases of property and equipment and principal payments on finance leases.
We believe that FCF is one of the key financial indicators of our business performance over the long term and provides useful information regarding how cash provided by operating activities compares to the property and equipment investments required to maintain and grow our business.
We have chosen our definition for FCF because we believe that this methodology can provide useful supplemental information to help investors better understand underlying trends in our business. We use FCF in discussions with our senior management and board of directors.
FCF has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities. FCF is not intended to represent our residual cash flow available for discretionary expenses. Some of the limitations of FCF are:
•FCF does not reflect our future contractual commitments; and
•other companies in our industry present similarly titled measures differently than we do, limiting their usefulness as comparative measures.
Management compensates for the inherent limitations associated with using the FCF measure through disclosure of such limitations, presentation of our financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and reconciliation of FCF to the most directly comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by operating activities, as presented below.
The following is a reconciliation of FCF to the most comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by operating activities (in millions):
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements that are reasonably likely to have a material current or future effect on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures, or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist mostly of obligations under operating leases and other contractual commitments. Our operating lease obligations mostly include among others, certain of our offices, data centers, colocations and land. Our other contractual commitments are primarily related to our investments in servers, network infrastructure and Reality Labs. The following table summarizes our commitments to settle contractual obligations in cash as of December 31, 2021 (in millions):
_________________________
(1)Includes variable lease payments that were fixed subsequent to lease commencement or modification.
Additionally, as part of the normal course of business, we may also enter into multi-year agreements to purchase renewable energy that do not specify a fixed or minimum volume commitment or to purchase certain server components that do not specify a fixed or minimum price commitment. These agreements are generally entered into in order to secure either volume or price. Using projected market prices or expected volume consumption, the total estimated spend is approximately $8.06 billion. The ultimate spend under these agreements may vary and will be based on prevailing market prices or actual volume purchased.
Our other liabilities also include $4.40 billion related to the uncertain tax positions as of December 31, 2021. Due to uncertainties in the timing of the completion of tax audits, the timing of the resolution of these positions is uncertain and we are unable to make a reasonably reliable estimate of the timing of payments in individual years beyond 12 months. As a result, this amount is not included in the above contractual obligations table.
Contingencies
We are involved in legal proceedings, claims, and regulatory, tax or government inquiries and investigations. We record a liability when we believe that it is both probable that a liability has been incurred, and that the amount can be reasonably estimated. If we determine there is a reasonable possibility that we may incur a loss and the loss or range of loss can be estimated, we disclose the possible loss in the accompanying notes to the consolidated financial statements to the extent material. Significant judgment is required to determine both probability and the estimated amount of loss. Such matters are inherently unpredictable and subject to significant uncertainties, some of which are beyond our control. Should any of these estimates and assumptions change or prove to be incorrect, it could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial position, and cash flows.
See Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies and Note 14 - Income Taxes in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" and Part I, Item 3, "Legal Proceedings" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding contingencies.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
For further information on recently issued accounting pronouncements, see Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in the accompanying notes to consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8, "Financial Statements and Supplementary Data" of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.