Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
GENERAL
We are a specialty finance company that invests in and finances residential mortgage assets. We invest, on a leveraged basis, in residential whole loans, residential mortgage-backed securities, MSR-related assets and other real estate assets. Through certain of our subsidiaries, we also originate and service business purpose loans for real estate investors. Our principal business objective is to deliver shareholder value through the generation of distributable income and through asset performance linked to residential mortgage credit fundamentals. We selectively invest in residential mortgage assets with a focus on credit analysis, projected prepayment rates, interest rate sensitivity and expected return. We are an internally-managed real estate investment trust.
At December 31, 2021, we had total assets of approximately $9.1 billion, of which $7.9 billion, or 87%, represented residential whole loans acquired through interests in certain trusts established to acquire the loans or originated by Lima One. Our Purchased Performing Loans, which as of December 31, 2021 comprised approximately 80% of our residential whole loans, include: (i) loans to finance (or refinance) one-to-four family residential properties that are not considered to meet the definition of a “Qualified Mortgage” in accordance with guidelines adopted by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (or Non-QM loans), (ii) short-term business purpose loans collateralized by residential properties made to non-occupant borrowers who intend to rehabilitate and sell the property for a profit (or Rehabilitation loans or Fix and Flip loans), (iii) loans to finance (or refinance) non-owner occupied one-to-four family residential properties that are rented to one or more tenants (or Single-family rental loans), (iv) loans on investor properties that conform to the standards for purchase by a federally chartered corporation, such as the Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie Mac”) (or Agency eligible investor loans), and (v) previously originated loans secured by residential real estate that is generally owner occupied (or Seasoned performing loans). In addition, at December 31, 2021, we had approximately $256.7 million in investments in Securities, at fair value, which represented approximately 3% of our total assets. At such date, our Securities, at fair value included MSR-related assets and CRT securities. Our MSR-related assets include term notes whose cash flows are considered to be largely dependent on MSR collateral and loan participations to provide financing to mortgage originators that own MSRs. Our remaining investment-related assets, which represent approximately 4% of our total assets at December 31, 2021, were primarily comprised of REO, capital contributions made to loan origination partners, other interest-earning assets, and loan-related receivables.
The results of our business operations are affected by a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, and primarily depend on, among other things, the level of our net interest income and the market value of our assets, which is driven by numerous factors, including the supply and demand for residential mortgage assets in the marketplace, the terms and availability of adequate financing, general economic and real estate conditions (both on a national and local level), the impact of government actions in the real estate and mortgage sector, and the credit performance of our credit sensitive residential mortgage assets. Changes in these factors, or uncertainty in the market regarding the potential for changes in these factors, can result in significant changes in the value and/or performance of our investment portfolio. Further, our GAAP results may be impacted by market volatility, resulting in changes in market values of certain financial instruments for which changes in fair value are recorded in net income each period, such as certain residential whole loans and CRT securities. Our net interest income varies primarily as a result of changes in interest rates, the slope of the yield curve (i.e., the differential between long-term and short-term interest rates), borrowing costs (i.e., our interest expense) and prepayment speeds, the behavior of which involves various risks and uncertainties. Interest rates and CPRs (which is an annualized measure of the amount of unscheduled principal prepayments on an asset as a percentage of the asset balance), vary according to the type of investment, conditions in the financial markets, competition and other factors, none of which can be predicted with any certainty. Our financial results are impacted by estimates of credit losses that are required to be recorded when loans that are not accounted for at fair value through net income are acquired or originated, as well as changes in these credit loss estimates that will be required to be made periodically.
With respect to our business operations, increases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with our borrowings to increase; (ii) the value of certain of our residential mortgage assets and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to decline; (iii) coupons on our adjustable-rate assets to reset, on a delayed basis, to higher interest rates; (iv) prepayments on our assets to decline, thereby slowing the amortization of purchase premiums and the accretion of our purchase discounts, and slowing our ability to redeploy capital to generally higher yielding investments; and (v) the value of our derivative hedging instruments, if any, and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to increase. Conversely, decreases in interest rates, in general, may over time cause: (i) the interest expense associated with our borrowings to decrease; (ii) the value
of certain of our residential mortgage assets and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to increase; (iii) coupons on our adjustable-rate assets, on a delayed basis, to lower interest rates; (iv) prepayments on our assets to increase, thereby accelerating the amortization of purchase premiums and the accretion of our purchase discounts, and accelerating the redeployment of our capital to generally lower yielding investments; and (v) the value of our derivative hedging instruments, if any, and, correspondingly, our stockholders’ equity to decrease. In addition, our borrowing costs and credit lines are further affected by the type of collateral we pledge and general conditions in the credit market.
Our investments in residential mortgage assets expose us to credit risk, meaning that we are generally subject to credit losses due to the risk of delinquency, default and foreclosure on the underlying real estate collateral. Our investment process for credit sensitive assets focuses primarily on quantifying and pricing credit risk. With respect to investments in Purchased Performing Loans, we believe that sound underwriting standards, including low LTVs at origination, significantly mitigate our risk of loss. Further, we believe the discounted purchase prices paid on Purchased Non-performing and Purchased Credit Deteriorated Loans mitigate our risk of loss in the event that, as we expect on most such investments, we receive less than 100% of the par value of these investments.
Premiums arise when we acquire an MBS at a price in excess of the aggregate principal balance of the mortgages securing the MBS (i.e., par value) or when we acquire residential whole loans at a price in excess of their aggregate principal balance Conversely, discounts arise when we acquire an MBS at a price below the aggregate principal balance of the mortgages securing the MBS or when we acquire residential whole loans at a price below their aggregate principal balance. Accretable purchase discounts on these investments are accreted to interest income. Premiums paid to purchase loans, primarily on certain of our Non-QM loans, business purpose loans and Agency eligible investor loans, are amortized against interest income over the life of the investment using the effective yield method, adjusted for actual prepayment activity. An increase in the prepayment rate, as measured by the CPR, will typically accelerate the amortization of purchase premiums, thereby reducing the interest income earned on these assets.
CPR levels are impacted by, among other things, conditions in the housing market, new regulations, government and private sector initiatives, interest rates, availability of credit to home borrowers, underwriting standards and the economy in general. In particular, CPR reflects the conditional prepayment rate, which measures voluntary prepayments of a loan, and the conditional default rate (or CDR) measures involuntary prepayments resulting from defaults. CPRs on our residential mortgage securities and whole loans may differ significantly. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the average CPRs on certain of our loan portfolios were: 35.3% for Non-QM loans, 24.2% for Single-family rental loans, 17.4% for Purchased Credit Deteriorated loans, and 16.3% for Purchased Non-Performing loans.
It is generally our business strategy to hold our residential mortgage assets as long-term investments. On at least a quarterly basis, excluding investments for which the fair value option has been elected or for which specialized loan accounting is otherwise applied, we assess our ability and intent to continue to hold each asset and, as part of this process, we monitor our investments in securities that are designated as AFS for impairment. A change in our ability and/or intent to continue to hold any of these securities that are in an unrealized loss position, or a deterioration in the underlying characteristics of these securities, could result in our recognizing future impairment charges or a loss upon the sale of any such security.
Our residential mortgage investments have longer-term contractual maturities than our non-securitization related financing liabilities. Even though the majority of our investments have interest rates that adjust over time based on short-term changes in corresponding interest rate indices (typically following an initial fixed-rate period for our Hybrids), the interest rates we pay on our borrowings will typically change at a faster pace than the interest rates we earn on our investments. In order to reduce this interest rate risk exposure, we may enter into derivative instruments, which currently include Swaps and short positions in to be announced (or TBA) securities.
Recent Market Conditions and Our Strategy
At December 31, 2021, our residential mortgage asset portfolio, which includes residential whole loans and REO, and Securities, at fair value, was approximately $8.3 billion compared to $6.0 billion at December 31, 2020.
The following table presents the activity for our residential mortgage asset portfolio for the year ended December 31, 2021:
(1)Primarily includes principal repayments and sales of REO.
(2)Includes draws on previously originated Rehabilitation loans.
(3)Primarily includes changes in fair value and changes in the allowance for credit losses.
At December 31, 2021, our total recorded investment in residential whole loans and REO was $8.1 billion, or 96.9% of our residential mortgage asset portfolio. Of this amount, $6.3 billion are Purchased Performing Loans, $525.0 million are Purchased Credit Deteriorated Loans and $1.1 billion are Purchased Non-performing Loans. Loan acquisition activity of $4.6 billion during 2021 included $2.2 billion of Non-QM loans, $1.3 billion of business purpose loans (including draws on Rehabilitation loans), and $1.1 billion of Agency eligible investor loans. During 2021, we recognized approximately $303.5 million of residential whole loan interest income on our consolidated statements of operations, representing an effective yield of 5.26%, with Purchased Performing Loans generating an effective yield of 4.35%, Purchased Credit Deteriorated Loans generating an effective yield of 6.56% and Purchased Non-performing Loans generating an effective yield of 8.39%. In addition, all of our Purchased Non-performing Loans and certain of our Purchased Performing Loans are measured at fair value as a result of the election of the fair value option at acquisition. Included in earnings in other income, net are net gains on these loans of $16.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had REO with an aggregate carrying value of $156.2 million and $249.7 million, respectively, which is included in Other assets on our consolidated balance sheets.
In response to the financial impact of COVID-19 on borrowers, and in compliance with various federal and state guidelines, starting in the first quarter of 2020, we offered short-term relief to certain borrowers who were contractually current at the time the pandemic started to impact the economy. Under the terms of such plans, for certain borrowers a deferral plan was entered into where missed payments were deferred to the maturity of the related loan, with a corresponding change to the loan’s next payment due date. In addition, certain borrowers were granted up to a seven-month “zero pay” forbearance with payments required to resume at the conclusion of the plan. For these borrowers, delinquent payments were permitted to be placed on specified repayment plans. While the majority of the borrowers granted relief have resumed making payments at the conclusion of such deferral and forbearance periods, certain borrowers, particularly in our Non-QM loan portfolio, continue to be impacted financially by COVID-19 and have not yet resumed payments. When these borrowers became more than 90 days delinquent on payments, any interest income receivable related to the associated loans was reversed in accordance with our non-accrual policies. At December 31, 2021, Non-QM loans with an unpaid principal balance of $94.8 million, or 2.8% of the portfolio, were more than 90 days delinquent. For these and other borrowers that have been impacted by COVID-19, we are continuing to evaluate loss mitigation options with respect to these loans, including forbearance, repayment plans, loan modification and foreclosure. In addition, at December 31, 2021, Rehabilitation Loans with an unpaid principal balance of $103.0 million, or 14.1% of the portfolio, were more than 90 days delinquent. Because rehabilitation loans are shorter term and repayment is usually dependent on completion of the rehabilitation project and sale of the property, the strategy to resolve delinquent rehabilitation loans differs from owner occupied loans. Consequently, forbearance and repayment plans are offered less frequently. However, we seek to work with delinquent rehabilitation loan borrowers whose projects are close to completion or are listed for sale in order to provide the borrower the opportunity to sell the property and repay our loan. In circumstances where the borrower is not able to complete the project or we are not able to work with the borrower to our mutual benefit, we pursue foreclosure or other forms of resolution.
At December 31, 2021, our Securities, at fair value totaled $256.7 million and included $153.8 million of MSR-related assets and $102.9 million of CRT securities. The net yield on our Securities, at fair value was 22.95% for 2021, compared to 6.16% for 2020. The increase in the net yield on our Securities, at fair value portfolio primarily reflects accretion income of approximately $20.5 million recognized during 2021 due to the redemption of MSR-related assets that had been held at amortized cost basis below par due to impairment charges recorded in the first quarter of 2020, and $8.1 million of accretion recognized during 2021 on the redemption of a Non-Agency MBS security that had been previously purchased at a discount.
We adopted the accounting standard addressing the measurement of credit losses on financial instruments (CECL) on January 1, 2020 for loans on which we do not elect the fair value option at the time of acquisition. CECL requires that reserves for credit losses be estimated at the reporting date based on expected cash flows for the life of the loan or financial asset, including anticipated prepayments and reasonable and supportable forecasts of future economic conditions. For 2021, we recorded a reversal of provision for credit losses on residential whole loans held at carrying value of $44.9 million. The reversal for the period primarily reflects run-off of loans held at carrying value and adjustments to certain macroeconomic and loan prepayment speed assumptions used in our credit loss forecasts. The total allowance for credit losses recorded on residential whole loans held at carrying value at December 31, 2021 was $39.4 million. In addition, as of December 31, 2021, CECL reserves for credit losses totaling approximately $205,000 were recorded related to undrawn commitments on loans held at carrying value.
During 2021, we continued to execute on our strategy of entering into more durable forms of financing by completing eight securitizations consisting of $2.6 billion of residential whole loans.
Our GAAP book value per common share was $4.78 as of December 31, 2021. Book value per common share increased from $4.54 as of December 31, 2020. Economic book value per common share, a non-GAAP financial measure of our financial position that adjusts GAAP book value by the amount of unrealized mark-to-market gains on our residential whole loans and securitized debt held at carrying value, was $5.15 as of December 31, 2021, an increase from $4.91 as of December 31, 2020. Increases in GAAP and Economic book value during 2021 reflect GAAP earnings in excess of dividends declared and fair value increases for our Residential whole loans at carrying value. For additional information regarding the calculation of Economic book value per share, including a reconciliation to GAAP book value per share, refer to page 58 under the heading “Economic Book Value.”
Completion of Lima One Acquisition:
On July 1, 2021, we completed the previously announced acquisition from affiliates of Magnetar Capital of their ownership interests in Lima One. In connection with this transaction, we also acquired from certain members of Lima One management their ownership interests in the company. We now own 100% of Lima One, and the financial results of Lima One are included in our consolidated financial results from the date of the transaction closing.
For more information regarding market factors which impact our portfolio, see Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” and