ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including those factors set forth in the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
our actual results could differ materially from the results described in, or implied by, the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
Magenta Therapeutics, Inc. is a clinical-stage biotechnology company developing novel medicines designed to bring the curative power of stem cell transplants to more patients with blood cancers, genetic diseases and autoimmune diseases.
Magenta’s drug development pipeline includes multiple clinical and preclinical product candidates designed to improve stem cell transplants. We are developing product candidates that are designed to deplete targeted cells in the bone marrow to make space for the bone marrow to receive newly transplanted stem cells, a process known as conditioning. Our targeted conditioning programs are intended to enhance the efficacy of and/or reduce the dosing levels, intensity or, in some cases, even the need for chemotoxic agents. Our first targeted conditioning program, MGTA-117,
has entered clinical development in a Phase 1/2 trial, and our second program, a CD45-antibody drug conjugate, or CD45-ADC,
is advancing in preclinical development. In addition to our conditioning programs, we are also developing a product candidate, MGTA-145,
to improve the process by which stem cells are stimulated out of the bone marrow and into the bloodstream so they are available for collection for future reinfusion, known as mobilization, which is required for all transplants and gene therapy applications. MGTA-145
is a Phase 2 clinical stage program intended to enable rapid, reliable, predictable and safe mobilization and collection of high numbers of functional stem cells for transplant.
In addition to our product candidates, Magenta’s research efforts are evaluating several early-stage targets that include a program for targeted lymphodepletion prior to therapies such as chimeric antigen receptor T-cells
or CAR-T.
We also have a cell therapy program, E478, which is a small molecule aryl hydrocarbon receptor, or AHR, antagonist designed to increase the numbers of gene-modified HSCs for stem cell-based gene therapy and genome editing. In December 2021, we notified Novartis International Pharmaceutical Ltd., or Novartis, of our termination of the Novartis license related to our cell therapy program, MGTA-456,
which becomes effective 90 days from the date of notification.
Magenta intends to become a fully integrated discovery, development, and commercial company in the field of stem cell transplant. We are developing our product candidates to be used individually or, in some cases, in combination with each other or together with other therapies. As a result, our portfolio could be tailored to the patient’s disease, such that a patient may receive more than one Magenta therapy as part of his or her individual stem cell transplant.
We are experiencing operational and other challenges as a result of the novel coronavirus, or COVID-19,
global pandemic, which could delay or halt the development of our product candidates. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for further discussion of the current and expected impact on our business and product candidates.
Since our inception in 2015, we have focused substantially all of our efforts and financial resources on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring and developing our technology, identifying potential product candidates, and undertaking preclinical studies and clinical trials, including MGTA-117
and MGTA-145.
We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales.
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. Our ability to generate product revenue sufficient to achieve profitability will depend heavily on the successful development and eventual commercialization of one or more of our product candidates. Net losses were $71.1 million and $74.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $325.6 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We expect our expenses and capital requirements will increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we:
•
initiate, enroll and conduct a Phase 1/2 clinical trial for MGTA-117
and Phase 2 clinical trials for MGTA-145
•
initiate and conduct preclinical studies and clinical trials of our other product candidates;
•
develop any other future product candidates we may choose to pursue;
•
seek marketing approval for any of our product candidates that successfully complete clinical development, if any;
•
maintain compliance with applicable regulatory requirements;
•
develop and scale up our capabilities to support our ongoing preclinical activities and clinical trials for our product candidates and commercialization of any of our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval, if any;
•
maintain, expand, protect and enforce our intellectual property portfolio;
•
develop and expand our sales, marketing and distribution capabilities for our product candidates for which we obtain marketing approval, if any; and
•
expand our operational, financial and management systems and increase personnel, including to support our clinical development and commercialization efforts and our operations as a public company.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. If we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing and distribution. Further, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and marketing and distribution or licensing arrangements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on favorable terms, or at all. If we fail to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, we may have to significantly delay, scale back or discontinue the development and commercialization of one or more of our product candidates.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with pharmaceutical product development, we are unable to accurately predict the timing or amount of increased expenses or when or if we will be able to achieve or maintain profitability. Even if we are able to generate product sales, we may not become profitable. If we fail to become profitable or are unable to sustain profitability on a continuing basis, then we may be unable to continue our operations at planned levels and be forced to reduce or terminate our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $176.9 million. Based on our operating plan, we believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the fourth quarter of 2023. See “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Liquidity and Capital Resources.”
Impact of the Ongoing COVID-19
Pandemic
In March 2020, COVID-19
was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization. as a result, more than 40 states and certain U.S. territories, including the Commonwealth of Massachusetts where our operations are located, instituted quarantines, restrictions on travel, “stay at home” rules, restrictions on types of businesses that may continue to operate and restrictions on the types of construction projects that may continue. As a result, the COVID-19
pandemic has caused significant disruptions to the U.S., regional and global economies and has contributed to significant volatility and negative pressure in financial markets.
We have been carefully monitoring the COVID-19
pandemic and its potential impact on our business and have taken important steps to help ensure the safety of our employees and their families and to reduce the spread of COVID-19
in the Cambridge community. We have established a work-from-home policy for all employees, as well as safety measures for those using our offices and laboratory facilities that are designed to comply with applicable federal, state and local guidelines instituted in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. We will continue to assess those measures as COVID-19-related
guidelines evolve. We have also maintained efficient communication with our partners and clinical sites as the COVID-19
pandemic has progressed. We have taken these precautionary steps while maintaining business continuity so that we can continue to progress our programs.
The future impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our industry, the healthcare system and our current and future operations and financial condition will, however, depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence, including the scope, severity and duration of the pandemic, the actions taken to contain the pandemic or mitigate its impact, including the adoption of available COVID-19
vaccines, as well as the effect of any relaxation of current restrictions within the Cambridge community or regions in which our partners and clinical sites are located, and the direct and indirect economic effects of the pandemic and containment measures, among others. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” for a discussion of the potential adverse impact of COVID-19
on our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Components of Our Results of Operations
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research activities, including our drug discovery efforts, and the development of our product candidates, which include:
•
employee-related expenses, including salaries and related costs, and stock-based compensation expense, for employees engaged in research and development functions;
•
expenses incurred in connection with the preclinical and clinical development of our product candidates, including under agreements with contract research organizations, or CROs;
•
the cost of consultants and third-party contract development and manufacturing organizations, or CDMOs, that manufacture drug products for use in our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and supplies; and
•
payments made under third-party licensing agreements.
We expense research and development costs to operations as incurred. Advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
Our direct research and development expenses are tracked on a program-by-program
basis and consist primarily of external costs, such as fees paid to consultants, central laboratories, contractors, CDMOs and CROs
in connection with our preclinical and clinical development activities. We do not allocate employee costs, costs associated with our platform technology or facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product development programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product development programs and, as such, are not separately classified.
The successful development and commercialization of our product candidates is highly uncertain. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties, including the following:
•
the continuing impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on our industry, the healthcare system, and our current and future operations;
•
successful completion of preclinical studies and clinical trials;
•
receipt and related terms of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•
raising additional funds necessary to complete clinical development of and commercialize our product candidates;
•
obtaining and maintaining patent, trade secret and other intellectual property protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•
making arrangements with third-party manufacturers, or establishing manufacturing capabilities, for both clinical and commercial supplies of our product candidates;
•
developing and implementing marketing and reimbursement strategies;
•
establishing sales, marketing and distribution capabilities and launching commercial sales of our products, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•
acceptance of our products, if and when approved, by patients, the medical community and third-party payors;
•
effectively competing with other therapies;
•
obtaining and maintaining third-party coverage and adequate reimbursement;
•
protecting and enforcing our rights in our intellectual property portfolio; and
•
maintaining a continued acceptable safety profile of the products following approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of that product candidate. We may never succeed in obtaining regulatory approval for any of our product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as our product candidate development programs progress. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs, and stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and administrative functions. General and administrative expenses also include direct and allocated facility-related costs and insurance costs, as well as professional fees for legal, patent, consulting, accounting and audit services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as we increase our headcount to support our continued research activities and development of our product candidates. We also anticipate that we will incur increased costs associated with continuing to operate as a growing public company.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest and other income, net, consists of interest income and miscellaneous income and expense unrelated to our core operations.
Income Taxes
Since our inception, we have not recorded any U.S. federal or state income tax benefits for the net losses we have incurred in each year or for our earned research and orphan drug tax credits, due to our uncertainty of realizing a benefit from those items. As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards for federal income tax purposes of $247.2 million, of which $17.5 million begin to expire in 2035 and $229.7 million can be carried forward indefinitely. As of December 31, 2021, we had net operating loss carryforwards for state income tax purposes of $247.4 million which begin to expire in 2035. As of December 31, 2021, we also had available research and orphan drug tax credit carryforwards for federal and state income tax purposes of $10.3 million and $2.7 million, respectively, which begin to expire in 2035 and 2030, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S., or GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, costs and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K,
we believe that the following accounting policies are those most critical to the judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued research and development expenses. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our applicable personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of actual costs. The majority of our service providers invoice us in arrears for services performed, on a pre-determined
schedule or when contractual milestones are met; however, some require advance payments. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date in the consolidated financial statements based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of the estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. Examples of estimated accrued research and development expenses include fees paid to:
•
vendors in connection with the preclinical development activities;
•
CROs in connection with preclinical and clinical trials;
•
CDMOs in connection with the production of preclinical and clinical trial materials; and
•
investigative sites in connection with clinical trials.
We base our expenses related to preclinical studies and clinical trials on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with multiple research institutions and CROs that conduct and manage preclinical studies and clinical trials on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have not been any material adjustments to our prior estimates of accrued research and development expenses.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure all stock options and other stock-based awards granted to employees, directors and non-employees
based on the fair value on the date of the grant and recognize compensation expense of those awards over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. Generally, we issue awards with either service-only vesting conditions and record expense using the straight-line method or service and performance vesting conditions and record expense when achievement of the performance condition becomes probable using the graded-vesting method. We have historically granted stock options with exercise prices equivalent to the fair value of our common stock as of the date of the grant. The fair value of our common stock is based on quoted market prices. We estimate the fair value of each stock option award using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs the fair value of our common stock and assumptions we make for the volatility of our common stock, the expected term of our stock options, the risk-free interest rate for a period that approximates the expected term of our stock options and our expected dividend yield. We do not estimate and apply a forfeiture rate as we have elected to account for forfeitures as they occur.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Research and Development Expenses
Expenses related to our conditioning program decreased primarily due to a decrease in manufacturing costs as we completed our process development activities to support the submission of our investigational new drug application and future clinical trials, partially offset by an increase in clinical trial costs related to our Phase 1/2 dose escalation trial which was initiated in December 2021. The increase in expenses related to our mobilization program was primarily due to an increase in process development activities to support future manufacturing. Expenses related to our cell therapy program decreased primarily due to the discontinuance of enrollment in our MGTA-456
Phase 2 trial in inherited metabolic diseases in June 2020.
The increase in personnel related costs was due primarily to an increase in headcount in our research and development function and an increase in stock-based compensation. Personnel related costs for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included stock-based compensation expense of $3.7 million and $3.1 million, respectively. The increase in facility related and other was primarily due to higher operating costs related to our Cambridge, Massachusetts facility.
General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease in personnel related costs was due primarily to a decrease in headcount in our general and administrative function. The decrease in professional and consultant costs was primarily due to lower patent and recruitment costs. The increase in facility related and other was primarily due to higher operating costs related to our Cambridge, Massachusetts facility and higher director and officers’ insurance costs.
Interest and Other Income, Net
Interest income and other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of sublease income of $3.5 million and interest income $0.1 million. Interest income and other income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of sublease income of $2.9 million and interest income of $1.0 million. The increase in sublease income of $0.6 million was due to higher sublessor operating expenses. The decrease in interest income was due to lower interest rates and lower invested balances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since our inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. We have not yet commercialized any of our product candidates and we do not expect to generate revenue from sales of any product candidates for several years, if at all. In June 2018, we completed the initial public offering, or IPO, of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $89.9 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. In May 2019, we completed a follow-on
public offering resulting in net proceeds of $60.3 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses. In June 2020, we issued and sold 8,625,000 shares of our common stock, including the underwriters’ exercise in full of their option to purchase additional shares of common stock, in a follow-on
public offering at a public offering price of $8.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $64.6 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commission and other offering expenses. In May 2021, we issued and sold 9,599,998 shares of our common stock in a private placement at a purchase price of $9.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $86.1 million, after deducting offering expenses.
On August 8, 2019, we filed a shelf registration statement on Form S-3,
or Shelf, with the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, which covers the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate of $350.0 million of our common stock, preferred stock, debt securities, warrants and/or units of any combination thereof. We simultaneously entered into a sales agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC, as sales agent, to provide for the issuance and sale by the Company of up to $100.0 million of our common stock from time to time in “at-the-market”
offerings under the Shelf, which we refer to as the ATM Program. The Shelf was declared effective by the SEC on August 19, 2019. As of December 31, 2021, no sales have been made pursuant to the ATM Program.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our sources and uses of cash for each of the periods presented:
Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, operating activities used $59.5 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $71.1 million and net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.5 million, partially offset by non-cash
charges of $13.1 million. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of an increase of $1.1 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets and a decrease of $0.6 million in accounts payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, operating activities used $64.0 million of cash, primarily resulting from our net loss of $74.9 million and net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $1.2 million, partially offset by non-cash
charges of $12.1 million. Net cash used by changes in our operating assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of a decrease of $2.7 million in accounts
payable and accrued expenses and other current liabilities, partially offset by a decrease of $1.4 million in prepaid expenses and other current assets.
Changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other current liabilities and prepaid expenses in both periods were generally due to the timing of vendor invoicing and payments.
Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by investing activities was $43.4 million, primarily attributable to net maturities of marketable securities of $44.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used by investing activities was $10.6 million, primarily attributable to net purchases of marketable securities of $10.2 million.
Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by financing activities was $89.6 million, consisting of proceeds from the May 2021 private placement, net of offering costs, of $86.1 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $3.4 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by financing activities was $67.7 million, consisting of proceeds from our follow-on
public offering, net of underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs, of $64.6 million and proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $3.1 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we advance the preclinical activities and clinical trials for our product candidates in development. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $176.9 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the fourth quarter of 2023. We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with research, development and commercialization of pharmaceutical product candidates, we are unable to estimate the exact amount of our working capital requirements. Our future funding requirements will depend on and could increase significantly as a result of many factors, including those listed above.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of equity offerings, including sales under our ATM Program, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances, marketing and distribution arrangements, or licensing arrangements. We do not currently have any committed external source of funds. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, our stockholders’ ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect our stockholders’ rights as a common stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making acquisitions or capital expenditures or declaring dividends. If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances, marketing and distribution arrangements, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings or other arrangements when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our research, product development or future commercialization efforts, or
grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves. Although we continue to pursue these plans, there is no assurance that we will be successful in obtaining sufficient funding on terms acceptable to us to fund our continuing operations, if at all.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Our cash flows are dependent on a number of factors in addition to our operational expenditures, including our contractual and other obligations. As a result, our liquidity and capital resources in future periods should be analyzed in conjunction with such factors.
Lease Obligations
We have a sublease for up to approximately 69,000 square feet of office and laboratory space in Cambridge, Massachusetts, which expires in February 2028. We are obligated to make remaining rent payments of $45.1 million through February 2028, of which $6.4 million are due in 2022.
Research and Development and Manufacturing Agreements
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with CROs, CDMOs and other third parties for clinical trials, preclinical research studies and testing and manufacturing services. These contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable by us upon prior written notice. Payments due upon cancellation consist only of payments for services provided or expenses incurred, including noncancelable obligations of our service providers, up to the date of cancellation and in some cases, wind-down costs. The exact amount of such obligations is dependent on the timing of termination and the terms of the related agreement and are not known.
License and Collaboration Agreements
In March 2018, we entered into a collaboration agreement with Heidelberg Pharma Research GmbH, or HDPR, whereby the parties agreed to combine our stem cell platform with proprietary antibodies across up to four exclusive targets with HDPR’s proprietary Antibody Targeted Amanitin Conjugates platform. Upon the exercise of certain license rights, we may be obligated to pay HDPR development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments of up to $83.5 million per target as well as royalties on net sales of products licensed under the agreement.
We have a license agreement with the President and Fellows of Harvard College, entered into in November 2016, for an exclusive, worldwide, royalty-bearing license for certain technologies related to conditioning and mobilization. We are obligated to pay milestone payments of up to $7.4 million for the first two licensed products upon the achievement of certain development and regulatory milestones and to pay royalties on a product-by-product
and country-by-country
basis on net sales of products licensed under the agreement. To date, we have paid $0.3 million related to the achievement of certain of these milestones. As of December 31, 2021, we were unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the remaining milestones or generating future product sales.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position and results of operations is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.