Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Overview
Following a review of our Bitcoin mining operations in early 2019, we consolidated our activities at a Company-owned and managed facility in LaFayette, GA. Located adjacent to a utility substation, the several-acre property has access to about 20 megawatts (MW) of low-cost electrical power, about half of which is presently utilized by the Company.
As of December 31, 2021 and March 31, 2022, the Company owned 480 and 430Antminer S17 miners, respectively, plus 35 Antminer S19 Pro miners as of March 31, 2022. All miners are located at our Georgia facility. As more fully described in the following paragraph, over three-quarters of the S17 miners require various repairs to be productive. We purchased a total of 1,506 S17 miners in the latter part of 2019 directly from Bitmain, for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $2,768, which was paid in full. From May 2020 through March 31, 2022, the Company sold a total of 923 of these miners, receiving aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $869, and has scrapped 153 S17 miners due to burning or other events that reduced their value to zero.
During 2020, the Company began to suffer component issues, such as heat sinks detaching from hash boards, and failures of both power supplies and hash board temperature sensors. Although Bitmain has acknowledged manufacturing defects in various production runs of S17 miners, the Company was unsuccessful in obtaining any compensation from Bitmain. The manufacturing defects, combined with inadequate repair facilities has rendered approximately 350 of our remaining 430 miners in need of repair or replacement. To date, in addition to a significant amount in lost revenue, we have incurred approximately $140 in costs of repairing or replacing the defective machines. Currently, we plan to sell with all our remaining inventory of S17 miners, as well as loose hash boards, power supplies, controller boards, and other parts.
MGT’s miners are housed in a modified shipping container on the property in Georgia owned by the Company. The entire facility, including the land and improvements, five 2500 KVA 3-phase transformers, three mining containers, and miners, are owned by MGT. We continue to explore ways to grow and maintain our current operations including but not limited to further potential equipment sales and raising capital to acquire the newest generation miners. The Company is also investigating other sites to develop into Bitcoin mining facilities in addition to expansion at its current property.
In addition to its self-mining operations, the Company leases its owned space to other Bitcoin miners and also provides hosting services for owners of mining equipment. These measures improve utilization of the electrical infrastructure and better insulate us against the volatility of Bitcoin mining.
Critical accounting policies and estimates
Principles of consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of MGT and MGT Sweden AB. MGT Sweden AB was dissolved effective on October 1, 2021. All intercompany transactions and balances have been eliminated.
Use of estimates and assumptions and critical accounting estimates and assumptions
The preparation of the consolidated financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as of the date of the financial statements, and also affect the amounts of revenues and expenses reported for each period. Actual results could differ from those which result from using such estimates. Management utilizes various other estimates, including but not limited to determining the estimated lives of long-lived assets, stock compensation, determining the potential impairment of long-lived assets, the fair value of warrants issued, the fair value of conversion features, the recognition of revenue, the valuation allowance for deferred tax assets and other legal claims and contingencies. The results of any changes in accounting estimates are reflected in the financial statements in the period in which the changes become evident. Estimates and assumptions are reviewed periodically, and the effects of revisions are reflected in the period that they are determined to be necessary.
Revenue recognition
Cryptocurrency mining
The Company recognizes revenue under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, (“ASC 606”). The core principle of the revenue standard is that a company should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The following five steps are applied to achieve that core principle:
● Step 1: Identify the contract with the customer
● Step 2: Identify the performance obligations in the contract 
● Step 3: Determine the transaction price  
● Step 4: Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract  
● Step 5: Recognize revenue when the Company satisfies a performance obligation  
In order to identify the performance obligations in a contract with a customer, a company must assess the promised goods or services in the contract and identify each promised good or service that is distinct. A performance obligation meets ASC 606’s definition of a “distinct” good or service (or bundle of goods or services) if both of the following criteria are met: The customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer (i.e., the good or service is capable of being distinct), and the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract (i.e., the promise to transfer the good or service is distinct within the context of the contract).
If a good or service is not distinct, the good or service is combined with other promised goods or services until a bundle of goods or services is identified that is distinct.
The transaction price is the amount of consideration to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer. The consideration promised in a contract with a customer may include fixed amounts, variable amounts, or both. When determining the transaction price, an entity must consider the effects of all of the following:
● Variable consideration  
● Constraining estimates of variable consideration  
● The existence of a significant financing component in the contract  
● Noncash consideration  
● Consideration payable to a customer  
Variable consideration is included in the transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal in the amount of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is subsequently resolved. The transaction price is allocated to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The transaction price allocated to each performance obligation is recognized when that performance obligation is satisfied, at a point in time or over time as appropriate.
The Company has entered into digital asset mining pools by agreeing to terms and conditions, as amended from time to time, with the mining pool operators to provide computing power to the mining pool. The contracts are terminable at any time by either party and the Company’s enforceable right to compensation only begins when the Company provides computing power to the mining pool operator. In exchange for providing computing power, the Company is entitled to a fractional share of the fixed cryptocurrency award the mining pool operator receives (less digital asset transaction fees to the mining pool operator which are recorded as a component of cost of revenues), for successfully adding a block to the Blockchain. The terms of the agreement provide that neither party can dispute settlement terms after thirty-five days following settlement. The Company’s fractional share is based on the proportion of computing power the Company contributed to the mining pool operator to the total computing power contributed by all mining pool participants in solving the current algorithm.
Providing computing power to solve complex cryptographic algorithms in support of the Bitcoin Blockchain (in a process known as “solving a block”) is an output of the Company’s ordinary activities. The provision of providing such computing power is the only performance obligation in the Company’s agreements with mining pool operators. The transaction consideration the Company receives, if any, is noncash consideration, which the Company measures at fair value on the date received, which is not materially different than the fair value at contract inception or the time the Company has earned the award from the pools. The consideration is all variable. Because it is not probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue will not occur, the consideration is constrained until the mining pool operator successfully places a block (by being the first to solve an algorithm) and the Company receives confirmation of the consideration it will receive, at which time revenue is recognized. There is no significant financing component in these transactions.
Fair value of the cryptocurrency award received is determined using the quoted price of the related cryptocurrency at the time of receipt. There is currently no specific definitive guidance under GAAP or alternative accounting framework for the accounting for cryptocurrencies recognized as revenue or held, and management has exercised significant judgment in determining the appropriate accounting treatment. In the event authoritative guidance is enacted by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”), the Company may be required to change its policies, which could have an effect on the Company’s consolidated financial position and results from operations.
Other Revenues
We receive revenues from third parties renting capacity at our facility and from hosting miners owned by others. The Company recognized $197 and $0 from these sources during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is calculated using the straight-line method on the various asset classes over their estimated useful lives, which range from one to ten years when placed in service. The cost of repairs and maintenance is expensed as incurred; major replacements and improvements are capitalized. When assets are retired or disposed of, the cost and accumulated depreciation are removed from the accounts, and any resulting gains or losses are included in income in the year of disposition. Deposits on property and equipment are initially classified as Other Assets and upon delivery, installation and full payment, the assets are classified as property and equipment on the consolidated balance sheet.
Income taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes”. ASC 740 requires an asset and liability approach for financial accounting and reporting for income taxes and established for all the entities a minimum threshold for financial statement recognition of the benefit of tax positions and requires certain expanded disclosures. The provision for income taxes is based upon income or loss after adjustment for those permanent items that are not considered in the determination of taxable income. Deferred income taxes represent the tax effects of differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of the Company’s assets and liabilities at the enacted tax rates in effect for the years in which the differences are expected to reverse. The Company evaluates the recoverability of deferred tax assets and establishes a valuation allowance when it is more likely than not that some portion or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Management makes judgments as to the interpretation of the tax laws that might be challenged upon an audit and cause changes to previous estimates of tax liability. In management’s opinion, adequate provisions for income taxes have been made. If actual taxable income by tax jurisdiction varies from estimates, additional allowances or reversals of reserves may be necessary.
Loss per share
Basic loss per share is calculated by dividing net loss applicable to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period. Diluted loss per share is calculated by dividing the net loss attributable to common shareholders by the sum of the weighted average number of common shares outstanding plus potential dilutive common shares outstanding during the period. Potential dilutive securities, comprised of unvested restricted shares, convertible debt, convertible preferred stock, stock warrants and stock options, are not reflected in diluted net loss per share because such potential shares are anti-dilutive due to the Company’s net loss.
Accordingly, the computation of diluted loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 excludes 74,614,871 shares issuable upon the exercise of outstanding warrants. The computation of diluted loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2020 excludes 33,333 unvested restricted shares, 9,173,651 shares issuable upon the conversion of convertible debt, and 45,634,921 shares under convertible preferred stock.
Stock-based compensation
The Company applies ASC 718-10, “Share-Based Payment,” which requires the measurement and recognition of compensation expenses for all share-based payment awards made to employees and directors including employee stock options under the Company’s stock plans and equity awards issued to non-employees based on estimated fair values.
ASC 718-10 requires companies to estimate the fair value of equity-based option awards on the date of grant using an option-pricing model. The fair value of the award is recognized as an expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods in the Company’s consolidated statements of comprehensive loss.
Restricted stock awards are granted at the discretion of the compensation committee of the board of directors of the Company (the “Board”). These awards are restricted as to the transfer of ownership and generally vest over the requisite service periods, typically over a 12 to 24-month period (vesting on a straight-line basis). The fair value of a stock award is equal to the fair market value of a share of the Company’s common stock on the grant date.
The fair value of an option award is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option valuation model. The Black-Scholes option valuation model requires the development of assumptions that are inputs into the model. These assumptions are the expected stock volatility, the risk-free interest rate, the expected life of the option, the dividend yield on the underlying stock and the expected forfeiture rate. Expected volatility is calculated based on the historical volatility of the Company’s common stock over the expected term of the option. Risk-free interest rates are calculated based on continuously compounded risk-free rates for the appropriate term.
Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards require the input of the subjective assumptions described above. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of equity-based payment awards represent management’s best estimates, which involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. The Company is required to estimate the expected forfeiture rate and recognize expense only for those shares expected to vest.
Fair Value Measure and Disclosures
ASC 820 “Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures” provides the framework for measuring fair value. That framework provides a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation techniques used to measure fair value. The hierarchy gives the highest priority to unadjusted quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (Level 1 measurements) and the lowest priority to unobservable inputs (Level 3 measurements).
Fair value is defined as an exit price, representing the amount that would be received upon the sale of an asset or payment to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants. Fair value is a market-based measurement that is determined based on assumptions that market participants would use in pricing an asset or liability. A three-tier fair value hierarchy is used to prioritize the inputs in measuring fair value as follows:
● Level 1 Quoted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities.
● Level 2 Quoted prices for similar assets or liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, or other inputs that are observable, either directly or indirectly.
● Level 3 Significant unobservable inputs that cannot be corroborated by market data.
As of December 31, 2021 the Company had a Level 3 financial instrument related to the derivative liability related to the issuance of warrants, and December 31, 2020, the Company had a Level 3 financial instrument related to the derivative liability related to the issuance of convertible notes.
Gain (Loss) on Modification/Extinguishment of Debt
In accordance with ASC 470, a modification or an exchange of debt instruments that adds or eliminates a conversion option that was substantive at the date of the modification or exchange is considered a substantive change and is measured and accounted for as extinguishment of the original instrument along with the recognition of a gain/loss. Additionally, under ASC 470, a substantive modification of a debt instrument is deemed to have been accomplished with debt instruments that are substantially different if the present value of the cash flows under the terms of the new debt instrument is at least 10 percent different from the present value of the remaining cash flows under the terms of the original instrument. A substantive modification is accounted for as an extinguishment of the original instrument along with the recognition of a gain/loss.
Cash and cash equivalents
The Company considers all highly liquid instruments with an original maturity of three months or less when acquired to be cash equivalents. The Company’s combined accounts were $1,230 and $236 as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. Accounts are insured by the FDIC up to $250 per financial institution. The Company has not experienced any losses in such accounts with these financial institutions. As of December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company had $980 and $0, respectively, in excess over the FDIC insurance limit.
Recent accounting pronouncements
Note 3 to our audited consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this report includes Recent Accounting Pronouncements.
Results of operations
Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
Our revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $551, or 38%, to $883 as compared to $1,434 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our revenue is primarily derived from cryptocurrency mining which totaled $686 during 2021. The decrease in revenues is a result of less Bitcoins mined due to fewer miners in operation and higher difficulty rate, offset by increased Bitcoin prices.
We also receive revenues from third parties renting capacity at our facility and from hosting miners owned by others. The Company recognized $197 and $0 from these sources during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $1,641, or 38%, to $2,670 as compared to $4,311 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in operating expenses was comprised of a decrease in cost of revenues of $822 and general and administrative expenses of $819.
The decrease in cost of revenues of $822 or 48% to $906 as compared to $1,728 for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to decreases in electricity costs of $405, decreases in depreciation of $427, offset by increases in mark to market revaluation of $10. The decrease in general and administrative expenses of $819 or 32% to $1,764 as compared to $2,583 for the year ended December 31, 2020, was primarily due to decreases in payroll and related expenses of $193, stock-based compensation of $223, legal and audit fees of $203, and insurance of $121.
Other Income and Expense
For the year ended December 31, 2021, non-operating expense consisted of accretion of debt discount of $526, loss on settlement of debt of $541, loss on settlement of derivative of $228, interest expense of $340, loss on change in fair value of derivative liability of $79, offset by non-operating income of a gain on sale of property and equipment of $246, the change in fair value of derivative liabilities of $955, gain on settlement of payables of $675 and other non-operating income of $392, and non-operating expense of $306.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, non-operating expense consisted of accretion of debt discount of $882, a loss on sale of property and equipment of $352, interest expense of $347, offset by non-operating income of a gain on change in fair value of the liability associated with the termination of management agreements of $26, forgiveness of debt of $111, the change in fair value of liability and derivative liability of $309, and net other income of $125.
.
Liquidity and capital resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have historically financed our business through the sale of debt and equity interests. We have incurred significant operating losses since inception and continue to generate losses from operations and as of December 31, 2021 have an accumulated deficit of $419,928. At December 31, 2021, our cash and cash equivalents were $1,230, and we had a working capital deficit of $191. As of December 31, 2021, we had no outstanding debt.
In January 2020, management consolidated its activities in a Company-owned and managed facility, having terminated all third-party management agreements and hosting arrangements in 2019. The Company will likely need to raise additional funding to maintain and grow its operations. There can be no assurance however that the Company will be able to raise additional capital when needed, or at terms deemed acceptable, if at all. Such factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to sustain operations for at least one year from the issuance of these consolidated financial statements. The accompanying consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments related to the recoverability and classification of asset amounts or the classification of liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern.
The price of Bitcoin is volatile, and fluctuations are expected. Declines in the price of Bitcoin have had a negative impact in our operating results and liquidity and could harm the price of our common stock. Movements may be influenced by various factors, including, but not limited to, government regulation, security breaches experienced by service providers, as well as political and economic uncertainties around the world. Since we record revenues partly based on the price of earned Bitcoin and we may retain such Bitcoin as an asset or as payment for future expenses, the relative value of such revenues may fluctuate, as will the value of any Bitcoin we retain. The high and low exchange rate per Bitcoin for the year ending December 31, 2021, as reported by Blockchain.info, were approximately $68 and $30 respectively.
The supply of Bitcoin is finite. Once 21 million Bitcoin are generated, the network will stop producing more. Currently, there are approximately 19 million Bitcoin in circulation, or 90% of the total supply of Bitcoin. Within the Bitcoin protocol is an event referred to as Halving where the Bitcoin reward provided upon mining a block is reduced by 50%. Halvings are scheduled to occur once every 210,000 blocks, or roughly every four years, until the maximum supply of 21 million Bitcoin is reached. The most recent Halving occurred in May 2020, with a revised reward payout of 6.25 Bitcoin per block.
Given a stable hash rate, a Halving reduces the number of new Bitcoin being generated by the network. While the effect is to limit the supply of new coins, it has no impact on the quantity of total Bitcoin outstanding. As a result, the price of Bitcoin could rise or fall based on overall investor and consumer demand. Should the price of Bitcoin remain unchanged after the next Halving, the Company’s revenue would be reduced by 50%, with a much larger negative impact to profit.
The COVID-19 pandemic represents a fluid situation that presents a wide range of potential impacts of varying durations for different global geographies, including locations where we have offices, employees, customers, vendors and other suppliers and business partners. Like most US-based businesses, the COVID-19 pandemic and efforts to mitigate the same began to have impacts on our business in March 2020. By that time, much of our first fiscal quarter was completed. In light of broader macro-economic risks and already known impacts on certain industries, we have taken, and continue to take targeted steps to lower our operating expenses because of the COVID-19 pandemic. We continue to monitor the impacts of COVID-19 on our operations closely and this situation could change based on a significant number of factors that are not entirely within our control and are discussed in this and other sections of this annual report on Form 10-K. To date, travel restrictions and border closures have not materially impacted our ability to operate. However, if such restrictions become more severe, they could negatively impact those activities in a way that would harm our business over the long term. Travel restrictions impacting people can restrain our ability to operate, but at present we do not expect these restrictions on personal travel to be material to our business operations or financial results. Like most companies, we have taken a range of actions with respect to how we operate to assure we comply with government restrictions and guidelines as well as best practices to protect the health and well-being of our employees. We have also undertaken measures to reduce our administrative and advisory costs required as a publicly reporting company. Actions taken to date include salary reductions for senior management and termination of certain consulting agreements. However, the impacts of COVID-19 and efforts to mitigate the same have remained unpredictable and it remains possible that challenges may arise in the future.
Our primary source of operating funds has been through debt and equity financing.
Sale of Preferred Stock
In April and July of 2019, we sold 200 shares of Series C Convertible Preferred Stock with a par value of $0.001 and a stated value of $10,000 per share (“Preferred Shares”) for $1,990.
The Preferred Shares did not have voting rights or pay a dividend, and were redeemable by the Company for cash. Further, each Preferred Share was convertible into shares of our common stock in an amount equal to the greater of: (a) 200,000 shares of common stock or (b) the amount derived by dividing the Stated Value by the product of 0.7 times the market price of our common stock, defined as the lowest trading price of our common stock during the ten-day period preceding the conversion date. The common shares issued upon conversion were registered under a Form S-3 registration statement.
All Preferred Shares were converted into common stock during the period from issuance through February 2021.
Sale of Common Stock
On July 21, 2021, as part of a corporate fundraising of $990, net of issuance costs, the Company issued 35,385,703 shares of common stock and 35,385,703 warrants to purchase common stock.
Debt Financing
December 2020 Note
On December 8, 2020, we entered into a securities purchase agreement pursuant to which we issued a convertible promissory note in the principal amount of $230 which was convertible, at the option of the holder, into shares of common stock at a conversion price equal to 70% of the lowest price for a share of common stock during the ten trading days immediately preceding the applicable conversion. The Company received consideration of $200 for the convertible promissory note. This entirety of the principal amount of this note was converted into 11,435,289 shares of common stock during 2021, and this note was extinguished as of December 31, 2021.
March 2021 Note
On March 5, 2021, we entered into a securities purchase agreement (the “Securities Purchase Agreement”) with Bucktown Capital, LLC (the “Investor”), pursuant to which the Company issued a convertible promissory note in the original principal amount of $13,210 (the “March 2021 Note”). The March 2021 Note was convertible, at the option of the Investor, into shares of common stock of the Company at a conversion price equal to 70% of the lowest price for a share of common stock during the ten trading days immediately preceding the applicable conversion (the “Conversion Price”); provided, however, in no event would the Conversion Price be less than $0.04 per share. The March 2021 Note bore interest at a rate of 8% per annum and was to mature in twelve months.
The Note was to be funded in tranches, with the initial tranche of $1,210 funded by the Investor on March 5, 2021 for consideration of $1,000.
On September 30, 2021, the March 2021 Note was extinguished by exchanging the March 2021 Note for a warrant to purchase 53,500,000 shares of common stock (the “2021 Warrant”). Subject to the terms and adjustments in the 2021 Warrant, the 2021 Warrant is exercisable at an initial price of $0.05 per share, for five years from March 5, 2021. The Investor has the option to exercise all or any part of the 2021 Warrant on a cashless or cash basis. Following this exchange, the outstanding balance on the March 2021 Note is $0.
The PPP Loan
On April 16, 2020, we entered into a promissory note with Aquesta Bank for $111 in connection with the Paycheck Protection Program offered by the U.S. Small Business Administration (the “PPP Loan”). The PPP Loan bears interest at 1% per annum, with monthly installments of $6 commencing on November 1, 2021 for 18 months through its maturity on April 1, 2023. The principal amount of the PPP Loan will be forgiven if the loan proceeds are used to pay for payroll costs, rent and utilities costs over the 24-week period after the PPP Loan is made. Not more than 40% of the forgiven amount may be used for non-payroll costs. The amount of the PPP Loan forgiveness may be reduced if the Company reduces its full-time head count.
On April 1, 2021, the Company received notice of forgiveness from the SBA in the amount of $108 in relation to the PPP Loan as the Company used all proceeds from the PPP Loan to maintain payroll and other allowable expenses. Further, pursuant to an SBA Procedural Notice in December 2020, the EIDL Advance was also forgiven. The Company has concluded that the PPP Loan and EIDL Advance represent, in substance, a government grant that is forgiven in its entirety. As such, in accordance with International Accounting Standards (“IAS”) 20, “Accounting for Government Grants and Disclosure of Government Assistance,” the Company has recognized the entire PPP Loan and EIDL Advance amount of $111 as grant income, which is included in other non-operating income (expense) in the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flows
Operating activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $1,160 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $650 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The amount in 2021 primarily consisted of a net loss of $1,539 offset by non-cash charges of $749 (including: depreciation expense of $675, change in fair value of derivative liability $79, loss on settlement of derivative of $228, loss on settlement of payables of $541, amortization of note discount $526, non-cash interest expense of $270, and non-operating expense of $306, partially offset by gain on disposal of assets of $246, gain on settlement of payables of $675 and the change in fair value of warrant liability of ($955), and reduced by a change in working capital excluding cash of $370. The amount in 2020 primarily consisted of a net loss of $3,887 offset by non-cash charges of $2,516 (including: stock-based compensation of $222, an impairment charge to the Company’s intangible cryptocurrency mining assets of $49, depreciation expense of $1,102, amortization of debt discount of $882, non-cash interest expense of $355 and loss on sale of property and equipment of $352), and reduced by other non-cash items, including funding from the PPP Loan recognized as income in the amount of $111, the change in the fair value of the liability associated with the termination of the management agreements of $26, the change in the fair value of the derivative liability of $309, and a change in working capital excluding cash of $721.
Investing activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $164 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $359 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The amount in 2021 consisted of proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $426 offset by purchases of property and equipment of $212 and an investment of $50 in the form of a convertible promissory note.
Financing activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities totaled $1,990 which includes $1,000 in net proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes payable and $990 from the sale of common stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities totaled $311 which includes $200 in net proceeds from the issuance of notes payable and $111 of proceeds from PPP Loan.
Off-balance sheet arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we had no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.