ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and accompanying notes appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Manhattan Scientifics, Inc. (the “Company” or “Manhattan Scientifics”), a Delaware corporation, was established on July 31, 1992 and has one operating wholly-owned subsidiary: Metallicum, Inc., (“Metallicum”). Manhattan Scientifics is focused on technology transfer and commercialization of these transformative technologies.
The Company operates as a technology incubator that seeks to acquire, develop and commercialize life-enhancing technologies in various fields, with emphasis in the areas of nanotechnology. Nanotechnology is the use and manipulation of matter on an atomic and molecular scale. To achieve this goal, the Company is actively seeking to identify emerging technologies through strategic alliances with scientific laboratories, educational institutions, scientists and leaders in industry and government. The Company and its executives have a long-standing relationship with Los Alamos Laboratories in New Mexico.
Metallicum
In June 2008, we acquired Metallicum and its licensed patented technology. We entered into a stock purchase agreement with Metallicum to acquire all of the outstanding capital in exchange for 15,000,000 restricted shares of our common stock. An additional 15,000,000 shares of our common stock will be payable to Metallicum in the event of meeting certain milestones. On December 31, 2011, one milestone was met. Metallicum was granted an exclusive license by The Los Alamos National Laboratory on patents related to nanostructured metals. In September 2009, we entered into a technology transfer agreement and sale with Carpenter Technology Corporation, (“Carpenter”) wherein Carpenter was to fully develop, manufacture and market a new class of high strength metals. On February 11, 2015, the Company and Carpenter entered into a Settlement Agreement and Mutual Release pursuant to which the parties provided a full release of one another, Carpenter paid the Company $8,000,000, Carpenter transferred to the Company all intellectual and physical property that was part of the original agreement, Carpenter agreed to provide follow-on technical assistance and Carpenter provided a list of all customers and contacts.
On May 1, 2019, Manhattan Scientifics, Inc., a Delaware corporation (the “Company”), and Metallicum, Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company, entered into an Overarching Agreement with a non-affiliated third party (“Third Party”), providing for an exclusive license by the Company of its ECAP technology to the Third Party for a term of 17 years unless terminated sooner, a sublicense by the Company to the Third Party of its rights under that certain Exclusive Field-of-Use Patent License Agreement dated January 5, 2009 entered with The Los Alamos National Laboratory for a term until the expiration of the last valid claim to expire of the patents pursuant to such agreement and the sale by the Company of ECAP-C machines to the Third party. As part of the above license agreements, the Company will receive royalty payments, including minimum payments, based on a percentage of the Third Party’s sales. The Company anticipates royalty income as the nanotitanium is commercialized for use in medial prosthetics. Royalties will be 10% on sales of licensed dental products and an average of 5% in all other sales of licensed products. We expect to start earning royalties in 2023.
Imagion
On May 31, 2011, we entered into an Agreement and Plan of Reorganization to acquire Senior Scientific. The total purchase price was 21,668,000 restricted shares of our common stock (less 7,667,000 shares previously issued pursuant to an option agreement). As a result of this acquisition, Senior Scientific owned patented technologies that can use biosafe nanoparticles and sensitive magnetic sensors to detect and measure cancer cells in biopsies or in the human body with the potential to transform how cancer is detected and treated. On November 17, 2016, Senior Scientific merged with and into Imagion, a Nevada company. Following the merger, Imagion held all of the liabilities, obligations and assets of Senior Scientific and the Company continued as the sole equity holder of Imagion. On November 29, 2016, the Company announced a plan to have Imagion pursue an IPO and listing on the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX).
As of December 31, 2021, Manhattan Scientifics presently owns 52,516,508 shares of Imagion, with a fair market value of approximately $2,901,000, based upon the closing price per share of Imagion common stock on the Australian Stock Exchange. The Company accounts for its investment in Imagion in accordance with ASC 825-10 and elected fair value option. We initially held 31% of the total issued and outstanding shares of Imagion and had one seat on the Board of Directors of Imagion. The guidance allows entities to elect to measure certain financial assets and financial liabilities (as well as certain nonfinancial instruments that are similar to financial instruments) at fair value. Investments over which an investor has the ability to exercise significant influence are eligible for the fair value option as they represent recognized financial assets. When the fair value option is elected for an instrument, all subsequent changes in fair value for that instrument are reported in earnings. As of December 31, 2021, we hold approximately 5% of the total issued and outstanding shares of Imagion and no longer have a seat on the Board of Directors of Imagion.
Novint
We made an investment in Novint Technologies Inc. (“Novint”) in 2001. Novint is currently engaged in the development and sale of 3D haptics products and equipment. Haptics refers to one’s sense of touch and Novint’s focus is in the consumer interactive computer gaming market. The Company owns 1,028,425 shares of Novint’s common stock. The fair value of the Novint shares are not recorded on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2021.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
REVENUES. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $50,000 in revenue compared to $50,000 of revenue recognized for the year ended December 31, 2020.
GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE. General and administrative expenses consist of consultants, contractors, accounting, legal, travel, rent, telephone and other day-to-day operating expenses. General and administrative expenses were $727,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $714,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary increase in general and administrative expense was the result of the increase in computer expenses and filing expenses. During the year ended, the officers and directors total compensation was $531,000 of which a total of $255,000 was paid to two individuals that are an officer and directors of the Company and the unpaid balance is recorded in accrued expenses - related party.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. Research and development expenses consist of consultants and contractors. Research and development expenses were $10,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with $11,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
OTHER INCOME AND (EXPENSES). Total other income (expense) for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled ($2,952,000), compared to the other income of $4,989,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is primarily attributable to the loss on fair value adjustments of its investment in Imagion partially offset in part by gain on settlement of legal fees.
INCOME (LOSS). As of the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has net loss of $3,639,000, compared to the net income of $4,314,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This is primarily attributable to the loss on fair value adjustment of investment in Imagion, offset in part by gain on forgiveness of debt.
LIQUIDITY AND PLAN OF OPERATIONS
Stockholders’ equity totaled $1,035,000 on December 31, 2021 and the working capital deficit was $(684,000) on such date. We had a decrease of $121,000 in cash and cash equivalents for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Based upon current projections, our principal cash requirements for the next 12 months consists of (1) fixed expenses, including payroll, and professional services and (2) variable expenses, including technology research and development, milestone payments and intellectual property protection, and additional scientific consultants. As of December 31, 2021, we had $232,000 in cash. We believe our current cash position may not be sufficient to maintain our operations for the next twelve months. Accordingly, we may need to engage in equity or debt financings to secure additional funds. If we raise additional funds through future issuances of equity or convertible debt securities, our existing stockholders could suffer significant dilution, and any new equity securities we issue could have rights, preferences and privileges superior to those of holders of our common stock. Any debt financing that we secure in the future could involve restrictive covenants relating to our capital raising activities and other financial and operational matters, which may make it more difficult for us to obtain additional capital and to pursue business opportunities, including potential acquisitions. We may not be able to obtain additional financing on terms favorable to us, if at all. If we are unable to obtain adequate financing or financing on terms satisfactory to us when we require it, our ability to continue to support our business growth and to respond to business challenges could be impaired, and our business may be harmed.
On October 17, 2019, we executed a secured note with our only independent director for $100,000 and a secured note with an unrelated party for $50,000. The secured notes are due on October 17, 2022. The Company agreed that the notes bear interest at 10% per annum, to be paid in advance with shares of Imagion Biosystems Limited common stock (“IBX”), calculated at $0.015 per share or 3,000,000 shares of IBX. We currently do not plan any further sale of transfer of IBX common stock to raise funds for operations. To fund operations, we plan on relying on payments of $300,000, to be collected during the next two years in equal increments from the sale of assets in 2019 and future royalties from the Metallicum license.
CASH FLOW INFORMATION
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $232,000 and $353,000 at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This represents an decrease in cash of $121,000.
OPERATING ACTIVITIES
The Company used approximately $421,000 of cash for operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to using $388,000 of cash for operating activities in the year ended December 31, 2020. The reason for the increase in cash used for operating activities is a lower increase in current liabilities partially offset by a lower net loss after adjustment for non-cash items.
INVESTING ACTIVITIES
The Company received approximately $300,000 of cash for investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to receiving $480,000 of cash for investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease in cash received in investing activities, is primarily attributed to proceeds from sale of investment of Imagion Biosystems shares in the prior year, but not in the current year and sale of assets.
FINANCING ACTIVITIES
The Company received $0 of cash for financing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the amount of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. A significant estimate includes the carrying value of our patents, fair value of our common stock, assumptions used in calculating the value of stock options, depreciation and amortization.
License Agreements
In 2008, the Company obtained licenses to the rights of certain patents regarding nano-structured materials developed by another company as a result of the acquisition of Metallicum. The purchase price paid for these licenses was $305,000, which represents its fair value. The Company obtained an exclusive license on two patents and a non-exclusive license on the third patent. The value attributable to license agreements is being amortized over the period of its estimated benefit period of 10 years. Under the terms of the agreement, the Company may be required to pay royalties, as defined, to the licensors.
In 2009, the Company entered into a patent license agreement with Los Alamos National Security LLC for the exclusive use of certain technology relating to the manufacture and application of nanostructuring metals and alloys. The value attributable to license agreements is being amortized over the period of its estimated benefit period of 10 years. Under the terms of the agreement the Company is required to pay an annual license fee of $10,000 and, may be required to pay royalties, as defined, to the licensors.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles as outlined in the Financial Accounting Standard Board’s (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue From Contracts with Customers, which consists of five steps to evaluating contracts with customers for revenue recognition: (i) identify the contract with the customer; (ii) identity the performance obligations in the contract; (iii) determine the transaction price; (iv) allocate the transaction price; and (v) recognize revenue when or as the entity satisfied a performance obligation.
Revenue recognition occurs at the time we satisfy a performance obligation to our customers, when control transfers to customers, provided there are no material remaining performance obligations required of the Company or any matters of customer acceptance. We only record revenue when collectability is probable.
Marketable Securities:
The Company considers securities with original maturities of greater than 90 days to be available for sale securities. Securities under this classification are recorded at fair value and unrealized gains and losses within other income (loss). The estimated fair value of the available for sale securities is determined based on quoted market prices or rates for similar instruments. In addition, the cost of debt securities in this category is adjusted for amortization of premium and accretion of discount to maturity. For available for sale debt securities in an unrealized loss position, the Company assesses whether it intends to sell or if it is more likely than not that the Company will be required to sell the security before recovery of its amortized cost basis. If either of the criteria regarding intent or requirement to sell is met, the security’s amortized cost basis is written down to fair value. If the criteria are not met, the Company evaluates whether the decline in fair value has resulted from a credit loss or other factors. In making this assessment, management considers, among other factors, the extent to which fair value is less than amortized cost, any changes to the rating of the security by a rating agency, and adverse conditions specifically related to the security. If this assessment indicates that a credit loss exists, the present value of cash flows expected to be collected from the security are compared to the amortized cost basis of the security. If the present value of the cash flows expected to be collected is less than the amortized cost basis, a credit loss exists and an allowance for credit losses is recorded for the credit loss, limited by the amount that the fair value is less than the amortized costs basis. Any impairment that has not been recorded through an allowance for credit losses is recognized in other income (loss). For the year ended December 31, 2021, no allowance was recorded for credit losses.
Stock-Based Compensation:
In June 2018, FASB issued ASU No. 2018-07, Compensation - Stock Compensation (Topic 718),Improvements to Nonemployee Share Based Payment Accounting. The amendments in this Update expand the scope of stock compensation to include share-based payment transactions for acquiring goods and services from nonemployees. The guidance in this Update does not apply to transactions involving equity instruments granted to a lender or investor that provides financing to the issuer. The guidance is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 31, 2018 including interim periods within the fiscal year. The Company adopted with an effective date of January 1, 2019. Upon adoption, there was no material impact to the financial statements.
Due from the Sale of Assets:
Non-current assets are classified as held for sale if it is highly probably that they will be recovered primarily through sale rather than through continuing use.
Immediately before classification as held for sale, the assets are remeasured at the lower of their carrying amount and fair value less costs to sell. Any impairment loss on initial classification as held for sale and subsequent gains and losses on remeasurement are recognized in profit or loss. Gains are not recognized in excess of any cumulative impairment loss.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company sold the assets held for sale that were presented on the balance sheet as of December 31, 2018. During the year ended December 31, 2018, the Company recorded impairment and adjusted the asset valuation to $1.2 million. On May 1, 2021 and 2020, the Company received $300,000 for sale of assets for a total of $1.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2019. The remaining $300,000 will be collected during the next two years in equal increments on the anniversary date of the agreement, May 1. As of December 31, 2021, the Company evaluated the collectability and determined that no allowance is needed at this time due to the payment history with this third party and the subsequent receipt of funds.
Fair Value Measurements:
The Company recognized the fair value of financial instruments in accordance with FASB ASC 820, Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures, “Fair Value Measurements”, which provides a framework for measuring fair value under GAAP. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. The standard also expands disclosures about instruments measured at fair value and establishes a fair value hierarchy, which requires an entity to maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. The standard describes three levels of inputs that may be used to measure fair value:
Level 1 - Quoted prices for identical assets and liabilities in active markets;
Level 2 - Quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets; quoted prices for identical or similar assets and liabilities in markets that are not active; and model-derived valuations in which all significant inputs and significant value drivers are observable in active markets; and
Level 3 - Valuations derived from valuation techniques in which one or more significant inputs or significant value drivers are unobservable.
GOING CONCERN
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has an accumulated deficit of 68,520,000 and negative working capital of $684,000. Because of these conditions, the Company will require additional working capital to develop business operations. The Company intends to raise additional working capital through the continued licensing of its technology as well as to generate revenues for other services. There are no assurances that the Company will be able to achieve the level of revenues adequate to generate sufficient cash flow from operations to support the Company’s working capital requirements. To the extent that funds generated are insufficient, the Company will have to raise additional working capital. No assurance can be given that additional financing will be available, or if available, will be on terms acceptable to the Company. If adequate working capital is not available, the Company may not continue its operations.
As of the filing date, the Coronavirus (“COVID-19”) has caused significant volatility in global markets, including the market price of our securities. The demand for our products and services has decreased and the ability of our customers to make payments for the products and services they purchased has been negatively impacted.
These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue within one year from the date of filing. The financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on the recoverability and classification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the possible inability of the Company to continue as a going concern.
The ability to continue as a going concern is dependent on out generating cash from the sale of our common stock and/or obtaining debt financing and attaining future profitable operations. Management’s plan includes selling our equity securities and/or obtaining debt financing to fund our capital requirement and ongoing operations; however, there can be no assurance the Company will be successful in these efforts.
OFF BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.