Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Overview
We offer a complete range of 4G and 5G network build and network densification products with an expansive portfolio of software and hardware tools for indoor and outdoor, compact femto, pico, micro and macro base stations, as well as an industry leading 802.11ac and 802.11ax fixed wireless access and backhaul solution portfolio for point-to-point and point-to-multipoint applications. Our solutions help network operators monetize the potential of 4G and 5G technologies and use cases and, in addition, allow enterprises to establish their own private networks especially in 5G, where dedicated spectrum has been allocated. We have developed differentiated RAN software and hardware products to help operators get the maximum capacity and coverage in the following ways:
● Very high performance wireless network technology for both access and backhaul components of the network.
● Energy efficient and integrated form factors, enabling cost effective deployment of RAN technology that are able to avoid zoning and site acquisition constraints, which translate into a quicker time-to-market for our customers.
● Easy to use, affordable and comprehensive core network elements to support 4G, 5G and fixed wireless services.
● Sophisticated provisioning and orchestration software for both backhaul and RAN for 4G and 5G access and the core network that can also integrate a wide range of access.
● Fully virtualized cloud native modular software and hardware solutions that adhere to open standards allowing our operator customers to fundamentally shift the dynamics of the value and supply chains of the wireless industry. This decreases vendor lock-in and as a result lowers total cost of ownership typical of traditional incumbent competitors.
The market for our wireless systems includes leading mobile CSPs, large enterprises, military communications integrators and ISPs. Our strategy applies the same network technology across all addressable sectors.
Our main operations are in: Slough, United Kingdom; Mumbai and Bangalore, India; Tokyo, Japan; Airport City, Israel; and Santa Clara, California, and our corporate headquarters is in Boca Raton, Florida.
Key Factors and Trends Affecting our Business
Various trends and other factors have affected and may continue to affect our business, financial condition and operating results, including, but not limited to:
● our expected financial and business performance;
● changes in our strategy, future operations, financial position, estimated revenues and losses, forecasts, projected costs, prospects and plans;
● the implementation, market acceptance and success of our products;
● demand for our products and the drivers of that demand;
● our estimated total addressable market and other industry projections, and our projected market share;
● competition in our industry, the advantages of our products and technology over competing products and technology existing in the market, and competitive factors including with respect to technological capabilities, cost and scalability;
● our ability to scale in a cost-effective manner and maintain and expand our manufacturing relationships;
● our ability to enter into production supply agreements with customers, the terms of those agreements, and customers’ utilization of our products and technology;
● our expected reliance on tier 1 customers;
● developments and projections relating to our competitors and industry, including with respect to investment in 5G networks;
● our expectation that we will incur substantial expenses and continuing losses for the foreseeable future and that we will incur increased expenses as a public company;
● the impact of health epidemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic, on our business and industry and the actions we may take in response thereto;
● our expectations regarding our ability to obtain and maintain intellectual property protection and not infringe on the rights of others;
● expectations regarding the time during which we will be an emerging growth company under the JOBS Act;
● our future capital requirements and sources and uses of cash;
● our ability to obtain funding for our operations;
● our business, expansion plans and opportunities;
● anticipated financial performance, including gross margin, and the expectation that our future results of operations will fluctuate on a quarterly basis for the foreseeable future;
● expected capital expenditures, cost of revenue and other future expenses, and the sources of funds to satisfy our liquidity needs; and
● the outcome of any known and unknown litigation and regulatory proceedings.
Recent Developments
The Business Combination
We consummated the Business Combination on August 13, 2021, pursuant to the terms of the Business Combination Agreement. Under the Business Combination Agreement, Legacy Airspan became a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Company. Thereafter, the Company was renamed Airspan Networks Holdings Inc.
In connection with the Business Combination, holders of 9,997,049 shares of Common Stock sold in New Beginnings’ initial public offering properly exercised their right to have such shares redeemed for a full pro rata portion of New Beginnings’ trust account, which was approximately $10.10 per share, or an aggregate redemption payment of $100.97 million.
As a result of the Business Combination, (i) 59,726,486 shares of Common Stock (including 345,471 shares of restricted Common Stock), 3,000,000 Post-Combination $12.50 Warrants, 3,000,000 Post-Combination $15.00 Warrants and 3,000,000 Post-Combination $17.50 Warrants were issued to Legacy Airspan stockholders, (ii) outstanding options to purchase Legacy Airspan common stock and Legacy Airspan Class B common stock were converted into options to purchase an aggregate of 5,815,796 shares of Common Stock, (iii) $17,500,000 in cash was paid and restricted stock units with respect to 1,750,000 shares of Common Stock were issued to the participants in Legacy Airspan’s management incentive plan (the “MIP”) and (iv) 4,257,718 shares of Common Stock were reserved for issuance in connection with future grants under the Company’s 2021 Stock Incentive Plan (the “2021 Plan”).
In connection with the Business Combination, we also issued 7,500,000 shares of Common Stock to certain investors (the “PIPE Investors”), at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate consideration of $75.0 million, and $50.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes.
After giving effect to the transactions and redemptions described above, there were 72,024,437 shares of our Common Stock issued and outstanding immediately following the Closing. Our Common Stock, Public Warrants, Post-Combination $12.50 Warrants, Post-Combination $15.00 Warrants and Post-Combination $17.50 Warrants commenced trading on the NYSE American under the symbols “MIMO”, “MIMO WS”, “MIMO WSA”, “MIMO WSB” and “MIMO WSC”, respectively, on August 16, 2021.
Following the Closing of the Business Combination, Legacy Airspan was deemed the accounting acquirer, and the Company is the successor SEC registrant. Although the legal acquirer in the Business Combination Agreement was New Beginnings, for financial accounting and reporting purposes under accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”), the Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse recapitalization. A reverse recapitalization does not result in a new basis of accounting, and the financial statements of the combined entity represent the continuation of the financial statements of Legacy Airspan in many respects. Under this method of accounting, New Beginnings is treated as the acquired company for financial statement reporting purposes and the Business Combination is treated as the equivalent of Legacy Airspan issuing stock for the net assets of New Beginnings, accompanied by a recapitalization. Accordingly, the consolidated assets, liabilities and results of operations of Legacy Airspan became the historical financial statements of the Company, and New Beginnings’ assets, liabilities and results of operations were consolidated with Legacy Airspan’s on August 13, 2021. The net assets of New Beginnings are stated at historical cost, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. Operations prior to the Business Combination are those of Legacy Airspan.
The most significant change in our future reported financial position and results as a result of the Business Combination is an increase in cash (as compared to Legacy Airspan’s balance sheet immediately prior to the Business Combination) of approximately $115.5 million and an increase of indebtedness (as compared to Legacy Airspan’s balance sheet immediately prior to the Business Combination) of $40.7 million as a result of the issuance of the Convertible Notes. Total non-recurring transaction costs were approximately $27.0 million as a result of the Business Combination.
As a majority of Legacy Airspan’s current management team and business operations comprise our management and operations, we will need to implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We expect we will incur additional annual expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees and additional internal and external accounting and legal and administrative resources, including increased audit and legal fees.
Convertible Notes
On July 30, 2021, we entered into a Convertible Note Purchase Agreement, pursuant to which, on August 13, 2021, we issued $50.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes. The Convertible Notes bear interest at a rate equal to 7.0% per annum (the “Base Rate”), payable quarterly in arrears on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year, beginning on September 30, 2021. Under certain circumstances, a default interest will apply following an event of default under the Convertible Notes at a per annum rate equal to the lower of (i) the Base Rate plus 3.75% and (ii) the maximum amount permitted by law. The Convertible Notes will mature on December 30, 2024, unless earlier accelerated, converted, redeemed or repurchased. On March 29, 2022, we and certain of our subsidiaries who are party to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement entered into a First Amendment and Waiver to Senior Secured Convertible Note Purchase and Guarantee Agreement and Other Note Documents relating to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement and the Convertible Notes (the “Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment”) to, among other things, amend the financial covenants included in the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement, amend the conversion price of the Convertible Notes and amend the optional redemption provisions of the Convertible Notes.
Prior to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment, the Convertible Notes, together with all accrued but unpaid interest thereon, were convertible, in whole or in part, at any time prior to the payment in full of the principal amount thereof (together with all accrued but unpaid interest thereon), into shares of Common Stock at a conversion price equal to $12.50 per share. Pursuant to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment, the conversion price with respect to the Convertible Notes was decreased to $8.00 per share. The conversion price with respect to the Convertible Notes is subject to adjustment to reflect stock splits and subdivisions, stock and other dividends and distributions, recapitalizations, reclassifications, combinations and other similar changes in capital structure. The conversion price with respect to the Convertible Notes is also subject to a broad-based weighted average anti-dilution adjustment in the event we issue, or are deemed to have issued, shares of Common Stock, other than certain excepted issuances, at a price below the conversion price then in effect. In addition, pursuant to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment, if, during the period commencing on and including the date of the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment and ending on and including the 15-month anniversary of the date of the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment, there is no 30 consecutive trading day-period during which the average of the daily volume weighted average price of our Common Stock (“Daily VWAP”) for such 30 consecutive trading day-period (after excluding the three highest and three lowest Daily VWAPs during such period) equals or exceeds $10.00 (as adjusted for stock splits, stock combinations, dividends, distributions, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like), the conversion price with respect to the Convertible Notes will be reduced to the amount that such conversion price would otherwise have been had the conversion price with respect to the Convertible Notes been $6.00 on the date of the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment (the “Stock Threshold Reduction”).
March 2022 Fortress Amendment
On March 29, 2022, the Company, Legacy Airspan and certain of our subsidiaries who are party to the Fortress Credit Agreement entered into a Third Amendment and Waiver to Credit Agreement and Other Loan Documents relating to the Fortress Credit Agreement with Fortress (the “March 2022 Fortress Amendment”) to, among other things, amend the financial covenants included in the Fortress Credit Agreement.
COVID-19 Update
The spread of COVID-19, a novel strain of coronavirus, has and continues to alter the behavior of business and people in a manner that is having negative effects on local, regional and global economies. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have an impact with short-term disruptions on our supply chains, as governments take robust actions to minimize the spread of localized COVID-19 outbreaks. The continued impact on our supply chains has caused delayed production and fulfilment of customer orders, disruptions and delays of logistics and increased logistic costs. As a further consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic, component lead times have extended as demand outstrips supply on certain components, including semiconductors, and have caused the costs of components to increase. These extended lead times have caused us to extend our forecast horizon with our contract manufacturing partners and have increased the risk of supply delays. We cannot at this time accurately predict what effects, or their extent, the coronavirus outbreak will have on our 2022 operating results, due to uncertainties relating to the ultimate geographic spread of the virus, the severity of the disease, the duration of the outbreak, component shortages and increased component costs, the length of voluntary business closures, and governmental actions taken in response to the outbreak. More generally, the widespread health crisis has and may continue to adversely affect the global economy, resulting in an economic downturn that could affect demand for our products and therefore impact our results of operations and financial condition.
Further quantification of these pandemic effects, to the extent relevant and material, are included in the discussion of results of operations below.
Cybersecurity Incidents
In December 2021, we experienced a ransomware incident that impacted the availability of certain systems within our computer network. In response to this incident, we secured digital assets within our computer systems, immediately commenced an investigation with assistance from an outside cybersecurity firm and were able to successfully restore our systems, without paying a ransom, after working to get the systems back up as quickly as possible. Despite these actions, we experienced some delays and disruptions to our business, primarily with respect to employee access to business applications and e-mail service. Through our investigation, we discovered that the individuals responsible for this incident acquired certain files from our servers. We are currently reviewing the content and scope of the files and we will provide notice to any individual whose personal information was contained therein.
In addition, in January 2022, we experienced a denial of service attack on our e-mail service. We were able to restore e-mail service after working to do so as quickly as possible.
In connection with these incidents, we have incurred certain incremental one-time costs of $0.1 million related to consultants, experts and data recovery efforts, net of insurance recoveries, and expect to incur additional costs related to cybersecurity protections in the future. We are in the process of implementing a variety of measures to further enhance our cybersecurity protections and minimize the impact of any future attack. However, cyber threats are constantly evolving, and there can be no guarantee that a future cyber event will not occur.
Going Concern Update
Previously, we had determined there were factors that raised substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. As of December 31, 2021, the Company was not in compliance with its covenants under the Fortress Credit Agreement and the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement related to its revenue, Adjusted EBITDA and cash balance. However, the Company was granted a waiver from compliance for these covenants as of December 31, 2021. On March 29, 2022, we and certain of our subsidiaries who are party to the Fortress Credit Agreement entered into the March 2022 Fortress Amendment to, among other things, amend the financial covenants included in the Fortress Credit Agreement. In addition, on March 29, 2022, we and certain of our subsidiaries, who are party to the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement, entered into the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement Amendment to, among other things, amend the financial covenants included in the Convertible Note Purchase Agreement, the conversion price of the Convertible Notes and the optional redemption provisions of the Convertible Notes. Furthermore, Airspan has taken measures to strengthen the financial position of the Company. Management believes these measures have resulted in a stronger balance sheet and improved operating results. Finally, the Company believes the 2022 forecasted results will sufficiently exceed the amended covenant requirements.
Based on the above, management believes that our cash position, together with the forecasted results and the amendment to our financial covenants, are sufficient to meet capital and liquidity requirements for at least the next 12 months and thereafter for the foreseeable future. As a result, there is no longer substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
How We Assess the Performance of Our Business
In assessing the performance of our business, we consider a variety of performance and financial measures. The key indicators of the financial condition and operating performance of our business are revenue, cost of revenue, research and development, sales and marketing, general and administrative, interest expense, income taxes and net income. To further help us assess our performance with these key indicators, we use Adjusted Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization (“Adjusted EBITDA”) as a non-GAAP financial measure. We believe Adjusted EBITDA provides useful information to investors and expanded insight to measure our revenue and cost performance as a supplement to our GAAP consolidated financial statements. See the “Adjusted EBITDA” sections below for a reconciliation to net income (loss), the most directly comparable GAAP measure.
Revenues
We derive the majority of our revenues from sales of our networking products, with the remaining revenue generated from software licenses and service fees relating to non-recurring engineering, product maintenance contracts and professional services for our products. We sell our products and services to end customers, distributors and resellers. Products and services may be sold separately or in bundled packages.
Our top three customers accounted for 63% and 69% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Our sales outside the U.S. and North America accounted for 71% and 75% of our total revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The following table identifies the percentage of our revenue by customer geographic region in the periods identified.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists of component and material costs, direct labor costs, warranty costs, royalties, overhead related to manufacture of our products and customer support costs. Our gross margin is affected by changes in our product mix both because our gross margin on software and services is higher than the gross margin on base station related equipment, and because our different product lines generate different margins. In addition, our gross margin is affected by changes in the average selling price of our systems and volume discounts granted to significant customers. The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have an impact with disruptions to our supply chains, which have caused extended component lead times, increased component costs, as well as disruption and increased expenses in logistics. We expect the average selling prices of our existing products to continue to decline and we intend to continue to implement product cost reductions and develop and introduce new products or product enhancements in an effort to maintain or increase our gross margins. Further, we may derive an increasing proportion of our revenue from the sale of our integrated systems through distribution channels. Revenue derived from these sales channels typically carries a lower gross margin than direct sales.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of salaries and related costs for personnel and expenses for design, development, testing facilities and equipment depreciation. These expenses also include costs associated with product development efforts, including consulting fees and prototyping costs from initial product concept to manufacture and production as well as sub-contracted development work. We expect to continue to make substantial investments in research and development.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist of salaries and related costs for personnel, sales commissions, consulting and agent’s fees and expenses for advertising, travel, technical assistance, trade shows, and promotional and demonstration materials. We expect to continue to incur substantial expenditures related to sales and marketing activities.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and related expenses for our personnel, audit, professional and consulting fees and facilities costs.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense consists primarily of interest associated with the Convertible Notes, two subordinated loan facilities and our senior secured credit facility, which consisted of a term loan and revolving credit facility. Interest on the term loan was determined based on the highest of the LIBOR Rate, commercial lending rate of the collateral agent and federal funds rate, plus an applicable margin. Interest on the revolving credit facility is based on the LIBOR Rate plus an applicable margin. On December 30, 2020, we amended and restated the terms of our credit facility with Fortress. (See Note 11 of the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion on this agreement.)
Income Tax (Expense) Benefit
Our provision for income tax (expense) benefit includes the expected benefit of all deferred tax assets, including our net operating loss carryforwards. Our net operating loss carryforwards will begin to expire in 2025 and continue to expire through 2037. Our tax (expense) benefit has been impacted by non-deductible expenses, including equity compensation and research and development amortization.
Net Loss
Net loss is determined by subtracting operating and non-operating expenses from revenues.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income before depreciation and amortization, interest expense and income taxes, and also adjusted to add back share-based compensation costs, changes in the fair value of the warrant liability and embedded derivatives and one-time costs related to the Business Combination, as these costs are not considered a part of our core business operations and are not an indicator of ongoing, future company performance. We use Adjusted EBITDA to evaluate our performance, both internally and as compared to our peers, because these measures exclude certain items that may not be indicative of our core operating results, as well as items that can vary widely among companies within our industry. For example, share-based compensation costs can be subject to volatility from changes in the market price per share of our Common Stock or variations in the value and number of shares granted.
Adjusted EBITDA is one of the primary metrics used by management to evaluate the financial performance of our business because it excludes, among other things, the effects of certain transactions that are outside the control of management, while other measures can differ significantly depending on long-term strategic decisions regarding capital structure, the jurisdictions in which we operate and capital investments.
We present this non-GAAP financial measure because we believe it is frequently used by analysts, investors and other interested parties to evaluate companies in our industry. Further, we believe it is helpful in highlighting trends in our operating results by focusing on our core operating results and is useful to evaluate our performance in conjunction with our GAAP financial measures. Adjusted EBITDA is a non-GAAP financial measure and should not be considered as an alternative to operating income, net income or earnings per share, as a measure of operating performance, cash flows or as a measure of liquidity. Non-GAAP financial measures are not necessarily calculated the same way by different companies and should not be considered a substitute for or superior to GAAP measures.
In particular, Adjusted EBITDA is subject to certain limitations, including the following:
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect interest expense, or the amounts necessary to service interest or principal payments under the Fortress Credit Agreement;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect income tax provision (benefit), and because the payment of taxes is part of our operations, tax provision is a necessary element of our costs and ability to operate;
● Although depreciation and amortization are eliminated in the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any costs of such replacements;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the noncash component of share-based compensation;
● Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the impact of earnings or charges resulting from matters we consider not to be reflective, on a recurring basis, of our ongoing operations; and
● Other companies in our industry may calculate Adjusted EBITDA or similarly titled measures differently than we do, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
We adjust for these limitations by relying primarily on our GAAP results and using Adjusted EBITDA only as supplemental information.
Segments
Our business is organized around one reportable segment, the development and supply of broadband wireless products and technologies. This is based on the objectives of the business and how our chief operating decision maker, the Chief Executive Officer, monitors operating performance and allocates resources.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenue
Revenue for the above periods is presented below:
Revenue from products and software licenses of $151.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $16.8 million, or 12.5%, from $134.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to increase in sales of products in North America of $13.4 million primarily from private network, a cable operator and growth in distribution sales. Growth in distribution sales in Latin America and the Middle East and Africa represented $2.1 million and $1.9 million, respectively and offset by a decrease in product sales in Asia Pacific of $0.2 million were offset by a decrease of $0.4 million of product sales to Europe.
Revenue from maintenance, warranty and services of $26.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $12.5 million, or 32.4%, from $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease was primarily due to the termination of a maintenance and features agreement with a North American customer at the end of the first quarter of 2021 that resulted in revenue of $8.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 that did not recur in the year ended December 31, 2021 and successful completion of time and materials projects in 2020 which resulted in revenue of $2.9 million for an Asia Pacific customer and $1.4 million for a European group that did not recur in 2021.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue for the above periods are presented below:
Cost of revenue from products and software licenses of $95.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $11.1 million, or 13.1%, from $84.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily due to revenue growth, which was impacted by a change in product mix, with most of the growth relating to product sales, which carry lower margins than services. In addition, there has been an increase in indirect costs caused by the worldwide shortage of electronics, component costs, expediting fees and limited availability of cargo space.
Cost of revenue from maintenance, warranty and services of $3.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $0.6 million, or 13.6%, from $4.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which is attributable to a decrease in revenues from maintenance.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for the above periods are presented below:
Research and development - Research and development expenses were $63.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $10.5 million, or 19.8%, from $52.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the MIP payout of $1.8 million, increased headcount-related expenses of $6.0 million, share-based compensation expense of $1.0 million, professional fees of $0.9 million and additional materials and supplies expense of $0.8 million.
Sales and marketing - Sales and marketing expenses were $33.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $5.1 million, or 17.8% from $28.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the MIP payout of $3.3 million, increased headcount-related expenses of $2.5 million and increased share-based compensation expense of $1.4 million.
These increases were offset by decreased agent costs of $1.6 million and decreased other outside services of $0.3 million.
General and administrative - General and administrative expenses of $40.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $24.3 million, or 146.9%, from $16.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the expenses related to the Business Combination, such as a MIP payout of $13.4 million, increased share-based compensation expense of $5.6 million, and increased other outside services of $5.3 million, which relate mainly to the process of becoming a public company.
Amortization of intangibles - Amortization of intangibles of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by $0.5 million, or 31.3%, from $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the amortization of trademarks completing.
Non-Operating Expenses
Interest expense, net - Interest expense, net was $12.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $6.4 million from $6.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a higher average debt outstanding in 2021 compared to 2020, as well as higher interest rates under the Fortress Credit Agreement and Convertible Notes, compared to the credit facility (the “PWB Facility”) with Pacific Western Bank (“PWB”) and Ally Bank (“Ally”) in place for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability and derivatives - Change in fair value of warrant liability and derivatives was a gain of $4.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a change of $7.4 million from a loss of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The fluctuation included changes in fair values of derivative liability and warrants of $5.1 million and $2.3 million, respectively.
Gain on extinguishment of debt - Gain on extinguishment of debt was $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $2.1 million from the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we recorded a gain on extinguishment of debt for a Paycheck Protection Program loan of $2.1 million and the accrued interest of $23 thousand. No such activity occurred during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other expense, net - Other expense, net was an expense of $3.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a change of $2.4 million from an expense of $0.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The difference was primarily due to foreign currency losses.
Income tax benefit - Income tax benefit was $690 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021, a minimal change from an income tax benefit of $782 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net Loss
We had net loss of $70.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a change of $43.8 million compared to net loss of $26.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to the same factors described above.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a loss of $29.1 million, representing a change of $19.7 million, or 210.0%, from a loss $9.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in Adjusted EBITDA was primarily due to the increase in net loss discussed above and certain higher adjusting items detailed in the table below.
The following table presents the reconciliation of net loss, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, our principal sources of liquidity have been our cash and cash equivalents and cash generated from operations, proceeds from the issuance of long term debt, preferred and common stock, and the sale of certain receivables. Our capital requirements depend on a number of factors, including sales, the extent of our spending on research and development, expansion of sales and marketing activities and market adoption of our products and services.
We had $157.2 million of current assets and $73.6 million of current liabilities at December 31, 2021. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we used $66.7 million in cash flows from operating activities, primarily from the collection of our outstanding accounts receivables. We are investing heavily in 5G research and development and expect to use cash from operations during the remainder of 2022 to fund research and development activities. Cash on hand and the available borrowing capacity under the Fortress Credit Agreement may not allow us to meet our forecasted cash requirements.
Days sales outstanding (“DSO”) is a measurement of the time it takes to collect receivables. DSO is calculated by dividing accounts receivable, net as of the end of the quarter by the average daily revenue for the quarter. Average daily revenue for the quarter is calculated by dividing the quarterly revenue by ninety days. All customer accounts are actively managed, and no losses in excess of amounts reserved are currently expected. We are also actively evaluating the potential negative impact of COVID-19 on our customers’ ability to pay our accounts receivable. DSO can fluctuate due to the timing and nature of contracts, as well as the payment terms of individual customers. DSO was104 days and 78 days as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in DSO as of December 31, 2021 is attributable to an increase in the balance of accounts receivable and higher sales to customers with longer average payment terms. Notwithstanding the DSO of 104 and 78 days as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, our accounts receivable were $58.0 million and $70.6 million due to high sales volumes in the fourth quarters of each respective year.
During 2020, we and four of our wholly-owned subsidiaries had the PWB Facility with PWB and Ally. Under the PWB Facility, we could borrow up to $45 million, subject to compliance with certain covenants. (See Note 11 of the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.) In addition to the PWB Facility, we had an aggregate of $39.0 million of subordinated debt with two other lenders. (See Notes 9 and 10 of the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.)
During 2020, we entered into several amendments to the PWB Facility. These amendments modified the financial and funding covenants and extended the due date for the audited consolidated financial statements. The PWB Facility was extended to mature on December 31, 2020. On December 30, 2020, Fortress and certain other lenders purchased the outstanding indebtedness under the PWB Facility. Fortress replaced PWB as administrative agent and collateral agent under the facility. On the same date, Fortress, the other lenders party thereto, we and certain of our subsidiaries modified the terms of such indebtedness by amending and restating the existing credit agreement, including an extension of the maturity date.
On August 6, 2015, we issued Golden Wayford Limited a $10.0 million subordinated Convertible Note Promissory Note (the “Golden Wayford Note”) pursuant to a subordinated convertible note purchase agreement, also dated August 6, 2015. The Golden Wayford Note, in the amount of $9.0 million plus interest, matured on June 30, 2020. We were not able to agree to an extended maturity date and the Golden Wayford Note remained outstanding as of December 31, 2020 and in default under the terms of the arrangement. We were granted a limited waiver under the Fortress Credit Agreement which waives each actual and prospective default and event of default existing under the Fortress Credit Agreement directly as a result of the non-payment of the Golden Wayford Note for so long as the Golden Wayford Note remains in effect. The waiver is limited to the actual and prospective defaults under the Fortress Credit Agreement as they existed on December 30, 2020 and not to any other change in facts or circumstances occurring after December 30, 2020. The waiver does not restrict Fortress from exercising any rights or remedies they may have with respect to any other default or event of default under the Fortress Credit Agreement or the related loan documents.
On December 30, 2020, we and each of our subsidiaries (other than Dense Air Limited or any of its subsidiaries) as guarantors, entered into the Fortress Credit Agreement with Fortress. At Closing, on August 13, 2021, the Company, Legacy Airspan and certain of our subsidiaries who are party to the Fortress Credit Agreement entered into a Waiver and Consent, Second Amendment, Restatement, Joinder and Omnibus Amendment to Credit Agreement and Other Loan Documents relating to the Fortress Credit Agreement with Fortress (the “August 2021 Fortress Amendment”) to, among other things, add the Company as a guarantor, recognize and account for the Business Combination, recognize and account for the Convertible Notes and provide updated procedures for replacement of LIBOR. As of December 31, 2021, we were not in compliance with all applicable covenants under the Fortress Credit Agreement; however, we were granted a waiver from compliance for these covenants as of December 31, 2021. On March 29, 2022, the Company, Legacy Airspan and certain of our subsidiaries who are party to the Fortress Credit Agreement entered into the March 2022 Fortress Amendment to, among other things, amend the financial covenants included in the Fortress Credit Agreement. See Note 9 and Note 11 of the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion on this agreement.
On August 13, 2021, we closed the Business Combination. In connection with the Closing, we issued 7,500,000 shares of Common Stock to the PIPE Investors, at a price of $10.00 per share, for aggregate consideration of $75.0 million, and $50.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Convertible Notes.
As of December 31, 2021, we had commitments with our main subcontract manufacturers under various purchase orders and forecast arrangements of $70.9 million, the majority of which have expected delivery dates during the first six months of 2022.
As of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe our existing cash resources are sufficient to fund the cash needs of our business for at least the next 12 months.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes the changes to our cash flows for the periods presented:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $66.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a change of $46.3 million from net cash used in operating activities of $20.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is a result of $0.4 million less generated from working capital, $43.7 million less from results of our operations and a $2.2 million decrease in non-cash adjustments.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $6.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $3.8 million from $2.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher purchases of property and equipment.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $117.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This included $115.5 million of net proceeds from the Business Combination, $0.6 million of net proceeds from the sale of Legacy Airspan Series H senior preferred stock and issuance of warrants to purchase Legacy Airspan Series H senior preferred stock, and $1.1 million of proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $38.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This included $32.1 million of proceeds from the sale of Legacy Airspan Series G and Series H senior preferred stock and warrants, $8.1 million of borrowings under the senior term loan and other long term debt, net of $2.0 million of repayments under the line of credit.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, the disclosure of contingent liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, we evaluate the effectiveness of our estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, allowance for doubtful accounts, intangible assets, net, impairment of long-lived assets, preferred stock warrants, share-based compensation and income taxes.
We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions and may change as future events occur.
We believe the following critical accounting policies are dependent on significant estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Goodwill
Goodwill is the result of a business combination that occurred in 2018 (See Note 7 of the notes to the audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K). Goodwill is recorded as the difference, if any, between the aggregate consideration paid for an acquisition and the fair value of the net tangible assets and other intangible assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized; however, it is assessed for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if triggering events occur. Our annual assessment date is December 1. For purposes of the annual assessment, management initially performs a qualitative assessment, which includes consideration of the economic, industry and market conditions in addition to our overall financial performance and the performance of these assets. If our qualitative assessment does not conclude that it is more likely than not that the estimated fair value of the reporting unit is greater than the carrying value, we perform a quantitative analysis. In a quantitative test, the fair value of a reporting unit is determined based on a combination of a discounted cash flow analysis and the guideline company approach. A discounted cash flow analysis requires us to make various assumptions, including assumptions about future cash flows, growth rates and discount rates. The guideline company method develops valuation multiples by comparing our reporting units to similar publicly traded companies. Key valuation assumptions used in determining the fair value estimates of our reporting units rely on: (a) the selection of similar companies; and (b) the selection of valuation multiples as they apply to the reporting unit characteristics. The assumptions about future cash flows and growth rates are based on our long-term projections. Assumptions used in our impairment testing are consistent with our internal forecasts and operating plans. If the fair value of the reporting unit exceeds its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If not, we recognize an impairment equal to the difference between the carrying amount of the reporting unit and its fair value, not to exceed the carrying amount of goodwill.
For the annual assessment in 2021, we bypassed the optional qualitative impairment assessment (step zero) and performed a quantitative assessment. Based on the results of the quantitative assessment performed, the fair value of the reporting unit exceeded its carrying amount. For the annual assessment in 2020, there were no indicators of impairment noted. Accordingly, no impairment charges related to goodwill were recognized during all periods presented in the consolidated financial statements.
Share-based compensation
We apply ASC 718, Share-based Payments. ASC 718 requires awards classified as equity awards to be accounted for using the estimated grant date fair value. The value of the portion of the award that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as an expense in the consolidated statements of operations over the requisite service periods. Share-based compensation expense recognized in the consolidated statements of operations includes compensation expense for share-based awards granted based on the estimated grant date fair value. Because share-based compensation expense is based on awards that are ultimately expected to vest, share-based compensation expense has been reduced to account for estimated forfeitures. Forfeitures are estimated at the time of grant and revised, if necessary, in subsequent periods if actual forfeitures differ from those estimates.
We determine the fair value of stock options using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which is impacted by the following assumptions:
● Fair Value of Common Stock - To determine the grant date fair value of our Common Stock, we use the closing market price of our Common Stock at the grant date.
● Expected Term - Expected term is estimated based on our prior five years of historical data regarding expired, forfeited or if applicable, exercise behavior.
● Expected Volatility - Since we have limited historical basis for determining our own volatility, the expected volatility assumption was based on the average historical volatility of a representative peer group, which includes consideration of the peer company’s industry, market capitalization, state of life cycle and capital structure.
● Expected Dividend Yield - The dividend yield assumption is based on our history and our expectation of no dividend payouts.
● Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate assumption is based upon observed interest rates appropriate for an equivalent remaining term equal to the expected life of the award.
Common Stock Warrants and Post-Combination Warrants
We evaluated the Public Warrants and private placement warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants” and, together with the Public Warrants, the “Common Stock Warrants”) issued in connection with the IPO and the Post-Combination Warrants under ASC 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815-40”), and concluded they do not meet the criteria to be classified in stockholders’ equity. Since the Common Stock Warrants and Post-Combination Warrants meet the definition of a derivative under ASC 815-40, we record these warrants as liabilities on the consolidated balance sheets within other long-term liabilities and measures these warrants at fair value at each reporting period date, with changes in their respective fair values recognized in other expense, net within the consolidated statements of operations. We used the Black-Scholes model to estimate the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and a Monte Carlo simulation to estimate the fair value of the Post-Combination Warrants. The main assumptions used in these models were: stock price, exercise price, risk free rate, expected volatility and dividend yield.
Convertible Notes
We account for the embedded derivatives at fair value under ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). Under ASC 815, an embedded feature in a debt instrument that meets the definition of a derivative is fair valued at issuance and remeasured at each reporting period with changes in fair value recognized in earnings.
We evaluated the guidance in ASC 815 and concluded the conversion option is not considered indexed to our own stock. As a result, the redemption feature and conversion option were bifurcated from the Convertible Notes and are separately measured at fair value at each reporting period within other long-term liabilities in the consolidated balance sheets with changes in their respective fair values recognized in other expense, net within the consolidated statements of operations.
We utilized a binomial model to estimate the fair value of the embedded derivative features requiring bifurcation associated with the Convertible Notes payable at issuance date and as of the December 30, 2021 reporting date. The key inputs to the valuation models that were utilized to estimate the fair value of the convertible debt derivative liabilities include: stock price, conversion strike price, volatility, dividend yield, risk free rate, debt discount rate, coupon interest rate, face amount and the probability of fundamental change.
Income taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, as clarified by ASC 740-10, Accounting for Uncertainty in Income Taxes. Under this method, deferred income taxes are determined based on the estimated future tax effects of differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities given the provisions of enacted tax laws. Deferred income tax provisions and benefits are based on changes to the assets or liabilities from year to year. In providing for deferred taxes, we consider tax regulations of the jurisdictions in which we operate, estimates of future taxable income and available tax planning strategies. If tax regulations, operating results or the ability to implement tax planning strategies vary, adjustments to the carrying value of deferred tax assets and liabilities may be required. Valuation allowances are recorded related to deferred tax assets based on the “more likely than not” criteria of ASC 740.
ASC 740-10 requires that we recognize the financial statement benefit of a tax position only after determining that the relevant tax authority would more likely than not sustain the position following an audit. For tax positions meeting the “more-likely-than-not” threshold, the amount recognized in the consolidated financial statements is the largest benefit that has a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement with the relevant tax authorities. We do not have any other material uncertain tax positions. We recognize interest accrued related to unrecognized tax benefits, if any, in interest expense and penalties in operating expenses.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 2 of our audited consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on accounting pronouncements.
JOBS Act
The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we have chosen to rely on certain reduced reporting requirements applicable to emerging growth companies, including, among other things, we are not required to (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the Chief Executive Officer’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of New Beginnings’ initial public offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.
We will remain an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act until the earliest of: (i) the last day of the fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the closing of New Beginnings’ initial public offering, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) when we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” under the Exchange Act, which would occur if the market value of our common equity held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter; or (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.