ITEM 7 - MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties including those discussed under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” These risks and uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
We deliver a comprehensive WiFi as a Service platform to make everyone’s connected home safe and supportive for life and work. We believe the home router must go the way of the mobile phone. Today’s routers are simple, single-purpose devices that rarely receive firmware updates and have underdeveloped management applications, making them the #1 target in residential cybersecurity attacks. It can be so much more. The router must offer frequent security updates, helpful apps, extensive personalization options and a delightful interface. That is what Minim delivers- not just the router or just an app, but WiFi as a Service. Technically, it’s composed of an intelligent router managed by a smart operating system that leverages cloud computing and AI to analyze and optimize the smart home, combined with intuitive applications to engage with it.
We continually seek to improve our product designs and manufacturing approach to elevate product performance and reduce our costs. We pursue a strategy of outsourcing rather than internally developing our hardware product chipsets, which are application-specific integrated circuits that form the technology base for our modems. By outsourcing the chipset technology, we are able to concentrate our research and development resources on modem system design, leverage the extensive research and development capabilities of our chipset suppliers, and reduce our development time and associated costs and risks. As a result of this approach, we are able to quickly develop new products while maintaining a relatively low level of research and development expense as a percentage of net sales. We also outsource aspects of our manufacturing to contract manufacturers as a means of reducing our costs of production, and to provide us with greater flexibility in our production capacity.
Generally, our gross margin for a given product depends on a number of factors, including the type of customer to whom we are selling. The gross margin for products sold to retailers tends to be higher than for some of our other customers; but the sales, support, returns, and overhead costs associated with products sold to retailers also tend to be higher. Minim’s sales to certain countries are currently handled by a single master distributor for each country that handles the support and marketing costs within the country. Gross margin for sales to these master distributors tends to be low, since lower pricing to these distributors helps them to cover the support and marketing costs for their country.
Our cash and cash equivalents balance on December 31, 2021 was $12.6 million compared to $772 thousand on December 31, 2020. On December 31, 2021, we had $5.1 million of outstanding borrowings on our asset-based credit line with availability of $445 thousand and working capital of $27.8 million.
In August 2021, we completed a public offering raise of $22.7 million and issued an aggregate of 10,000,000 shares at a purchase price of $2.50 per share. Other major changes in cash and cash equivalents during fiscal 2021 was a decrease of approximately $4.3 million in accounts receivable, an increase of $16.1 million in inventories, an increase of $862 thousand in accounts payable and a decrease of $2.3 million in accrued expenses. In fiscal 2021, the Company also had a net loss of $3.6 million, which contributed to a decrease in cash and cash equivalents.
The Company’s ability to maintain adequate levels of liquidity depends in part on our ability to sell inventory on hand, increasing SaaS sales, and collect related receivables.
Prior to July 2020, almost all of our products were produced in China and were subject to a tariff on our cost of goods at the time of entry into the U.S. Beginning in July 2020, a majority of our products were produced in Vietnam while a small portion of our products continued to be produced in China. The China related tariff is 25%. These tariffs have a significant impact on our cost of inventory and profitability. These tariffs may not be reduced and may even be increased. Although we have significantly reduced tariff costs with the transition to Vietnam production, it is not possible to predict the impact of tariffs in the future, which could have a material adverse impact on our net income and cash position and we may continue to experience losses.
Although the Company has recently experienced losses, it has continued to experience sales growth. We have experienced six consecutive years with double-digit sales growth. In the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we generated net sales of $55.4 million and $48.0 million, respectively.
COVID-19 Pandemic
We are subject to risks and uncertainties as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. The extent of the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business is highly uncertain and difficult to predict, particularly as variants of the coronavirus continue to spread around the world. In March 2020, we instituted office closures, travel restrictions and a work-from-anywhere policy for substantially all our employees due to shelter-in-place mandates. In June 2021, we opened our U.S. offices to employees, who choose to work in the office, and we lifted certain travel restrictions. The COVID-19 pandemic has had a prolonged impact on our supply chain operations due to restrictions, reduced capacity, and limited availability from suppliers on whom we rely for sourcing components and materials and from third-party partners on whom we rely for manufacturing, warehousing and logistics services. Although demand for our products has increased relative to pre-pandemic levels as consumers and businesses seek flexible networking solution for their day-to-day needs, customers’ purchasing decisions over the long-term may be impacted by the pandemic and its impact on the economy, which could in turn impact our revenue and results of operations. Furthermore, our supply chain continues to face constraints primarily due to challenges in sourcing components and materials and managing global logistics and transport services for our products due to shortages and delays. The prolonged impact of COVID-19 could exacerbate these constraints or cause further supply chain disruptions. In 2021, we experienced increases in costs of materials and components for our products. We expect these costs to remain elevated for the foreseeable future.
Recent Accounting Standards
Please refer to Note 2 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, which is incorporated herein by reference.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Following is a discussion of what we view as our more significant accounting policies and estimates. As described below, management judgments and estimates must be made and used in connection with the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. We have identified areas where material differences could result in the amount and timing of our net sales, costs, and expenses for any period if we had made different judgments or used different estimates.
Revenue Recognition. We primarily sell hardware products to computer peripherals retailers, computer product distributors, OEMs, and direct to consumers and other channel partners via the Internet. The hardware products include cable modems and gateways, mobile broadband modems, wireless routers, MoCA adapters and mesh home networking devices. We also sell the Minim subscription service that enables and secures a better connected home using the Minim AI-driven smart home WiFi management and security platform.
The SaaS is offered over a defined contract period, generally one year, and are sold to ISPs, who then promote the services to their subscribers. These services are available as an on-demand application over the defined term. The agreements include service offerings, which deliver applications and technologies via cloud-based deployment models that we develop functionality for, provide unspecified updates and enhancements for, and host, manage, provide upgrades and support for the customers’ access by entering into solution agreements for a stated period. The monthly fees charged to the customers are based on the number of subscribers utilizing the services each month, and the revenue recognized generally corresponds to the monthly billing amounts as the services are delivered. Customers do not have the contractual right or ability to take possession of the hosted software.
We consider each product and each service contract to be a distinct performance obligation. Revenue is recognized when a performance obligation is satisfied, which occurs when control of the promised products or services is transferred to the customer in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Revenue from product sales is recognized at a point in time when management has determined that control has transferred to the customer, which is generally when legal title has transferred to the customer. Revenue from SaaS contracts is recognized as the output of the service is transferred to the customer over time, typically evenly over the contract term. Revenue is recognized net of allowances for returns and any taxes collected from customers, which are subsequently remitted to governmental authorities.
Our contracts with customers often include promises to transfer multiple products and services to a customer. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Judgment is also required to determine the stand-alone selling price (“SSP”) for each distinct performance obligation. We use an observable price to estimate SSP for items that are sold separately. In instances where SSP is not directly observable, such as when we do not sell the product or service separately, we determine the SSP using information that may include market conditions and other observable inputs.
Product Returns. Products are returned by retail stores and distributors for inventory balancing, contractual stock rotation privileges, and warranty repair or replacements. Analyses of actual returned product are compared to analyses of the product return estimates. We have concluded that the current process of estimating the return reserve represents a fair measure with which to adjust revenue. Returned goods are variable and under ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, are estimated and recognized as a reduction of revenue as performance obligations are satisfied (e.g., upon shipment of goods). Under ASC Topic 606, the Company monitors pending authorized returns of goods and, if deemed appropriate, record the right of return asset accordingly.
Inventory Valuation and Cost of Goods Sold. Inventory is valued at the lower of cost, determined by the first-in, first-out method, or its net realizable value. We review inventories for obsolete and slow-moving products each quarter and make provisions based on our estimate of the probability that the material will not be consumed or that it will be sold below cost. Additionally, material product certification costs on new products are capitalized and amortized over the expected period of value of the respective products.
Valuation of Deferred Tax Assets. As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we estimate our income tax expense and deferred income tax position. This process involves the estimation of our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our balance sheet. We then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income. To the extent we believe that recovery is not likely, we establish a valuation allowance. Changes in the valuation allowance are reflected in the statement of operations.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes and any valuation allowances. We have recorded a 100% valuation allowance against our deferred income tax assets. It is management’s estimate that, after considering all available objective evidence, historical and prospective, with greater weight given to historical evidence, it is more likely than not that these assets will not be realized. If we establish a record of continuing profitability, at some point we will be required to reduce the valuation allowance and recognize an equal income tax benefit which will increase net income in that period(s).
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth certain financial data derived from our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 presented in absolute dollars and as a percentage of net sales, with dollars and percentage change year over year.
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020
The following table sets forth our revenues by product and the changes in revenues for fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to fiscal year ended December 31, 2020:
The following table sets forth our revenues by geographic area and the changes in revenues for fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to fiscal year ended December 31, 2020:
(1) Revenues are attributed to geographies based on the location of the customer.
Net Sales
Our total net sales increased year-over-year by $7.4 million or 15.5%. The growth in net sales is directly attributable to increased sales of Motorola branded cable modems and gateways, including intelligent networking products that include the Minim software. In both 2021 and 2020, we primarily generated our sales by selling cable modems and gateways. Sales related to SaaS offerings were $525 thousand and $0 in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in other category of $2.4 million in 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to a reduction in DSL products and a refocus on new products with growth potential outside North America as well as within new product introductions. Generally, our lower sales outside North America reflect the fact that cable modems are sold successfully through retailers in the U.S. but not in most countries outside the U.S., due primarily to variations in government regulations.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Margin
Cost of goods sold consists primarily of the following: the cost of finished products from our third-party manufacturers; overhead costs, including purchasing, product planning, inventory control, warehousing and distribution logistics; third-party software licensing fees; inbound freight; import duties/tariffs; warranty costs associated with returned goods; write-downs for excess and obsolete inventory; amortization of certain acquired intangibles and software development costs; and costs attributable to the provision of service offerings.
The increase in gross profit was attributable to sales growth of Motorola branded cable modems and gateways. We outsource our manufacturing, warehousing and distribution logistics. We believe this outsourcing strategy allows us to better manage our product costs and gross margin. Our gross margin can be affected by a number of factors, including fluctuation in foreign exchange rates, sales returns, changes in average selling prices, end-user customer rebates and other channel sales incentives, changes in our cost of goods sold due to fluctuations and increases in prices paid for components, overhead costs, inbound freight and duty/tariffs, conversion costs, and charges for excess or obsolete inventory.
The following table presents net sales and gross margin, for the periods indicated:
Gross profit and gross margin increased in fiscal 2021 compared to the prior fiscal year, primarily due to higher net sales and reductions in tariffs and air freight expense of approximately $4.2 million.
We expect fiscal 2022 gross margin to be subject to similar variabilities experienced in fiscal 2021. In 2021, we experienced meaningful increase in costs for sea freight transportation as well as costs of materials and components for our products. We expect these costs to remain elevated for the foreseeable future. We continue to experience disruptions from the pandemic, with manufacturing partners being affected by factory uptime, scarcity of materials and components and limited capacity to transport cargo via sea and air. These disruptions have increased the length of time taken between order to production and transportation of inventory. If such disruptions become more widespread, they could significantly affect our ability to fulfill the demand for our products. Forecasting gross margin percentages is difficult, and there are several risks related to our ability to maintain or improve our current gross margin levels. Our cost of goods sold as a percentage of net sales can vary significantly based upon factors such as: uncertainties surrounding revenue volumes, including future pricing and/or potential discounts as a result of the economy, competition, the timing of sales, and related production level variances; import customs duties and imposed tariffs; changes in technology; changes in product mix; expenses associated with writing off excessive or obsolete inventory; fluctuations in freight costs; manufacturing and purchase price variances; and changes in prices on commodity components.
Selling and Marketing
Selling and marketing expenses consist primarily of advertising, trade shows, corporate communications and other marketing expenses, product marketing expenses, outbound freight costs, amortization of certain intangibles, personnel expenses for sales and marketing staff, technical support expenses, and facility allocations. The following table presents sales and marketing expenses, for the periods indicated:
Sales and marketing expenses increased in fiscal 2021, as compared to the prior year, primarily due to an increase in Motorola royalty fees of $1.2 million, personnel expenses of $2.0 million and marketing program campaigns of $1.4 million.
We expect our selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of net sales in fiscal 2022 to be similar to fiscal 2021 levels. Expenses may fluctuate depending on sales levels achieved as certain expenses, such as commissions, are determined based upon the net sales achieved. Forecasting selling and marketing expenses is highly dependent on expected net sales levels and could vary significantly depending on actual net sales achieved in any given quarter. Marketing expenses may also fluctuate depending upon the timing, extent and nature of marketing programs.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist of salaries and related expenses for executives, finance and accounting, human resources, information technology, professional fees, including legal costs associated with defending claims against us, allowance for doubtful accounts, facility allocations, and other general corporate expenses. The following table presents general and administrative expenses, for the periods indicated:
General and administrative expenses decreased $0.6 million primarily due to a $0.9 million reduction in professional services, of which $1.6 million was attributable to the professional services related to the merger with Zoom Connectivity incurred in 2020, and a $0.4 million reduction in personnel expenses, partially offset by $0.4 million in legal settlements, and an increase of $0.2 million in provisions for bad debt.
Future general and administrative expense increases or decreases in absolute dollars are difficult to predict due to the lack of visibility of certain costs, including legal costs associated with defending claims against us, and other factors.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of personnel expenses, payments to suppliers for design services, safety and regulatory testing, product certification expenditures to qualify our products for sale into specific markets, prototypes, IT, and other consulting fees. Research and development expenses are recognized as they are incurred. Our research and development organization is focused on enhancing our ability to introduce innovative and easy-to-use products and services. The following table presents research and development expenses, for the periods indicated:
The increase of $2.3 million was primarily due to personnel expenses of $1.5 million and increased contract labor, professional fees, product testing, certification and software development costs of $0.8 million.
We believe that innovation and technological leadership is critical to our future success, and we are committed to continuing a significant level of research and development to develop new technologies, products and services. We continue to invest in research and development to expand our hardware product offerings focused on premium WiFi 6E, WiFi 6, and software solutions. We expect research and development expenses as a percentage of net sales in fiscal 2022 to be in line with or slightly above fiscal 2021 levels. Research and development expenses may fluctuate depending on the timing and number of development activities and could vary significantly as a percentage of net sales, depending on actual net sales achieved in any given year.
Trademark sale. On August 12, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with Zoom Video Communications, Inc. to sell all of the Company’s right, title and interest in the ZOOM® trademark for cash consideration in the amount of $4.0 million, net of legal costs incurred of $44 thousand. The Company did not have a carrying basis in the trademark that was subject to the agreement and recorded income of approximately $4.0 million, which is recorded in income from continuing operations pursuant to ASC 360-10, Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived Assets.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense), net was an expense of $206 thousand in fiscal 2021 and income of $1.0 million in fiscal 2020, primarily due to a $1.1 million forgiveness in 2020 on loans received under the Paycheck Protection Plan of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”). Of the $1.1 million forgiveness, $545 thousand related to loan proceeds received by Zoom Connectivity prior to the Zoom Connectivity merger but forgiven after the Zoom Connectivity merger. Refer to Note 4 of the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit). We recorded minimum state income tax for a few states and tax related to our operations in Mexico, which was $64 thousand and $27 thousand in fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020, respectively.
Unaudited Pro Forma Information
The following unaudited pro forma financial information summarizes the combined results of operations for the Company and Zoom Connectivity, Inc. as if the merger of Zoom Connectivity, Inc. had been completed on January 1, 2020. The pro forma results have been prepared for comparative purposes only, and do not necessarily represent what the net sales or results of operations would have been had the merger been completed on January 1, 2020. In addition, these results are not intended to be a projection of future operating results. The unaudited pro forma information includes adjustments to eliminate intercompany transactions and align accounting policies. The pro forma results for the year ended December 31, 2020 also includes the non-recurring transaction costs totaling $1.6 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal sources of liquidity are cash and cash equivalents and borrowings under our SVB line-of-credit. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $12.6 million as compared to $772 thousand on December 31, 2020. On December 31, 2021, we had $5.1 million of borrowings outstanding and $445 thousand available on our $25.0 million SVB line-of-credit and working capital of $27.8 million. We have funded our operations and investing activities primarily through borrowings on our line of credit, the sale of assets and the sale of our common stock.
Our historical cash outflows have primarily been associated with: (1) cash used for operating activities such as the purchase and growth of inventory, expansion of our sales and marketing and research and development infrastructure and other working capital needs; (2) expenditures related to increasing our manufacturing capacity and improving our manufacturing efficiency; (3) capital expenditures related to the acquisition of equipment; (4) cash used to repay our debt obligations and related interest expense; and (5) cash used for acquisitions. Fluctuations in our working capital due to timing differences of our cash receipts and cash disbursements also impact our cash inflows and outflows.
On August 12, 2021, we entered into an agreement with Zoom Video Communications, Inc. to sell, and sold, all of our rights, title and interest in the ZOOM® trademark for cash consideration in the amount of $4.0 million, net of legal costs incurred of $44 thousand.
On August 2, 2021, we completed a public offering of 10 million shares of our common stock for $22.7 million in net proceeds after deducting underwriter’s discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
Cash Flows
The following table presents our cash flows for the periods presented:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities.
Cash used in operating activities of $14.3 million for 2021 reflected our net loss of $3.6 million, adjusted for non-cash expenses, consisting primarily of $1.0 million of depreciation and amortization and $1.0 million of stock-based compensation expense. Uses of cash include an increase in inventories ($16.1 million) and a decrease in accrued expenses ($2.3 million). Sources of cash included a decrease of accounts receivable of $4.3 million and increases in accounts payable of $862 thousand and deferred revenue of $662 thousand.
Cash used in operating activities of $7.1 million for 2020 reflected our net loss of $3.9 million, adjusted for non-cash expenses, consisting primarily of loan forgiveness of $1.1 million. Uses of cash included an increase in accounts receivable of $5.0 million due to increased sales and increased inventories of $8.9 million. Sources of cash include increases in accounts payable of $6.7 million and accrued expenses of $4.7 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities. In 2021, $593 thousand was used to purchase equipment and $89 thousand was used for certification costs.
In 2020, cash acquired in merger was a source of cash of $502 thousand. Cash was used for certification costs ($461 thousand), capitalized software costs ($317 thousand), and the purchase of equipment ($303 thousand).
Cash Flows from Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities in 2021 consisted of a source of cash of $22.7 million from a public offering, $5.2 million from borrowings under our SVB line-of-credit, and $1.2 million in proceeds from the exercises of common stock options. Uses of cash include the repayment of the Rosenthal & Rosenthal, Inc. line-of-credit of $2.4 million.
Cash provided by financing activities in 2020 consisted primarily of net proceeds from a private placement offering of $3.2 million, $2.4 million in borrowings under our line-of-credit with Rosenthal & Rosenthal, Inc., and $1.2 million from stock option exercises.
Future Liquidity Needs
Our primary short-term needs for capital, which are subject to change, include expenditures related to:
● the acquisition of equipment and other fixed assets for use in our current and future manufacturing and research and development facilities;
● upgrades to our information technology infrastructure to enhance our capabilities and improve overall productivity;
● support of our commercialization efforts related to our current and future products, including expansion of our direct sales force and field support resources;
● the continued advancement of research and development activities.
Our capital expenditures are largely discretionary and within our control. We expect that our product sales and the resulting operating loss as well as the status of each of our product development programs, will significantly impact our cash management decisions.
At December 31, 2021, we believe our current cash and cash equivalents will be sufficient to fund working capital requirements, capital expenditures and operations during the next twelve months. We intend to retain any future earnings to support operations and to finance the growth and development of our business, and we do not anticipate paying any dividends in the foreseeable future.
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will be influenced by numerous factors, including the extent and duration of any future operating losses, the level and timing of future sales and expenditures, the results and scope of ongoing research and product development programs, working capital required to support our sales growth, funds required to service our debt, the receipt of and time required to obtain regulatory clearances and approvals, our sales and marketing programs, our need for infrastructure to support our sales growth, the continuing acceptance of our products in the marketplace, competing technologies and changes in the market and regulatory environment and cash that may be required to settle our foreign currency hedges.
Our ability to fund our longer-term cash needs is subject to various risks, many of which are beyond our control-See “Risk Factors-We may require significant additional capital to pursue our growth strategy, and our failure to raise capital when needed could prevent us from executing our growth strategy.” Should we require additional funding, such as additional capital investments, we may need to raise the required additional funds through bank borrowings or public or private sales of debt or equity securities. We cannot assure that such funding will be available in needed quantities or on terms favorable to us, if at all.
At December 31, 2021, we have Federal and state net operating loss carry forwards of approximately $65.0 million and $22.1 million, respectively, available to reduce future taxable income. A valuation allowance has been established for the full amount of deferred income tax assets as management has concluded that it is more-likely than-not that the benefits from such assets will not be realized.
Contractual Obligations
For a description of our bank credit line, refer to Note 8 and for a description of our operating leases, license agreement and purchase commitments, refer to Note 9 in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In 2006, the Company entered into a maquiladora agreement with North American Production Sharing, Inc. (“NAPS”). This agreement provides that NAPS provide certain personnel and other services for a production facility in Mexico on our behalf. Although the maquiladora agreement expired on September 25, 2019, the agreement automatically renews annually unless otherwise cancelled per provisions in the agreement. Any related assets, liabilities, or expenses are reported in the accompanying financial statements. Additionally, the Company is obligated to pay future minimum required royalty payments associated with certain licensing agreements which are not included in our consolidated balance sheet.