Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” and included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements based upon our current beliefs, estimates, plans and expectations that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth under “Risk Factors” or in other parts of this Annual Report.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company focused on the identification, acquisition, development and commercialization of novel therapies for debilitating rare and orphan diseases. We focus on diseases for which the unmet medical need is high and the biology for treatment is clear.
Our lead product LIVMARLI (maralixibat) oral solution (“Livmarli”), a novel, oral, minimally-absorbed agent designed to selectively inhibit ASBT, also known as the IBAT, is approved for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS 1 year of age and older in the United States. We market and commercialize Livmarli in the United States through our specialized and focused commercial team. We have also filed for approval in Europe of Livmarli for the treatment of cholestatic liver disease in patients with ALGS and plan to commercialize Livmarli in Western Europe with our international team based in Switzerland. We have entered license and distribution agreements with several rare disease companies for the commercialization of Livmarli in additional countries. We are also developing Livmarli for PFIC and BA. Livmarli has been granted breakthrough designation for ALGS and PFIC type 2.
We are advancing our second product candidate, volixibat, a novel, oral, minimally-absorbed agent designed to inhibit IBAT, for the treatment of adult patients with cholestatic liver diseases. We are developing volixibat for the treatment of ICP, PSC and PBC. Volixibat has been studied in over 400 adults for up to 48 weeks. Clinical trials of volixibat have shown significant activity on ASBT and bile acid markers such as 7αC4, fecal bile acids and cholesterol, demonstrating potent biological activity.
We were incorporated in May 2018 and commenced operations in November 2018. To date, we have focused primarily on acquiring and in-licensing our product candidates, organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, advancing our product candidates through clinical development, preparing for commercialization of our product candidates, commercializing Livmarli, and conducting business development activities relating to, among other things, portfolio expansion through collaborations.
We have a limited operating history and incurred significant operating losses since our inception and expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future. We have only one product approved for commercial sale and have not generated significant revenues from product sales as of December 31, 2021. Since inception, we have funded our operations to date primarily through debt, equity and revenue interest financings.
Financing Transactions
In January 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 2,400,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $20.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $44.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
In August 2020, the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) declared effective a registration statement on Form S-3 (“Shelf Registration”) covering the sale of up to $300.0 million of our securities. Also, in August 2020, we entered into a sales agreement (“Sales Agreement”) with SVB Leerink LLC (“SVB Leerink”) pursuant to which we may elect to issue and sell, from time to time, shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million under the Shelf Registration through SVB Leerink acting as the sales agent and/or principal. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold 305,969 shares of common stock in at-the-market offerings pursuant to the Sales Agreement at a weighted-average price of $21.55 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $6.6 million. The net proceeds after deducting sales commissions to SVB Leerink and other issuance expenses were
approximately $6.3 million. The remaining capacity under the Sales Agreement is approximately $68.4 million as of December 31, 2021. In January and February 2022, we sold 992,389 shares of common stock in at-the-market offerings pursuant to the Sales Agreement at a weighted-average price of $18.04 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $17.4 million.
In December 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our common stock pursuant to the Shelf Registration. We sold 3,750,000 shares of common stock at a price of $20.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $70.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. In addition, we granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days, to purchase up to 562,500 additional shares of our common stock at the public offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. In January 2021, the underwriters exercised their option for 375,654 shares of our common stock, resulting in net proceeds of $7.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts.	
In December 2020, we entered into a Revenue Interest Purchase Agreement, as amended in September 2021 (“RIPA”), with Mulholland SA LLC, an affiliate of Oberland Capital LLC (“Oberland”), as agent for purchasers party thereto (the “Purchasers”), and the Purchasers named therein, pursuant to which the Purchasers paid us $50.0 million on closing, less certain issuance costs. In April 2021, upon acceptance for filing by the FDA of our NDA for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS, we received an additional $65.0 million, less certain transaction costs, from the Purchasers. We may also be entitled to up to an additional $50.0 million at the option of the Purchasers to finance in-license or other acquisitions (“Purchaser Payments”). We were entitled to receive an additional $35.0 million upon FDA approval of Livmarli, which we elected to forgo. As consideration for the Purchaser Payments, the Purchasers have the right to receive the Revenue Interests from us based on the net sales of Livmarli, which will be tiered payments ranging from 2.00% to 9.75% of our net sales in the covered territory. The initial Revenue Interest rate of 9.75% will decrease upon certain revenue achievements. The Purchasers’ rights to receive such payments shall terminate on the date on which the Purchasers have received payments totaling 195.0% of the total payments made by the Purchasers to us, exclusive of transaction expenses, unless the RIPA is terminated earlier.
Concurrently with our entry into the RIPA, we entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement (the “Stock Purchase Agreement”) with TPC Investments II LP, TPC Investments Solutions LP and TPC Investments Solutions Co-Invest LP, each of which is an affiliate of Oberland. Pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement, we issued an aggregate of 509,164 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $19.64, resulting in net proceeds to us of $10.0 million.
In November 2021, we entered into a definitive agreement to sell the PRV that we received from the FDA in connection with the approval of Livmarli for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS one year of age and older, for cash proceeds of $110.0 million. In December 2021, we completed our sale of the PRV and received net proceeds of $108.0 million, after deducting commission costs.
Financial Overview
Our net loss was $84.0 million and $103.3 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $257.2 million and cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash equivalents and investments of $261.5 million, of which $100.0 million is restricted from use under terms of the RIPA.
We expect our expenses and operating losses will increase substantially as we conduct our ongoing and planned clinical trials, continue our research and development activities, continue commercial activities for Livmarli, and seek regulatory approvals for our product candidates, as well as hire additional personnel and protect our intellectual property. In addition, as our product candidates progress through development and toward commercialization, we will need to make milestone payments to the licensors and other third parties from whom we have in-licensed or acquired our product candidates. We have also entered into collaboration arrangements with other companies whereby we are entitled to receive upfront and license fees, research and development funding, development and sales-based milestones, and tiered royalties based on sales of commercialized products. Arrangements that include upfront payments may require deferral of revenue recognition to a future period until we perform obligations under these arrangements. The event-based milestone and other contingent payments represent
variable consideration, and we use the most likely amount method or expected value method to estimate this variable consideration, depending on the nature of the contingency and the variable payments. Given the high degree of uncertainty around the occurrence of these events, we generally determine the milestone and other contingent amounts to be fully constrained until the uncertainty associated with these payments is resolved. We will recognize revenue from sales-based royalty payments when or as the sales occur. We will re-evaluate the transaction price in each reporting period as uncertain events are resolved and other changes in circumstances occur. The timing of these activities may fluctuate significantly. As a result, our net losses may fluctuate significantly from quarter-to-quarter and year-to-year, depending in particular on the timing of our clinical trials and non-clinical studies and our expenditures on other research and development activities.
We expect our revenue from product sales, net will increase in the future from the launch of Livmarli. However, the timing and amount of product sales, net are unknown. Accordingly, until such time as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure and sustain operating activities, if ever, we expect to finance our cash needs through equity offerings, debt financings or other capital sources, collaborations, licenses and other similar arrangements. However, we may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other arrangements when needed on favorable terms or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such other arrangements when needed could have a negative impact on our financial condition and on our ability to pursue our business plans and strategies. If we are unable to raise additional capital when needed, we could be forced to delay, limit, reduce or terminate the development of one or more of our product candidates or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market our product candidates even if we would otherwise prefer to develop and market such product candidates ourselves.
Prior to the regulatory approval of Livmarli, the manufacturing and related costs were expensed as research and development as any future economic benefit was not considered probable; accordingly, these costs were not capitalized and as a result gross margins resulting from product sales, net will initially be higher until we deplete inventories that we had expensed prior to receiving approval.
COVID-19
The coronavirus (including its variants, “COVID-19”) pandemic has had a significant economic impact across the global marketplace presenting challenges to maintaining business continuity and dramatically changing the ways in which we live and interact with others. Although the initial impact of the pandemic has subsided, we are uncertain as to how more transmissible variants may impact our business. We are working diligently to ensure the advancement of all of our clinical development programs in the safest manner possible. While we are unable to reliably estimate the duration or extent of any potential business disruption or financial impact during this time, we remain committed to (i) prioritizing the safety, health and well-being of patients, their caregivers, healthcare providers and our employees; (ii) ensuring patients are well supported and have continued uninterrupted access to our product candidates, for which we currently do not expect any supply disruption; and (iii) advancing our clinical trials. Examples include a “Work from Home Policy” for our employees and access to home health care to assist families with safer participation in our trials.
Although we did not see a significant financial impact to our business operations as a result of COVID-19 for the year ended December 31, 2021, there may be potential impacts to our business in the future that are highly uncertain and difficult to predict such as temporary closures of our offices or those of our third-party manufacturers or suppliers, disruptions or restrictions on our employees’ ability to travel, disruptions to or delays in ongoing non-clinical trials, clinical trials, third-party manufacturing supply and other operations, inability for patients to see their healthcare providers and access our products, the potential diversion of healthcare resources away from the conduct of clinical trials to focus on pandemic concerns, interruptions or delays in the operations of the FDA or other regulatory authorities, and our ability to raise capital and conduct business development activities. The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, including any lasting effects on our revenue and the way we conduct our business, is highly uncertain and subject to continued change. We recognize that this pandemic may continue to present unique challenges for us throughout 2022.
We continue to believe that existing cash equivalents and investments, excluding restricted cash equivalents, and existing sources of and access to financing are adequate to satisfy our needs for working capital, capital expenditures, debt service requirements and other business development initiatives that we plan to strategically
pursue in the 12 months from the issuance of the consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report. However, should the COVID-19 pandemic and any associated recession or depression continue for a prolonged period, our results of operations, financial condition, liquidity and cash flows could be materially impacted as a result of a lower likelihood of effectively and efficiently developing new medicines and successfully commercializing our products.
License Agreements
Assignment and License Agreement with Shire (Takeda)
In November 2018, we entered into the Shire License Agreement with Shire, which was subsequently acquired by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited (“Takeda”), in which we were granted an exclusive, royalty bearing worldwide license to develop and commercialize our two product candidates, Livmarli and volixibat. As part of the Shire License Agreement, we were assigned license agreements held by Shire with Satiogen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (“Satiogen” and altogether, the “Satiogen License”), Pfizer Inc., and Sanofi, collectively the Assigned License Agreements (“Assigned License Agreements”). In partial consideration for the rights granted to us under the Shire License Agreement, we made an upfront payment to Shire of $7.5 million and issued Shire 1,859,151 shares of our common stock with an estimated fair value of $7.0 million.
Under the Shire License Agreement and Assigned License Agreements, to date, we have paid aggregate development and regulatory milestones of $51.0 million related to our Livmarli and volixibat programs.
Licensing Agreement with Takeda
In September 2021, we entered into an exclusive licensing agreement with Takeda for the development and commercialization of Livmarli in Japan for ALGS, PFIC and BA. Under the terms of the agreement, Takeda will be responsible for regulatory approval and commercialization of Livmarli in Japan. Takeda will also be responsible for development, including conducting clinical studies in cholestatic indications. We are responsible for commercial supply to Takeda. In exchange, we are eligible to receive a percentage of Takeda’s annualized net sales, which range from high-double digits declining to mid-double digits over the first four years from commercial launch and thereafter remains at mid-double digits.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
Product Sales, Net
To date, we have not generated significant revenue from product sales. Our approved product, Livmarli, was approved by the FDA in September 2021 for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS one year of age and older. We recorded our first product sales of Livmarli in October 2021. We expect our product sales of Livmarli will increase as a result of our continued commercial activities. However, as it is early in our product launch, we do not yet have a trend and while we believe revenue will increase as we further engage with health care providers in the United States and globally, we cannot predict revenues with any certainty.
Our revenue from product sales, net further depends on our prescription mix of U.S. commercial payors, Medicaid and free drugs under our patient assistance program. Our experience to date in our recent product launch is not sufficient to allow us to reliably estimate the payor mix and resulting gross to net adjustments.
License Revenue
Under the exclusive licensing agreements with CANbridge and GC Pharma, we have recognized as revenue the upfront nonrefundable payments related to the licenses granted upon satisfaction of certain performance obligations. Pursuant to the agreements, we are eligible to receive future milestone payments. These milestone payments were fully constrained and not recognized currently in revenue due to the degree of uncertainty in achieving the milestones associated with these payments. We are also eligible to receive royalty payments related to the agreements, which will be recognized as the underlying product sales occur.
Cost of Product Sales
Cost of product sales consist of third party manufacturing costs, personnel, facility and other costs of manufacturing commercial products, transportation and freight, amortization of capitalized intangibles associated
with contractual milestone payments paid to licensors upon certain regulatory approval and sales-based events and royalty payments payable on net sales of Livmarli under licensing agreements. Cost of product sales may also include period costs related to certain manufacturing services and inventory adjustment charges. Prior to receiving approval from the FDA in September 2021 to market and sell Livmarli in the United States, we expensed all costs incurred related to the manufacture of Livmarli as research and development expense because of the inherent risks associated with the development of a drug candidate, the uncertainty about the regulatory approval process and the lack of history as a company of regulatory approval of drug candidates. Our inventory of Livmarli produced prior to FDA approval is available for commercial or clinical use.
Operating Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses primarily relate to clinical development and manufacturing activities of our product candidates. Our research and development expenses include, among other things:
•salaries and related expenses for employee personnel, including benefits, travel and expenses related to stock-based compensation granted to personnel in development functions;
•external expenses paid to clinical trial sites, contract research organizations and consultants that conduct our clinical trials;
•expenses related to drug formulation development and the production of clinical trial supplies, including fees paid to contract manufacturers;
•licensing milestone payments related to development or regulatory events;
•research and development funding for collaboration arrangements;
•expenses related to non-clinical studies;
•expenses related to compliance with drug development regulatory requirements; and
•other allocated expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, depreciation of equipment, and other supplies.
We expense research and development costs as incurred. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods or services to be received in the future for use in research and development activities are recorded as prepaid expenses. The prepaid amounts are expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed. Upfront payments, research and development funding and milestone payments made to third parties in connection with licenses and research and development collaborations are expensed as incurred.
We anticipate that our research and development expenses will increase in the future as we continue the clinical and development activity for further indications of Livmarli, as well as expand the clinical and development activity associated with our volixibat pipeline. These increases will likely include increased costs related to hiring of additional development personnel and fees to outside clinical development organizations that support clinical trial activity.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling expenses consist of professional fees related to preparation and commercialization of Livmarli, finished goods warehousing costs, as well as salaries and related employee benefits for commercial employees, including stock-based compensation.
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance and other administrative functions. Other significant costs include facility-related costs, legal fees relating to intellectual property and corporate matters, professional fees for accounting and consulting services and insurance costs.
We anticipate that our selling, general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support our continued commercialization efforts of Livmarli in the United States and internationally as well as increased costs of operating as a global commercial stage biopharmaceutical public company. These increases will likely include
increased costs related to hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants to support further marketing, legal and accounting activities.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on our cash equivalents and investments.
Interest Expense
Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was related to the RIPA. Costs during the year consist primarily of costs associated with our liability and non-cash interest costs associated with the amortization of the related debt discount and deferred issuance costs. We impute interest expense associated with this liability using the effective interest rate method which is calculated based on the rate that would enable the debt to be repaid in full over the anticipated life of the arrangement.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
Change in fair value of derivative liability consists of the gain or loss from remeasurement of the compound derivative liability related to the revenue interest liability during the period.
Gain from Sale of Priority Review Voucher, Net
Gain from the sale of priority review voucher represents the sale of the PRV that was granted by the FDA in September 2021 with the approval of Livmarli for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS one year of age and older.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net consists of transactional currency exchange gain or loss.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results require our management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported, including the amount of assets, liabilities, expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Note 2, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities. Actual results may differ materially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Product Sales, Net
Revenues from product sales are recorded net of reserves established for applicable discounts and allowances that are offered within contracts with our customers, including amounts from payors and other third parties on behalf of our customers. The transaction price, which may include fixed or variable consideration reflecting the impact of discounts and allowances, may be subject to constraint and is included in the product sales price only to the extent that it is probable that a significant reversal of the amount of the cumulative revenue recognized will not occur in a future period. Estimates are reviewed and updated quarterly as additional information becomes known. Actual amounts may ultimately differ from our estimates. If actual results vary, we adjust these estimates, which could have an effect on earnings in the period of adjustment.
Government Rebates. We are obligated to pay rebates for mandated discounts under the Medicaid Drug Rebate Program. Our rebate calculations may require estimates, including estimates of customer mix, to determine which sales will be subject to rebates and the amount of such rebates. We update estimates and assumptions on a quarterly basis and record any necessary adjustments to revenue in the period identified. Estimated rebates are recorded as a reduction of revenue in the period the related sale is recognized. To date, actual government rebates have not differed materially from our estimates.
Revenue Interest Liability, Net
We impute interest expense associated with this liability using the effective interest rate method. The effective interest rate is calculated based on the rate that would enable the debt to be repaid in full over the anticipated life of the arrangement. The effective interest rate on the liability may vary during the term of the agreement depending on a number of factors, including the level of actual and forecasted product sales, net. We evaluate the interest rate quarterly based on actual product sales, net and on our current product sales, net forecasts utilizing the prospective method. A significant increase or decrease in product sales, net will materially impact the revenue interest liability, interest expense and the time period for repayment.
At December 31, 2021, the revenue interest liability is calculated using our current estimate of global forecasted net sales of Livmarli and impacted by a debt discount comprising the estimated value of a bifurcated derivative liability and issuance costs incurred.
The fair value of the derivative liability is valued using a “with-and-without” method. The “with-and-without” methodology involves valuing the whole instrument on an as-is basis and then valuing the instrument without the individual embedded derivative. The difference between the entire instrument with the embedded derivative compared to the instrument without the embedded derivative was the fair value of the derivative liability. The estimated probability and timing of underlying events triggering the exercisability of the derivative liability bifurcated from within the RIPA, forecasted cash flows and the discount rate are significant unobservable inputs used to determine the estimated fair value of the entire instrument with the embedded derivative.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We accrue and expense clinical trial activities performed by third parties based upon estimates of the proportion of work completed over the life of the individual study and patient enrollment rates in accordance with agreements established with clinical research organizations, clinical trial sites and other vendors associated with the clinical trials. We determine the estimates by reviewing contracts, vendor agreements and purchase orders and through discussions with internal clinical personnel and external service providers as to the progress or stage of completion of trials or services and the agreed-upon fee to be paid for such services.
We make estimates of accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from the estimate, we will adjust the accrual accordingly. Nonrefundable advance payments for goods and services, including fees for process development or manufacturing and distribution of clinical supplies that will be used in future research and development activities, are deferred and recognized as expense in the period that the related goods are consumed or services are performed.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Uncertain Tax Positions
We are subject to income taxes in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions. The evaluation of uncertain tax positions involves significant judgment in the interpretation and application of GAAP and complex tax laws. Although management believes our reserves are reasonable, no assurance can be given that the final tax outcome of these matters will not be different from that which is reflected in our reserves. Reserves are adjusted considering changing facts and circumstances, such as the closing of a tax examination or the refinement of an estimate. Resolution of these uncertainties in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Legal and Other Contingencies
We are subject to various legal proceedings and claims that arise in the ordinary course of business, the outcomes of which are inherently uncertain. We record a liability when it is probable that a loss has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated, the determination of which requires significant judgment. Resolution of legal matters in a manner inconsistent with management’s expectations could have a material impact on our financial condition and operating results.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
A description of recent accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows is disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Product Sales, Net
Product sales, net was $3.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of our commercial launch of Livmarli in the United States in September 2021.
License Revenue
License revenue was $16.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in license revenue was due to the satisfaction of certain performance obligations associated with the licenses granted under the license agreements with CANbridge and GC Pharma.
Cost of Sales
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cost of sales was $1.9 million, compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2020, and primarily consisted of amortization of capitalized intangible assets, royalties payable on net sales of Livmarli under licensing agreements and indirect overhead costs associated with the manufacturing and distribution of Livmarli. There were minimal inventory costs reflected in cost of sales as inventory related to current product sold were expensed as research and development costs prior to Livmarli approval in September 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
The following tables summarize the period-over-period changes in research and development expenses relating to our product candidates in development for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Research and development expenses were $131.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $49.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to:
•for Livmarli programs, a decrease of $6.9 million, primarily due to a decrease of $8.2 million manufacturing activities as a result of prior year completion of NDA registrational production offset by a net increase of $1.1 million clinical trial expenses due to increases for the Phase 2b EMBARK clinical trial in BA, the Phase 3 MARCH clinical trial in PFIC, an infant safety study and an expanded access program, which were partially offset by $2.2 million in research and development funding pursuant to our license agreements with CANbridge and GC Pharma which was recorded as a reduction of clinical trial expenses, and $0.1 million of regulatory fees and other general development expenses;
•for volixibat programs, an increase of $8.2 million, primarily due to an increase of $3.2 million in clinical trial expenses for PSC, PBC and ICP, $4.4 million related manufacturing activities supporting clinical supply, and $0.6 million in other general development expenses;
•for collaboration funding, an increase of $18.9 million, due to Vivet Collaboration Agreement program development funding. We terminated this agreement in December 2021 and we do not expect to incur additional funding;
•for stock-based compensation, an increase of $4.8 million, related to an increase in employee headcount as well as expense associated with performance-based restricted stock units that vested upon achievement of FDA approval of Livmarli;
•for personnel related expenses, an increase of $8.7 million, related to an increase in employee headcount to support our development pipeline;
•for license fees, an increase of $13.2 million, related to calendar year 2021 developmental milestone payments of $19.0 million consisting of $15.0 million associated with the acceptance of our NDA for
filing for Livmarli for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS one year of age and older, $4.0 million associated with the initiation of the Phase 2b VISTAS clinical trial in PSC and the Phase 2b EMBARK clinical trial in BA and a $4.2 million upfront fee in connection with our Vivet Collaboration Agreement compared to $10.0 million in calendar year 2020 upon acceptance of an MAA filing to the EMA for Livmarli for the treatment of PFIC2; and
•for other general expense, an increase of $3.0 million, primarily due to outside consulting expenses.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $59.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $36.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of $14.1 million in professional and consulting service expenses associated with commercial launch activities for Livmarli, $17.1 million of personnel and other compensation related expenses, including an increase of $5.7 million in stock-based compensation, reflecting an increase in the number of our administrative employees to support commercial launch activities for Livmarli and increased requirements of operating as a public company, such as regulatory compliance, an increase of $2.5 million in expenses primarily related to general legal and public relations activities, an increase of $1.5 million in consulting and professional services general corporate compliance and support, and an increase of $1.4 million in other general administrative expenses.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of $1.2 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was primarily due to lower interest earned on our cash equivalents and investment balances compared to the prior year largely a result of current economic conditions.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was $17.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase of $17.3 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase reflected a full year of accreted interest recognized on the revenue interest liability in connection with the RIPA.
Change in Fair Value of Derivative Liability
Change in fair value of derivative liability was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to zero for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was related to the remeasurement of the derivative liability at December 31, 2021 and reflects an increase in value of the put option associated with the RIPA primarily resulting from changes in forecast product sales, net.
Gain from Sale of Priority Review Voucher, Net
Gain from sale of the PRV, net of transaction costs, totaled $108.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. We did not sell a PRV in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
To date, we have funded our operations primarily from the sale of our equity securities, revenue interest financings and collaboration arrangements and to a lesser extent from product revenue from the sales of Livmarli.
We had $261.5 million of cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash equivalents and investments as of December 31, 2021, inclusive of $100.0 million restricted cash equivalents, compared to $231.8 million as of December 31, 2020. Since inception, we have incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $257.2 million.
In January 2020, we completed a follow-on public offering of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 2,400,000 shares of common stock at a price of $20.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $44.7 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses payable by us.
In August 2020, the SEC declared effective the Shelf Registration covering the sale of up to $300.0 million of our securities. Also, in August 2020, we entered into the Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink, pursuant to which we may elect to issue and sell, from time to time, shares of common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $75.0 million under the Shelf Registration through SVB Leerink acting as the sales agent and/or principal. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not sell any common stock pursuant to the Sales Agreement. As of December 31, 2020, we had sold 305,969 shares of common stock in an at-the-market offering pursuant to the Sales Agreement at a weighted-average price of $21.55 per share, resulting in gross proceeds of $6.6 million. The net proceeds after deducting sales commissions to SVB Leerink and other issuance expenses were approximately $6.3 million. The remaining capacity under the Sales Agreement is approximately $68.4 million as of December 31, 2021. In January and February 2022, we sold 992,389 shares of common stock in at-the-market offerings pursuant to the Sales Agreement at a weighted-average price of $18.04 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $17.4 million.
In December 2020, we completed an underwritten public offering of our common stock pursuant to the Shelf Registration. We sold 3,750,000 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $20.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of $70.0 million after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses. In addition, we granted the underwriters an option, exercisable for 30 days, to purchase up to 562,500 additional shares of our common stock at the public offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions. In January 2021, the underwriters exercised their option for 375,654 shares of our common stock resulting in net proceeds of $7.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts.
Pursuant to the RIPA, we received $115.0 million from the Purchasers consisting of an upfront cash payment of $50.0 million and an additional $65.0 million as a result of acceptance for filing of our NDA for Livmarli. We may also be entitled to receive up to an additional $50.0 million at the option of the Purchasers to finance in-license or other acquisitions. In return, the Purchasers have a right to receive Revenue Interests based on net product sales of Livmarli. We were entitled to receive an additional $35.0 million upon FDA approval of Livmarli, which we elected to forgo.
Pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement, entered into concurrently with our entry into the RIPA, we issued an aggregate of 509,164 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $19.64, resulting in net proceeds to us of $10.0 million.
In December 2021, we received net cash proceeds of $108.0 million, after deducting commission costs, related to the sale of the PRV which we received from the FDA in connection with the approval of Livmarli for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS one year of age and older. Of these proceeds, $100.0 million was placed in a segregated bank account as restricted cash, per the terms of the RIPA.
Based on our current and anticipated level of operations, we believe our unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and investments will be sufficient to fund current operations through at least the next 12 months from the filing of this Annual Report. Our unrestricted cash, cash equivalents and investments include money market funds, government agency securities, corporate debt and commercial paper. We maintain established guidelines relating to diversification and maturities of our investments to preserve principal and maintain liquidity.
We anticipate that we will continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future as we continue research efforts and the development of our product candidates, continue commercial activities for Livmarli and potentially expand into additional markets, hire additional staff, including clinical, scientific, operational, financial and management personnel and pay potential development and commercial milestones in connection with our license agreements.
Our primary use of cash is to fund operating expenses, which consist primarily of research and development expenditures, and to a lesser extent, selling, general and administrative expenditures, including commercial expenses. Cash used to fund operating expenses is impacted by the timing of when we pay these expenses, as reflected in the change in our outstanding accounts payable and accrued expenses.
Although Livmarli has been approved by the FDA for the treatment of cholestatic pruritus in patients with ALGS one year of age and older, and we expect product revenues to increase as we continue commercial activities, Livmarli may not achieve commercial success. Our principal sources of liquidity are cash from the sale of our equity securities, revenue interest financings and collaboration arrangements and, to a lesser extent, from product revenue from the sale of Livmarli. Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenue from sales of Livmarli, our current product candidates or any future product candidates, if approved, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, revenue interest purchase agreements and potential collaboration, license or development agreements. Our primary cash needs are for day-to-day operations, to pay our debt obligations under the RIPA and to fund our working capital requirements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect rights as a stockholder. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise additional funds through the RIPA, collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may be required to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and actions taken to slow its spread, the global credit and financial markets have experienced volatility and disruptions, including severely diminished liquidity and credit availability, declines in consumer confidence, declines in economic growth, increases in unemployment rates and uncertainty about economic stability. If the equity and credit markets deteriorate, it may make any necessary debt or equity financing more difficult, more costly and more dilutive. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
In addition to ongoing capital needs to fund our ongoing operations, the Company’s material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Pursuant to the RIPA, the Purchasers have a right to receive Revenue Interests based on net product sales of Livmarli. The amounts of quarterly Revenue Interest Payments will change each reporting period based upon the underlying net product sales of Livmarli and will initially be 9.75% of net product sales. Per the terms of the agreement, every $100.0 million of net sales generated, less than or equal to $350 million in an annual aggregate, would result in a repayment obligation of approximately $9.8 million. Additionally, every $100.0 million of net sales generated in excess of $350.0 million in an annual aggregate would result in a repayment obligation of approximately $2.0 million. In the future, as net sales thresholds set forth in the agreement are met and the repayment percentage rate changes, the amount of the obligation and timing of payment is likely to change. A significant increase or decrease in actual and forecast net sales will materially impact the revenue interest liability, interest expense and the time period for repayment.
Under the Shire License Agreement, as well as our other license and acquisition agreements, we have payment obligations that are contingent upon future events such as our achievement of specified development, regulatory and commercial milestones and are required to make royalty payments in connection with the sale of products developed under those agreements. The amount and timing of milestone obligations are unknown or uncertain as we are unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of achieving the milestone events. Additionally, the amount of royalty payments are based upon future product sales, which we are unable to predict with certainty. These potential obligations are further described in Note 7 to the consolidated financial statements.
We additionally have contractual obligations for our operating leases for our corporate headquarters. These obligations are further described in Note 9 to our consolidated financial statements.
We are party to certain license and collaboration agreements, which contain a number of contractual obligations. Those contractual obligations may entitle us to receive, or may obligate us to make, certain payments. The amount and timing of those payments are unknown or uncertain as we are unable to estimate the timing or likelihood of the events that will obligate those payments.
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business with clinical research organizations and clinical sites for the conduct of clinical trials, non-clinical research studies, professional consultants for expert advice and other vendors for clinical supply manufacturing or other services. These contracts generally provide for termination on notice, and therefore are cancelable contracts.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of the net cash flow activity for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $132.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, reflecting our net loss of $84.0 million partially offset by non-cash items of $42.2 million and a non-cash gain of $108.0 million from the sale of the PRV. Non-cash items consisted primarily of $23.1 million of stock-based compensation, $17.6 million of effective interest expense in connection with the RIPA, $0.7 million related to the change in fair value of the derivative liability, and $1.0 million of depreciation and amortization of our fixed assets and operating lease right-of use assets. Additionally, cash used in operating activities reflected changes in net operating assets of $17.0 million, consisting primarily of a $22.7 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities primarily associated with clinical, manufacturing and commercial planning activities and collaboration funding pursuant to the Vivet Collaboration Agreement and $5.0 million increase in prepaid expenses, inventory and other assets, partially offset by a $0.6 million decrease in our operating lease liability.
Net cash used in operating activities was $89.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, reflecting our net loss of $103.3 million partially offset by non-cash items of $13.6 million. Non-cash items consisted primarily of $12.6 million of stock-based compensation, $0.6 million of depreciation and amortization of our fixed assets and our operating lease right-of use assets and $0.3 million of interest expense in connection with the RIPA. Additionally, cash used in operating activities reflected changes in net operating assets of $0.6 million, consisting primarily of a $3.7 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other liabilities due to clinical and manufacturing activities, offset by a $1.8 million increase to prepaid expenses primarily associated with clinical and manufacturing activities, $1.0 million increase in long term assets primarily associated with advances to vendors associated with our clinical trials, and a $0.4 million decrease in our operating lease liability.
Net Cash Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash provided by investing activities was $48.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to $108.0 million of net proceeds received from the sale of the PRV, proceeds of $155.6 million from maturities of investments, and proceeds of $2.0 million from paydowns of investments partially offset by $198.0 million used in purchases of investments and $19.0 million in milestone payments triggered under license agreements.
Net cash provided by investing activities was $37.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to proceeds of $85.9 million from maturities of investments and proceeds of $26.8 million from paydowns of investments, partially offset by $74.6 million used in purchases of investments and $0.2 million used for purchases of property and equipment.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $73.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, due to net proceeds of $64.6 million pursuant to the RIPA, net proceeds of $6.9 million received from the underwriters when they exercised their option to purchase 375,654 shares of our common stock in January 2021 following the follow-on underwritten public offering of our common stock in December 2020, and proceeds of $2.1 million from
employee equity award exercises, partially offset by $0.1 million of revenue interest payments made under the RIPA.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $181.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, due to net proceeds of $44.7 million received from the completion of a follow-on public offering of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 2,400,000 shares of common stock at a price of $20.00 per share, net proceeds of $70.0 million received from completion of a public offering of our common stock pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 3,750,000 shares of common stock at $20.00 per share, net proceeds of $49.6 million pursuant to the RIPA, net proceeds of $10.0 million pursuant to the Stock Purchase Agreement entered into in connection with the RIPA for the sale of an aggregate of 509,164 shares of our common stock at a price per share of $19.64, net proceeds of $6.3 million from the sale of common stock under the Sales Agreement with SVB Leerink, pursuant to which we sold an aggregate of 305,969 shares of common stock at a weighted-average price of $21.55 per share, and proceeds of $0.8 million from the issuance of common stock pursuant to the exercise of outstanding options pursuant to our equity incentive plans. These proceeds were offset by the payment of $0.2 million for deferred offering costs associated with the Shelf Registration. The deferred offering costs are reflected as other assets on our consolidated balance sheet until such time as we complete sales of shares under the Shelf Registration.
JOBS Act
As an emerging growth company under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (“JOBS Act”), we can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This allows an emerging growth company to delay the adoption of certain accounting standards until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We have irrevocably elected not to avail ourselves of this exemption and, therefore, we will be subject to the same new or revised accounting standards as other public companies that are not emerging growth companies. We intend to rely on other exemptions provided by the JOBS Act, including without limitation, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended (“Sarbanes-Oxley Act”).
We will remain an emerging growth company until the earliest of (i) December 31, 2024, (ii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, (iii) the last day of the fiscal year in which we are deemed to be a “large accelerated filer” as defined in Rule 12b-2 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (“Exchange Act”), or (iv) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period.