Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
This Report includes “forward-looking statements” that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “expect,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “intend,” “estimate,” “seek” and variations and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 5, 2021, as a Cayman Islands exempted company and formed for the purpose of effectuating a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination, involving one or more businesses, which we refer to throughout this Quarterly Report as our “initial business combination”. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering and the private placement of the Private Placement Warrants (as defined below), the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with our initial business combination (pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements we may enter into following the consummation of the initial public offering or otherwise), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering described below and, after the initial public offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the initial public offering and will recognize other income and expense related to the change in fair value of warrant liabilities. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had net income of $4,386,819, which resulted from a gain on the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $5,296,250 and unrealized gain on investments held in the Trust Account in the amount of $30,739, partially offset by operation and formation costs of $533,130 and expensed offering costs of $407,040.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On June 25, 2021, we consummated an initial public offering of 15,000,000 Units (the “Units”) generating gross proceeds to the Company of $150,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we completed the private sale of 3,225,000 warrants to Coliseum Acquisition Sponsor LLC at a purchase price of $1.50 per warrant (the “Private Placement Warrants”), generating gross proceeds of $4,837,500.
For the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in operating activities was $1,259,092, which was due to non-cash adjustments to net income related to the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $5,296,250 and unrealized gain on investments held in the Trust Account of $30,739, and changes in operating assets and liabilities of $725,962, partially offset by net income of $4,386,819 and non-cash adjustment to net income related to expensed offering costs of $407,040.
For the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $150,000,000, which was the result of the amount of net proceeds from the initial public offering and the private placement sale of warrants being deposited to the Trust Account.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the period from February 5, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 of $152,061,037 was comprised of $147,750,000 from the issuance of Units in the initial public offering net of underwriter’s discount paid, $4,837,500 in proceeds from the issuance of warrants in a private placement to our Sponsor and proceeds from the issuance of a promissory note to our Sponsor of $187,401, offset by the payment of $526,463 for offering costs associated with the initial public offering and repayment of the outstanding balance on the promissory note to our Sponsor of $187,401.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $801,945 held outside the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following the initial public offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. In addition, we intend to target businesses larger than we could acquire with the net proceeds of our initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants and may as a result be required to seek additional financing to complete such proposed initial business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Contractual Obligations
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants) will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of its securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of a business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriter a 45-day option to purchase up to 2,250,000 additional Units to cover over-allotments at the initial public offering price, less the underwriting discounts and commissions, which the underwriter did not exercise and expired on August 6, 2021.
The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting fee of $0.20 per Unit, or $3,000,000 in the aggregate. In addition, $0.375 per Unit, or $5,625,000 in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriter for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriter from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of condensed financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the Private Placement Warrants and the redeemable warrants the (“Public Warrants”) that were included in units issued by the Company in its initial public offering (collectively, the “Warrants”) in accordance with Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815-40, Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (“ASC 815”), under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity classification and must be recorded as liabilities. As the Warrants meet the definition of a derivative as contemplated in ASC 815, the Warrants are measured at fair value at inception and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, Fair Value Measurement, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
All of the 15,000,000 shares of Class A ordinary shares sold as part of the Units in the initial public offering contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such Public Shares in connection with the Company’s liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the business combination and in connection with certain amendments to the Company’s Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require ordinary shares subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity. Therefore, all Class A ordinary shares has been classified outside of permanent equity.
The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Income Per Ordinary Share
Net income per ordinary share is computed by dividing net earnings by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. As the Public Shares are considered to be redeemable at fair value, and a redemption at fair value does not amount to a distribution different than other shareholders, Class A and Class B ordinary shares are presented as one class of shares in calculating net income per ordinary share. As a result, the calculated net income per ordinary share is the same for Class A and Class B shares of ordinary shares. The Company has not considered the effect of the Warrants sold in the initial public offering and private placement to purchase an aggregate of 8,225,000 shares in the calculation of diluted earnings per share, since the exercise of the Warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such Warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company early adopted ASU 2020-06 on February 5, 2021. Adoption of the ASU 2020-06 did not impact the Company’s financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our condensed financial statements.