ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements and should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the accompanying notes to our consolidated financial statements, which are included in this report.
Our company
We are a residential mortgage REIT with a focus on investing in a diversified risk-adjusted portfolio of residential mortgage-related assets in the U.S. mortgage market. Our objective is to provide attractive risk-adjusted returns to our stockholders over the long-term, primarily through dividends and capital appreciation.
Our investment activities primarily include acquiring and securitizing newly-originated residential mortgage loans within the growing non-agency segment of the housing market. We obtain our assets through Arc Home, our residential mortgage loan originator in which we own an approximate 44.6% interest, and through other third-party origination partners. We finance our acquired loans through various financing lines on a short-term basis and utilize Angelo Gordon’s proprietary securitization platform to secure long-term, non-recourse, non-mark-to-market financing as market conditions permit. Through our ownership in Arc Home, we also have exposure to mortgage banking activities. Arc Home is a multi-channel licensed mortgage originator and servicer primarily engaged in the business of originating and selling residential mortgage loans while retaining the mortgage servicing rights associated with the loans that it originates.
Our investment portfolio (which excludes our ownership in Arc Home) includes Residential Investments and Agency RMBS. Currently, our Residential Investments primarily consist of Non-QM Loans and GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans. We may also invest in other types of residential mortgage loans and other mortgage related assets.
We were incorporated in Maryland on March 1, 2011 and commenced operations in July 2011. We conduct our operations to qualify and be taxed as a REIT for U.S. federal income tax purposes. We also operate our business in a manner that permits us to maintain our exemption from registration under the Investment Company Act.
We are externally managed by our Manager, an affiliate of Angelo Gordon, pursuant to a management agreement. Our Manager has delegated to Angelo Gordon the overall responsibility of its day-to-day duties and obligations arising under the management agreement. Angelo Gordon is a leading privately-held alternative investment firm focusing on credit and real estate strategies.
Executive summary
During the year ended 2021, we focused on executing our mission to become a pure-play residential mortgage REIT by simplifying our portfolio through exiting all of our commercial investments, growing our portfolio of newly-originated non-agency loans, and increasing our pace of securitization activity in order to obtain long-term, non-recourse financing without mark-to-market margin calls. During 2021, we significantly increased the size of our investment portfolio and also completed five Non-QM securitizations through Angelo Gordon's proprietary securitization platform. Further, we focused on strengthening our capital base by entering into various financing facilities and raising capital in order to provide for continued growth and execution of our business strategy. Subsequent to year end, we continued to grow our portfolio of newly-originated non-agency loans and completed two additional securitizations. See below for detail on these activities during 2021 and subsequent to year end.
Investment Activity
•Purchased $2.5 billion of Non-QM Loans and GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans, $833.4 million of which were purchased from Arc Home;
•Participated in two rated securitizations alongside other Angelo Gordon funds in which Non-QM Loans with a fair value of $397.3 million were securitized. Certain senior tranches in the securitization were sold to third parties with us and private funds under the management of Angelo Gordon retaining the subordinate tranches;
◦$171.4 million were securitized through our unconsolidated ownership interest in MATT, in which we have an approximate 44.6% interest;
◦$225.9 million were securitized alongside one private fund under the management of Angelo Gordon and we contributed approximately 41% of the underlying loans;
•Sold Non-Agency RMBS for gross proceeds of $44.6 million;
•Exited remaining commercial investments;
◦Received gross proceeds of $148.4 million from the full repayment or sales of our Commercial Loans, inclusive of receiving all accrued or deferred interest outstanding; and
◦Sold our remaining CMBS portfolio for gross proceeds of $67.7 million.
Financing Activity
•Executed three rated securitizations in which Non-QM Loans with a fair value of $880.9 million were securitized, converting financing from recourse financing with mark-to-market margin calls to non-recourse financing without mark-to-market margin calls;
•Entered into certain financing arrangements with a maximum uncommitted borrowing capacity of $2.3 billion to finance non-agency mortgage loans, of which approximately $1.0 billion of the maximum uncommitted borrowing capacity remains available as of December 31, 2021; and
•Repaid $10 million secured note and accrued interest to our Manager upon maturity on March 31, 2021.
Capital Activity
•Completed a public offering issuing 8.1 million shares of common stock for net proceeds of approximately $80.0 million after deducting estimated offering expenses;
•Utilized ATM program to issue 1.0 million shares of common stock, raising net proceeds of approximately $13.1 million;
•Repurchased 0.3 million shares of common stock for $3.6 million;
•Entered into two privately negotiated exchange offers with existing holders of our preferred stock, issuing 1.4 million shares of common stock in exchange for 0.7 million shares of preferred stock; and
•Implemented a reverse stock split primarily to decrease volatility in trading for our common stock. The reverse stock split was effective following the close of business on July 22, 2021 (the "Effective Time"). At the Effective Time, every three issued and outstanding shares of our common stock was converted into one share of common stock. No fractional shares were issued in connection with the reverse stock split. Instead, each stockholder holding fractional shares was entitled to receive, in lieu of such fractional shares, cash in an amount determined based on the closing price of our common stock on the date of the Effective Time.
Subsequent Event Activity
•Purchased $519.0 million of non-agency mortgage loans, inclusive Non-QM Loans, GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans, and other qualifying mortgage loans. $233.0 million of these non-agency mortgage loans were purchased from Arc Home;
•Participated in our first rated securitization of GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans, in which loans with a fair value of $474.9 million were securitized;
•Participated in a rated securitization in which Non-QM Loans with a fair value of $301.7 million were securitized; and
•Announced that on February 18, 2022 our Board of Directors declared first quarter 2022 preferred stock dividends on our Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock in the amount of $0.51563, $0.50 and $0.50 per share, respectively. The dividends will be paid on March 17, 2022 to holders of record on February 28, 2022.
Presentation of investment, financing and hedging activities
In the "Investment activities," "Financing activities," "Hedging activities" and "Liquidity and capital resources" sections of this Part II, Item 7, we present information on our investment portfolio and the related financing arrangements inclusive of unconsolidated ownership interests in affiliates that are accounted for under GAAP using the equity method. Our investment portfolio excludes our investment in Arc Home.
Our investment portfolio and the related financing arrangements are presented along with a reconciliation to GAAP. This presentation of our investment portfolio is consistent with how our management team evaluates the business, and we believe this presentation, when considered with the GAAP presentation, provides supplemental information useful for investors in evaluating our investment portfolio and financial condition. See Note 2 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a discussion of investments in debt and equity of affiliates. See below for further terms used when describing our investment portfolio.
•Our "Investment portfolio" includes Agency RMBS and our credit portfolio.
•Our "Credit portfolio" or "credit investments" refer to our residential investments, inclusive of loans and credit securities.
◦"Loans" refer to our Non-QM Loans and Re/Non-Performing Loans, exclusive of retained tranches from unconsolidated securitizations, GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans, and Land Related Financing.
◦"Credit securities" refer to the retained tranches from unconsolidated securitizations of Non-QM Loans and Re/Non-Performing Loans.
•"Real estate securities" refers to our Agency RMBS and our credit securities.
•Our "GAAP Investment portfolio" includes Agency RMBS and our GAAP Credit portfolio.
•Our "GAAP Credit portfolio" refers to our credit portfolio exclusive of all investments held within affiliated entities.
For a reconciliation of our Investment portfolio to our GAAP Investment portfolio, see the GAAP Investment Portfolio Reconciliation Table below.
Special Note Regarding COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, the global pandemic associated with COVID-19 and the related economic conditions caused financial and mortgage-related asset markets to come under extreme duress, resulting in credit spread widening, a sharp decrease in interest rates and unprecedented illiquidity in repurchase agreement financing and MBS markets. The illiquidity was exacerbated by inadequate demand for MBS among primary dealers due to balance sheet constraints. Refer to the "Financing activities-Forbearance and Reinstatement Agreements" section below for further details related to the impact these economic conditions had on us.
Although market conditions improved during 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic is ongoing with new variants emerging despite growing vaccination rates. As a result, the full impact of COVID-19 (including the impact of any significant variants) on the mortgage REIT industry, credit markets, and, consequently, on our financial condition and results of operations for future periods remains uncertain. Future developments with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic, including among others, the emergence of new variants, the effectiveness and durability of current vaccines and government stimulus measures, could materially and adversely affect our business, operations, operating results, financial condition, liquidity, or capital levels.
Market Conditions
During 2021, the financial markets generally continued their recovery from the unprecedented dislocation caused by the COVID-19 pandemic and the resulting economic shutdown across much of the U.S. economy. In addition, mortgage and housing fundamentals continued to be favorable throughout the year. Delinquency and forbearance rates continued to decline and home prices reached another record high, rising 19.1% year-over-year. Limited availability of homes against fundamentally strong housing demand has been a driving factor for persistent home price appreciation. Other fundamentals continued to be favorable due to strong labor conditions and residual support from federal stimulus and payment accommodations, whose positive effects should persist into 2022. Some near-term headwinds could be created by the term-driven expiration of mortgage payment forbearance, resumption of foreclosure activity and sunset of other relief programs. However, we believe these risks should be offset by strong demand for labor, rising collateral prices and persistently tight new mortgage underwriting, the latter of which remains near 2014 levels, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association.
Non-Agency Loans and Securitizations: Non-QM securitization issuance topped $10 billion in a record quarter for the sector driven by strong origination volume as well as older vintages exiting their respective non-call windows Annual issuance also hit a record at approximately $25 billion, which was in line with the market’s expectations for 2020 prior to the COVID-19 pandemic disruption. Despite the amount of supply in the market during the fourth quarter, execution was orderly with spreads slightly widening. The prospect of raising rates did bring about concerns on extension risk among buyers of the most senior bonds, causing issuers to transition from pro-rata capital structures to sequential capital structures. Non-QM loan volumes remained elevated, with some originators doubling their monthly production over the course of 2021. During the third quarter, an increased amount of agency-eligible mortgage loans backed by investment properties and second homes were being issued into the Private Label Securities ("PLS") market as originators looked for liquidity away from the GSE’s as a result of amendments made to the Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement between Treasury and the GSEs earlier in the year. However these volumes declined during the fourth quarter as originators returned to delivering most, if not all, of their production back to the GSEs due to the September 14, 2020 suspension of certain amendments made to the Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement.
Agency RMBS: Despite the Federal Reserve’s commencement of tapering its monthly bond purchases during the fourth quarter, spreads on Agency RMBS modestly tightened. Valuations continued to be supported by bank demand, moderating supply, and strong carry due to persistent specialness of TBA dollar roll income. Payups on specified pools have also held steady as holders of TBA rotate into specified pools in anticipation of a shrinking Federal Reserve presence and subsequent weakening of TBA dollar roll income. Post year-end however, spreads have begun to widen in response to the Federal Reserve communicating its desire to begin winding down their balance sheet earlier than the market had anticipated.
Non-Agency RMBS: Spreads for securitized residential debt sectors were mixed during the fourth quarter. Most Credit Risk Transfer tranches generally widened 10-20 basis points while other new-issue senior tranches widened 10-15 basis points. Legacy mortgages were mostly unchanged during the quarter. Many of the same themes that have supported the sector persisted during the quarter, including favorable collateral fundamentals, record high home prices, demand for yield, and continued employment gains. Issuance of new RMBS rose approximately 14% to $55 billion in the fourth quarter, and for the full year 2021, RMBS issuance totaled $200 billion, surpassing the post-Great Financial Crisis peak of $137 billion in 2019, though some of this year’s issuance was delayed from 2020. The rise was mostly due to issuance of Jumbo 2.0 and Agency-eligible securities, which collectively comprised over half of the annual growth. Non-QM, Single-Family Rental, and Non-Performing Loans also saw meaningful annual increases in 2021.
In light of various market uncertainties, in particular the pervasive uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic for the U.S. and global economy, there can be no assurance that the trends and conditions described above will not change in a manner materially adverse to the mortgage REIT industry and/or our Company.
Results of Operations for the Fiscal Year 2021 and 2020
Our operating results can be affected by a number of factors and primarily depend on the size and composition of our investment portfolio, the level of our net interest income, the fair value of our assets and the supply of, and demand for, our investments in residential mortgages in the marketplace, among other things, which can be impacted by unanticipated credit events, such as defaults, liquidations or delinquencies, experienced by borrowers whose mortgage loans are included in our investment portfolio and other unanticipated events in our markets. Our primary source of net income or loss available to common stockholders is our net interest income, less our cost of hedging, which represents the difference between the interest earned on our investment portfolio and the costs of financing and economic hedges in place on our investment portfolio, as well as any income or losses from our equity investments in affiliates.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The table below presents certain information from our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Interest income
Interest income is calculated using the effective interest method for our GAAP investment portfolio and calculated based on the actual coupon rate.
Interest income decreased from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to the decrease in the weighted average yield of our GAAP investment portfolio which decreased by 1.00% from 4.61% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 3.61% for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was offset by a $0.4 billion increase in the weighted average cost of our GAAP investment portfolio from $1.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2.0 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest expense
Interest expense is calculated based on the actual financing rate and the outstanding financing balance of our GAAP investment portfolio.
Interest expense decreased from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to a decrease in the weighted average financing rate on our GAAP investment portfolio, inclusive of securitized debt, which decreased by 1.20% from 2.79% for the year ended December 31, 2020 to 1.59% for the year ended December 31, 2021. This was offset by an increase in the weighted average financing balance on our GAAP investment portfolio, inclusive of securitized debt, during the period which increased by $0.4 billion from $1.3 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.7 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net interest component of interest rate swaps
Net interest component of interest rate swaps represents the net interest income received or expense paid on our interest rate swaps.
We recognized losses on the net interest component of interest rate swaps for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with gains for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the difference in terms on the outstanding interest rate swaps during the periods. We also exited our entire interest rate swap portfolio in the first quarter of 2020 and began growing our interest rate swap portfolio in the fourth quarter of 2020 and throughout 2021 in connection with the growth of our GAAP investment portfolio. As of the December 31, 2021, we held an interest rate swap portfolio with a notional value of $888.5 million, a weighted average receive-variable rate of 0.15%, and a weighted average pay-fix rate of 0.85%.
Net realized gain/(loss)
The following table presents a summary of Net realized gain/(loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Certain realized losses on real estate securities during the year ended December 31, 2020 were a result of financing counterparty seizures. There were no financing counterparty seizures during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net unrealized gain/(loss)
The following table presents a summary of Net unrealized gain/(loss) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
Management fee to affiliate
Our management fee is based upon a percentage of our Stockholders’ Equity. See the "Contractual obligations" section of this Part II, Item 7 for further detail on the calculation of our management fee and for the definition of Stockholders’ Equity. Management fees decreased from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily due to a decrease in our Stockholders’ Equity as calculated pursuant to our Management Agreement.
Other operating expenses
Other operating expenses is primarily comprised of professional fees, directors’ and officers’ ("D&O") insurance, directors’ fees, and certain non-investment related and investment related expenses reimbursable to the Manager. We are required to reimburse our Manager or its affiliates for operating expenses incurred by our Manager or its affiliates on our behalf, including certain compensation expenses and other expenses relating to legal, accounting, due diligence, and other services. Refer to the "Contractual obligations" section below for more detail on certain expenses reimbursable to the Manager. The following table presents a summary of Other operating expenses broken out between non-investment related expenses and investment related expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Manager agreed to waive its right to receive expense reimbursements of $0.8 million.
Transaction related expenses
Transaction related expenses are expenses associated with securitizing residential mortgage loans as well as certain other transaction and performance related fees associated with assets we invest in. These fees increased from the year ended December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 primarily as a result of the various securitizations of Non-QM Loans transacted in 2021. Additionally, in the period ended March 31, 2020, the Company reversed previously accrued deal related performance fees due to a decline in the price of the related assets and the seizure of such assets by financing counterparties.
Restructuring related expenses
Restructuring related expenses relate to legal and consulting fees primarily incurred in connection with executing the Forbearance Agreement and subsequent Reinstatement Agreement during 2020. Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for more information regarding the Forbearance Agreement and the Reinstatement Agreement.
Excise tax
Excise tax represents a four percent tax on the required amount of any ordinary income and net capital gains not distributed during the year. The expense is calculated in accordance with applicable tax regulations.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we reversed previously accrued excise taxes primarily as a result of losses associated with COVID-19. We did not record any excise taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Servicing fees
We incur servicing fee expenses in connection with the servicing of our Residential mortgage loans. The weighted average cost of our GAAP Residential mortgage loan portfolio increased by $0.6 billion from $0.6 billion for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $1.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase was primarily the result of purchases of Non-QM
Loans and GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans in 2021. As a result, servicing fees increased from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021.
Equity in earnings/(loss) from affiliates
Equity in earnings/(loss) from affiliates represents our share of earnings and profits of investments held within affiliated entities. Substantially all of these investments are comprised of real estate securities, loans, and our investment in AG Arc which holds our investment in Arc Home. The below table reconciles the net income/(loss) to the "Equity in earnings/(loss) from affiliates" line item on our consolidated statements of operations (in thousands):
(1)The earnings within MATT for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily the result of mark-to-market gains on its Non-QM Loan portfolio and net interest income, offset by expenses. The losses generated within MATT for the year ended December 31, 2020 were primarily the result of mark-to-market losses on its Non-QM Loan portfolio and related financing, offset by net interest income.
(2)The earnings/(loss) at AG Arc during the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily the result of $5.4 million of net income related to Arc Home's lending and servicing operations, offset by $(2.3) million related to changes in the fair value of the MSR portfolio held by Arc Home. Earnings/(loss) recognized by AG Arc do not include our portion of gains recorded by Arc Home in connection with the sale of residential mortgage loans to us. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we eliminated $5.3 million of intra-entity profits recognized by Arc Home and also decreased the cost basis of the underlying loans we purchased by the same amount.
(3)The earnings for the year ended December 31, 2021 were primarily the result of accelerated accretion as a result of paydowns on certain Re/Non-Performing Loans held at discounts.
Gain on Exchange Offers, net
We completed two privately negotiated exchange offers during the year ended December 31, 2021. As a result of the exchange offers, we exchanged 153,325 shares of our 8.25% Series A Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock ("Series A Preferred Stock"), 437,087 shares of our 8.00% Series B Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock ("Series B Preferred Stock"), and 154,383 shares of our 8.000% Series C Fixed-to-Floating Rate Cumulative Redeemable Preferred Stock ("Series C Preferred Stock") (collectively, "preferred stock") for a total of 1,367,264 shares of common stock. We recognized a gain of $0.5 million in connection with the offers.
We completed a public exchange offer and two privately negotiated exchange offers during the year ended December 31, 2020. As a result of the exchange offers, we exchanged a total of 253,482 shares of our Series A Preferred Stock, 435,272 shares of our Series B Preferred Stock, and 716,822 shares of our Series C Preferred Stock for a total of 1,698,645 shares of common stock and cash consideration of $8.0 million. We recognized a gain of $10.6 million in connection with the exchange offers.
Book value and Adjusted book value per share
On July 12, 2021, we announced a one-for-three reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock. The reverse stock split was effected following the close of business on July 22, 2021. All per share amounts and common shares outstanding for all periods presented have been adjusted on a retroactive basis to reflect the one-for-three reverse stock split.
Per share amounts for book value are calculated using all outstanding common shares in accordance with GAAP, including all vested shares issued to our Manager and our independent directors under our equity incentive plans as of quarter-end. As of December 31, 2021, the net proceeds on our preferred stock were $220.5 million. As of December 31, 2021, the liquidation preference for our issued and outstanding preferred stock was $228.0 million.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our book value per common share calculated using stockholders’ equity less net proceeds on our preferred stock as the numerator was $14.64 and $12.40, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our adjusted book value per common share calculated using stockholders’ equity less the liquidation preference of our preferred stock as the numerator was $14.32 and $11.81, respectively.
Net interest margin and leverage ratio
Net interest margin and leverage ratio are metrics that management believes should be considered when evaluating the performance of our investment portfolio.
GAAP net interest margin and non-GAAP net interest margin, a non-GAAP financial measure, are calculated by subtracting the weighted average cost of funds from the weighted average yield for our GAAP investment portfolio and our investment portfolio, respectively, both of which exclude cash held by us. The weighted average yield on our investment portfolio represents an effective interest rate, which utilizes all estimates of future cash flows and adjusts for actual prepayment and cash flow activity as of quarter-end. The calculation of weighted average yield is weighted on fair value at quarter-end. The weighted average cost of funds is the sum of the weighted average funding costs on total financing arrangements outstanding at quarter-end, including all non-recourse financing arrangements, and our weighted average hedging cost, which is the weighted average of the net pay rate on our interest rate swaps. GAAP and non-GAAP cost of funds are weighted by the outstanding financing arrangements on our GAAP investment portfolio and our investment portfolio, respectively, and the fair value of securitized debt at quarter-end.
Our leverage ratio is determined by our portfolio mix as well as many additional factors, including the liquidity of our portfolio, the availability and price of our financing, the available capacity to finance our assets, and anticipated regulatory developments. See the "Financing activities" section below for more detail on our leverage ratio.
The table below sets forth the net interest margin and leverage ratio on our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and a reconciliation to the net interest margin and leverage ratio on our GAAP investment portfolio:
(a)Includes cost of non-recourse financing arrangements.
(b)The leverage ratio on our GAAP Investment Portfolio represents GAAP leverage. The leverage ratio on our investment portfolio represents Economic Leverage as defined below in the "Financing Activities" section.
(c)Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for an aggregate breakout of leverage.
Core Earnings
One of our objectives is to generate net income from net interest margin on the portfolio, and management uses Core Earnings, as one of several metrics, to help measure our performance against this objective. Management believes that this non-GAAP measure, when considered with our GAAP financial statements, provides supplemental information useful for investors to help evaluate our financial performance. However, management also believes that our definition of Core Earnings has important limitations as it does not include certain earnings or losses our management team considers in evaluating our financial performance. Our presentation of Core Earnings may not be comparable to similarly-titled measures of other companies, who may use different calculations. This non-GAAP measure should not be considered a substitute for, or superior to, Net Income/(loss) available to common stockholders or Net income/(loss) per diluted common share calculated in accordance with GAAP. Our GAAP financial results and the reconciliations from these results should be carefully evaluated.
We define Core Earnings, a non-GAAP financial measure, as Net Income/(loss) available to common stockholders excluding (i) (a) unrealized gains/(losses) on real estate securities, loans, derivatives and other investments, inclusive of our investment in
AG Arc, and (b) net realized gains/(losses) on the sale or termination of such instruments, (ii) any transaction related expenses incurred in connection with the acquisition or disposition of our investments, (iii) accrued deal-related performance fees payable to Arc Home and third party operators to the extent the primary component of the accrual relates to items that are excluded from Core Earnings, such as unrealized and realized gains/(losses), (iv) realized and unrealized changes in the fair value of Arc Home's net mortgage servicing rights and the derivatives intended to offset changes in the fair value of those net mortgage servicing rights, (v) deferred taxes recognized at our taxable REIT subsidiaries, if any, (vi) any foreign currency gain/(loss) relating to monetary assets and liabilities, (vii) income from discontinued operations, and (viii) any gains/(losses) associated with exchange transactions on our common and preferred stock. Items (i) through (viii) above include any amount related to those items held in affiliated entities. Management considers the transaction related expenses referenced in (ii) above to be similar to realized losses incurred at the acquisition or disposition of an asset and does not view them as being part of its core operations. Management views the exclusion described in (iv) above to be consistent with how it calculates Core Earnings on the remainder of its portfolio. Management excludes all deferred taxes because it believes deferred taxes are not representative of current operations. Core Earnings include the net interest income and other income earned on our investments on a yield adjusted basis, including TBA dollar roll income/(loss) or any other investment activity that may earn or pay net interest or its economic equivalent.
A reconciliation of "Net Income/(loss) available to common stockholders" to Core Earnings for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is set forth below (in thousands, except per share data):
(1)For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, total transaction related expenses and deal related performance fees included $7.3 million and $(1.2 million), respectively, recorded within the "Transaction related expenses" line item and $1.2 million and $0.6 million, respectively, recorded within the "Interest expense" line item, which relates to the amortization of deferred financing costs.
(2)For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, $2.5 million or $0.15 per share and $(3.9 million) or $(0.33) per share, respectively, of realized and unrealized changes in the fair value of Arc Home's net mortgage servicing rights and corresponding derivatives were excluded from Core Earnings per diluted share.
(3)Core income or loss recognized by AG Arc does not include our portion of gains recorded by Arc Home in connection with the sale of residential mortgage loans to us. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we eliminated $5.3 million of intra-entity profits recognized by Arc Home and also decreased the cost basis of the underlying loans we purchased by the same amount. We did not eliminate any intra-entity profits for the year ended December 31, 2020. Refer to Note 2 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information on this accounting policy.
(4)All per share amounts for all periods presented have been adjusted to reflect the one-for-three reverse stock split.
Investment activities
We aim to allocate capital to investment opportunities with attractive risk/return profiles in our target asset classes. Our investment activities primarily include acquiring and securitizing newly-originated residential mortgage loans. We finance our acquired loans through various financing lines on a short-term basis and securitize the loans to obtain long-term, non-recourse, non-mark-to-market financing as market conditions permit. We are also currently investing in 30 Year Fixed Rate Agency RMBS to utilize excess liquidity. Our investment and capital allocation decisions depend on prevailing market conditions and compliance with Investment Company Act and REIT tests, among other factors, and may change over time in response to opportunities available in different economic and capital market environments. As a result, in reacting to market conditions and
taking into account a variety of other factors, including liquidity, duration, and interest rate expectations, the mix of our assets changes over time as we opportunistically deploy capital. We actively evaluate our investments based on factors including, among others, the characteristics of the underlying collateral, geography, expected return, expected future prepayment trends, supply of and demand for our investments, costs of financing, costs of hedging, expected future interest rate volatility, and the overall shape of the U.S. Treasury and interest rate swap yield curves.
We allocate our equity by investment type using the fair value of our investment portfolio, less any associated leverage, inclusive of any long TBA position (at cost). We allocate all non-investment portfolio related assets and liabilities to our investment portfolio based on the characteristics of such assets and liabilities in order to sum to stockholders' equity per the consolidated balance sheets. Our equity allocation method is a non-GAAP methodology and may not be comparable to the similarly titled measure or concepts of other companies, who may use different calculations and allocation methodologies.
The following table presents a summary of the allocated equity of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ in thousands):
The following table presents a summary of our investment portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and a reconciliation to our GAAP Investment Portfolio ($ in thousands):
(a)The leverage ratio on our investment portfolio represents Economic Leverage as defined below in the "Financing Activities" section and is calculated by dividing each investment type's total recourse financing arrangements by its allocated equity (described in the chart below). Cash posted as collateral has been allocated pro-rata by each respective asset class's Economic Leverage amount. The Economic Leverage Ratio excludes any fully non-recourse financing arrangements and includes any net receivables or payables on TBAs. The leverage ratio on our GAAP Investment Portfolio represents GAAP leverage.
(b)Certain Re/Non-Performing Loans held in securitized form are presented net of non-recourse securitized debt.
(c)Refer to the "Financing activities" section below for an aggregate breakout of leverage.
The following table presents a reconciliation of our Investment Portfolio to our GAAP Investment Portfolio as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 ($ in thousands):
(1)Refer to Note 10 to the "Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements" for more detail on what is included in our "Investments in debt and equity of affiliates" line item on our consolidated balance sheets. Our assets held through Investments in debt and equity of affiliates are included in the "MATT Non-QM Loans," "Re/Non-Performing Loans," "Land Related Financing," and "Excess MSR" line items above.
(2)Equity residuals with a zero coupon rate are excluded from this calculation.
(3)Weighted average life is based on projected life. Typically, actual maturities are shorter than stated contractual maturities. Maturities are affected by the contractual lives of the underlying mortgages, periodic payments of principal, and prepayments of principal.
(4)Prior to 2021, we acquired Non-QM Loans through our equity method investment in MATT. This line item represents direct purchases of Non-QM Loans, which began in Q1 2021, and retained tranches of certain Non-QM securitizations.
(5)As of December 31, 2021, this line item primarily includes retained tranches from past securitizations.
(6)As of December 31, 2021, this line item includes Non-QM interest-only bonds.
Credit Investments
The following table presents the fair value of the securities and loans in our credit portfolio and a reconciliation to our GAAP credit portfolio (in thousands):
(1)Includes Non-QM Loans, GSE Non-Owner Occupied Loans, Re/Non-Performing Loans, and Land Related Financing not held in securitized form.
(2)Includes Non-QM Loans and Re/Non-Performing Loans held in securitized form, as well as Prime, Alt-A/Subprime, Credit Risk Transfer, Non-U.S RMBS, and Interest-Only Securities.
(3)Includes Conduit, Single-Asset/Single-Borrower, Freddie Mac K-Series, and Interest-Only investments.
Residential loans
The following table presents information regarding credit quality for certain categories within our Residential loan portfolio ($ in thousands):
(1)Weighted average and aging data excludes residual positions where we consolidate a securitization and the positions are recorded on our balance sheet as Re/Non-Performing Loans. There may be limited data available regarding the underlying collateral of the residual positions.
(2)Weighted average and aging data excludes Land Related Financing.
(3)Weighted average current FICO excludes borrowers where FICO scores were not available.
See Note 3 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a breakout of geographic concentration of credit risk within loans we include in the "Residential mortgage loans, at fair value" and "Securitized residential mortgage loans, at fair value" line items on our consolidated balance sheets.
Credit securities
The following table presents the fair value of our credit securities portfolio by credit rating as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)Represents the minimum rating for rated assets of S&P, Moody and Fitch credit ratings, stated in terms of the S&P equivalent.
(2)Certain Re/Non-Performing Loans held in securitized form are presented net of non-recourse securitized debt.
The following table presents the geographic concentration of the underlying collateral for our Non-Agency RMBS portfolio ($ in thousands):
(1)As of December 31, 2020 Non-Agency RMBS fair value includes $3.2 million of investments where there was no data regarding the underlying collateral. These positions were excluded from the percent calculation.
Agency RMBS
The following table presents the fair value ($ in thousands) and the Constant Prepayment Rate ("CPR") experienced on our GAAP Agency RMBS portfolio for the periods presented:
(1)Represents the weighted average monthly CPRs published during the period for our in-place portfolio.
Investments in debt and equity of affiliates
The below table details our investments in debt and equity of affiliates as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 (in thousands):
(1)As of December 31, 2021, MATT primarily holds retained tranches from past securitizations which continue to reduce in size due to ongoing principal repayments and we do not expect to acquire additional investments within this equity method investment.
(2)Certain Re/Non-Performing Loans held in securitized form are presented net of non-recourse securitized debt.
(3)Land Related Financing continues to reduce in size due to ongoing principal repayments and we do not expect to originate new loans within this equity method investment.
Financing activities
We use leverage to finance the purchase of our investment portfolio. Our leverage has primarily been in the form of repurchase agreements, revolving facilities, and securitized debt. Repurchase agreements involve the sale and a simultaneous agreement to repurchase the transferred assets or similar assets at a future date and typically have a term 30 to 90 days. The amount borrowed generally is equal to the fair value of the assets pledged less an agreed-upon discount, referred to as a "haircut." The size of the haircut reflects the perceived risk associated with the pledged asset. Haircuts may change as our financing arrangements mature or roll and are sensitive to governmental regulations. Interest rates on borrowings are fixed based on prevailing rates corresponding to the terms of the borrowings, and interest is paid at the termination of the borrowing at which time we may enter into a new borrowing arrangement at prevailing market rates with the same counterparty or repay that counterparty and negotiate financing with a different counterparty. We have also used revolving facilities, which are typically longer term in nature than repurchase agreements, to finance loans. Interest rates on these facilities are based on prevailing rates corresponding to the terms of the borrowings, and interest is paid on a monthly basis. Repurchase agreements and revolving facilities, which we refer to as our financing arrangements, are generally mark-to-market with respect to margin calls and recourse to us. We had outstanding financing arrangements with five counterparties as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Our financing arrangements generally include customary representations, warranties, and covenants, but may also contain more restrictive supplemental terms and conditions. Although specific to each financing arrangement, typical supplemental terms include requirements of minimum equity and liquidity, leverage ratios, and performance triggers. In addition, some of the financing arrangements contain cross default features, whereby default under an agreement with one lender simultaneously causes default under agreements with other lenders. To the extent that we fail to comply with the covenants contained in these financing arrangements or is otherwise found to be in default under the terms of such agreements, the counterparty has the right to accelerate amounts due under the associated agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we are in compliance with all of our financial covenants.
We also use securitized debt to finance our loan portfolio. Securitized debt is generally non-mark-to-market with respect to margins calls and non-recourse to us.
Forbearance and Reinstatement Agreements
In connection with the market disruption created by the COVID-19 pandemic, in March 2020, we received notifications of alleged events of default and deficiency notices from several of our financing counterparties. We engaged in discussions with our financing counterparties and, as a result, entered into a series of forbearance agreements (collectively, the "Forbearance Agreement") with certain of our financing counterparties (the "Participating Counterparties") pursuant to which each Participating Counterparty agreed to forbear from exercising its rights and remedies with respect to events of default and any and all other defaults under the applicable financing arrangement (each, a "Bilateral Agreement") for the period ending June 15, 2020.
On June 10, 2020, we and the Participating Counterparties entered into a reinstatement agreement (the "Reinstatement Agreement"), pursuant to which the Forbearance Agreement was terminated and each Participating Counterparty permanently waived all existing and prior events of default under the applicable Bilateral Agreements. Pursuant to the Reinstatement Agreement, the Bilateral Agreements were reinstated with certain amendments to reflect current market terms (i.e., increased haircuts and higher coupons), updated financial covenants, and various reporting requirements from us to the Participating Counterparties, releases, certain netting obligations and cross-default provisions. As a result of the Reinstatement Agreement, default interest on our outstanding borrowings under the Bilateral Agreements ceased to accrue as of June 10, 2020, all cash margin was applied to outstanding balances owed by us, and principal and interest payments on the underlying collateral were permitted to flow to and be used by us, just as it was prior to the Forbearance Agreements. In addition, pursuant to the terms of the Reinstatement Agreement, the security interests granted to Participating Counterparties as additional collateral under the Forbearance Agreement have been terminated and released. We also agreed to pay the reasonable fees and out-of-pocket expenses of counsel and other professional advisors for the Participating Counterparties and the collateral agent.
Concurrently, on June 10, 2020, we entered a separate reinstatement agreement with one of our financing counterparties on substantially the same terms as those set forth in the Reinstatement Agreement.
Refer to Note 12 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information on deficiencies that are now settled.
Recourse and non-recourse financing
The below table provides detail on the breakout between recourse and non-recourse financing as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands):
(1)See the "Contractual obligations-Secured debt" section below for more detail on Secured debt from our Manager.
(2)On January 29, 2021, we and private funds under the management of Angelo Gordon entered into an amendment with respect to our Restructured Financing Arrangement in MATT. The amendment converted the existing financing to a mark-to-market facility with respect to margin calls that is recourse to us and the private funds managed by Angelo Gordon that invest in MATT up to our and each funds' allocation of the $50.0 million commitment to MATH, which is further described in the "Contractual Obligations-MATT Financing Arrangement Restructuring" section below and Note 12 to the "Notes of the Consolidated Financial Statements."
See Note 6 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for a breakout of the "Financing arrangements" line item on our consolidated balance sheets. See Note 2 and Note 3 to the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more detail on securitized debt and our consolidated variable interest entities.
Leverage
We define GAAP leverage as the sum of (1) our GAAP financing arrangements, net of any restricted cash posted on such financing arrangements, (2) the amount payable on purchases that have not yet settled less the financing remaining on sales that have not yet settled, and (3) securitized debt, at fair value. We define Economic Leverage, a non-GAAP metric, as the sum of: (i) our GAAP leverage, exclusive of any fully non-recourse financing arrangements, (ii) financing arrangements held through affiliated entities, net of any restricted cash posted on such financing arrangements, exclusive of any financing utilized through AG Arc, any adjustment related to unsettled trades as described in (2) in the previous sentence, and any non-recourse financing arrangements and (iii) our net TBA position (at cost), if any.
The calculations in the tables below divide GAAP leverage and Economic Leverage by our GAAP stockholders’ equity to derive our leverage ratios. The following tables present a reconciliation of our Economic Leverage ratio to GAAP Leverage ($ in thousands):
(1) Non-recourse financing arrangements include securitized debt and other non-recourse financing held within MATT.
(1) Non-recourse financing arrangements include securitized debt and other non-recourse financing held within MATT.
Hedging activities
Subject to maintaining our qualification as a REIT and our Investment Company Act exemption, to the extent leverage is deployed, we may utilize derivative instruments in an effort to hedge the interest rate risk associated with the financing of our portfolio. Specifically, we may seek to hedge our exposure to potential interest rate mismatches between the interest we earn on our investments and our borrowing costs caused by fluctuations in short-term interest rates. We may utilize interest rate swaps, swaption agreements, and other financial instruments such as short positions in to-be-announced securities. In utilizing leverage and interest rate derivatives, our objectives are to improve risk-adjusted returns and, where possible, to lock in, on a long-term basis, a spread between the yield on our assets and the costs of our financing and hedging. Derivatives have not been designated as hedging instruments for GAAP. See Note 7 in the "Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements" for more information.
Dividends
Federal income tax law generally requires that a REIT distribute annually at least 90% of its REIT ordinary taxable income, without regard to the deduction for dividends paid and excluding net capital gains and that it pay tax at regular corporate rates to the extent that it annually distributes less than 100% of its net taxable income. Before we pay any dividend, whether for U.S. federal income tax purposes or otherwise, we must first meet both our operating requirements and debt service on our financing arrangements and other debt payable. If our cash available for distribution is less than our net taxable income, we could be required to sell assets or borrow funds to make required cash distributions or we may make a portion of the required distribution in the form of a taxable stock distribution or distribution of debt securities.
As described above, our distribution requirements are based on taxable income rather than GAAP net income. Differences between taxable income and GAAP net income include (i) unrealized gains and losses associated with investment and derivative portfolios which are marked-to-market in current income for GAAP purposes, but excluded from taxable income
until realized or settled, (ii) temporary differences related to amortization of premiums and discounts paid on investments, (iii) the timing and amount of deductions related to stock-based compensation, (iv) temporary differences related to the recognition of realized gains and losses on sold investments and certain terminated derivatives, (v) taxes, (vi) methods of depreciation and (vii) differences between GAAP income or losses in our TRSs’ and taxable income resulting from dividend distributions to the REIT from our TRSs. Undistributed taxable income is based on current estimates and is not finalized until we file our annual tax return for that tax year, typically in October of the following year. We did not have any undistributed taxable income as of December 31, 2021.
On March 27, 2020, we announced that our Board of Directors approved a suspension of our quarterly dividends on our Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock, beginning with the preferred dividend that would have been declared in May 2020, as well as a suspension of the quarterly dividend on the common stock, beginning with the dividend that normally would have been declared in March 2020, in order to conserve capital and improve our liquidity position during the market volatility due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Under the terms of the Articles Supplementary governing our series of preferred stock, we cannot pay cash dividends with respect to our common stock if dividends on our preferred stock are in arrears.
On December 17, 2020, we paid our Series A Preferred Stock, Series B Preferred Stock, and Series C Preferred Stock dividends that were in arrears as well as the full dividends payable on the preferred stock for the fourth quarter of 2020 in the amount of $1.54689, $1.50 and $1.50 per share, respectively. On December 22, 2020, our Board of Directors declared a dividend of $0.09 per common share for the fourth quarter 2020 which was paid on January 29, 2021 to shareholders of record at the close of business on December 31, 2020. During 2021, we declared our preferred and common dividends in the ordinary course of business.
On July 12, 2021, we announced a one-for-three reverse stock split of our outstanding shares of common stock. The reverse stock split was effected following the close of business on July 22, 2021. All per share amounts and common shares outstanding for all periods presented have been adjusted on a retroactive basis to reflect the one-for-three reverse stock split.
The following tables detail our common stock dividends declared during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The following tables detail our preferred stock dividends declared during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Liquidity and capital resources
Our liquidity determines our ability to meet our cash obligations, including distributions to our stockholders, payment of our expenses, financing our investments and satisfying other general business needs.
Our principal sources of cash as of December 31, 2021 consisted of borrowings under financing arrangements, principal and interest payments we receive on our investment portfolio, cash generated from our operating results, and proceeds from capital market transactions. We typically use cash to repay principal and interest on our financing arrangements, to purchase loans, real estate securities, and other real estate related assets, to make dividend payments on our capital stock, and to fund our operations. At December 31, 2021, we had $137.3 million of liquidity, which consisted of $68.1 million of cash and $69.2 million of unencumbered assets available to support our liquidity needs. At January 31, 2022, we had $134.3 million of liquidity, which consisted of $67.8 million of cash and $66.5 million of unencumbered assets available to support our liquidity needs. Refer to the "Contractual obligations" section of this Part II, Item 7 for additional obligations that could impact our liquidity.
Margin requirements
The fair value of our loans and real estate securities fluctuate according to market conditions. When the fair value of the assets pledged as collateral to secure a financing arrangement decreases to the point where the difference between the collateral fair value and the financing arrangement amount is less than the haircut, our lenders may issue a "margin call," which requires us to post additional collateral to the lender in the form of additional assets or cash. Under our repurchase facilities, our lenders have full discretion to determine the fair value of the securities we pledge to them. Our lenders typically value assets based on recent transactions in the market. Lenders also issue margin calls as the published current principal balance factors change on the pool of mortgages underlying the securities pledged as collateral when scheduled and unscheduled paydowns are announced monthly. We experience margin calls in the ordinary course of our business. In seeking to manage effectively the margin requirements established by our lenders, we maintain a position of cash and, when owned, unpledged Agency RMBS. We refer to this position as our "liquidity." The level of liquidity we have available to meet margin calls is directly affected by our leverage levels, our haircuts and the price changes on our assets. Typically, if interest rates increase or if credit spreads widen, then the prices of our collateral (and our unpledged assets that constitute our liquidity) will decline, we will experience margin calls, and we will need to use our liquidity to meet the margin calls. There can be no assurance that we will maintain sufficient levels of liquidity to meet any margin calls. If our haircuts increase, our liquidity will proportionately decrease. In addition, if we increase our borrowings, our liquidity will decrease by the amount of additional haircut on the increased level of indebtedness. We intend to maintain a level of liquidity in relation to our assets that enables us to meet reasonably anticipated margin calls but that also allows us to be substantially invested in the residential mortgage market. We may misjudge the appropriate amount of our liquidity by maintaining excessive liquidity, which would lower our investment returns, or by maintaining insufficient liquidity, which may force us to liquidate assets into potentially unfavorable market conditions and harm our results of operations and financial condition. Further, an unexpected rise in interest rates and a corresponding fall in the fair value of our securities may also force us to liquidate assets under difficult market conditions, thereby harming our results of operations and financial condition, in an effort to maintain sufficient liquidity to meet increased margin calls.
Similar to the margin calls that we receive on our borrowing agreements, we may also receive margin calls on our derivative instruments when their fair value declines. This typically occurs when prevailing market rates change adversely, with the severity of the change also dependent on the terms of the derivatives involved. We may also receive margin calls on our derivatives based on the implied volatility of interest rates. Our posting of collateral with our counterparties can be done in cash or securities, and is generally bilateral, which means that if the fair value of our interest rate hedges increases, our counterparty will be required to post collateral with us. Refer to the "Liquidity risk - derivatives" section of