Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation.
Forward Looking Statements
The following discussion and analysis of the consolidated financial condition and consolidated results of operations of the Company is for the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013 and should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements, and the notes to those consolidated financial statements that are included elsewhere in this report. Our discussion includes forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as our plans, objectives, expectations and intentions. Actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors. We use words such as “anticipate,” “estimate,” “plan,” “project,” “continuing,” “ongoing,” “expect,” “believe,” “intend,” “may,” “will,” “should,” “could,” and similar expressions to identify forward-looking statements. As used in this report, the terms “MOJO,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our,” and similar terms mean Mojo data solutions, Inc., a Puerto Rico corporation.
Company Overview
Since the consummation of the Asset Purchase Agreement on January 31, 2014 (see Note 2 of the consolidated financial statements for details of the transaction), we have been refocusing the Company’s business plan and strategy to develop and monetize the intellectual property assets we purchased from MDS. Preceding the transaction, the Company served as a holding company for our predecessor’s wholly-owned subsidiary, Authentic Teas Inc., a corporation incorporated in the province of Ontario, Canada on July 8, 2010 (“AUTT Canada”). AUTT Canada historically sold herbal teas online.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company generated revenues of $0 from a non-related party. During the year ended December 31, 2020 the Company generated revenues of $0, from a related party.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had general and administrative expenses of $98,369 compared to $13.313 during the year ended December 31, 2021. The majority of expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 were for professional fees related to the regulatory filings.
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company had interest expense of $0.0 and $0.0, respectively.
The foregoing resulted in net loss of $13,313 during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss of $98,369 during the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company attributes the decrease in net loss to decreased professional fees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s working capital as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 is summarized as follows:
The Company’s cash flow for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is summarized as follows:
As of December 31, 2021, we had working capital of $23,648 compared to a working capital deficiency of $37,174 as of December 31, 2020, an improvement of $60,822. The change is primarily attributable to the effects of the new management and convertible notes from founder, resulting in a decrease in debt.
We anticipate that our cash on hand and the revenue that we anticipate generating going forward from our operations will not be sufficient to satisfy all of our cash requirements for the next twelve month period. We require funds to enable us to address our minimum current and ongoing expenses as presently, we are not generating revenue to meet our operating and capital expenses. We currently do not have committed sources of additional financing and may not be able to obtain additional financing. To acquire additional financing, we plan to raise any such additional capital primarily through equity and debt financing, provided that such funding is available to us. The issuance of additional equity securities by us may result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders. There is no assurance that we will be able to obtain further funds required for our continued operations or that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain additional financing as required on a timely basis, we will not be able to meet certain obligations as they become due and we will be forced to scale down or perhaps even cease our operations.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements:
We do not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, financings, or other relationships with unconsolidated entities or other persons, also known as “special purpose entities” (SPEs).