Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Certain statements in this Report constitute “forward-looking statements.” Such forward-looking statements involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause our actual results, performance or achievements to be materially different from any future results, performance or achievements expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause such a difference include, among others, uncertainties relating to general economic and business conditions; industry trends; changes in demand for our products and services; uncertainties relating to customer plans and commitments and the timing of orders received from customers; announcements or changes in our pricing policies or that of our competitors; unanticipated delays in the development, market acceptance or installation of our products and services; changes in government regulations; availability of management and other key personnel; availability, terms and deployment of capital; relationships with third-party equipment suppliers; and worldwide political stability and economic growth. The words “believe,” “expect,” “anticipate,” “intend” and “plan” and similar expressions identify forward-looking statements. Readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which speak only as of the date the statement was made.
Year Ended May 31, 2022 compared with the Year Ended May 31, 2021
The narrative comparison of results of operations for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021 is based on the following table. The table includes information on continuing operations, non-operating expenses and discontinued operations, which are discussed below.
Revenues in the year ended May 31, 2022 increased when compared to the same period in 2021. The increase is largely attributable to an intensified sales effort for Debudder products in conjunction with a move of our inventory to a new fulfillment center in California. In anticipation of the move, our sales force reached out to customers with incentives to avoid having to move the inventory and the incentive program was successful in generating a short-term increase in Debudder sales. We do not anticipate that the short-term increase in Debudder sales will be sustainable, and we expect to see a decrease in sales of farm implements and plant nutrients in the fiscal year ended May 31, 2023. In the current fiscal year, the Company also generated $25,352 in sales of cannabis products at our Colorado facility. The Colorado facility was newly opened in our fiscal fourth quarter and was in the very early stage of commencing sales activities. We expect a slow ramp up of sales of cannabis products through the remainder of calendar year 2022. Additional information on our operations is included below.
Cost of revenues as a percentage of sales increased in the year ended May 31, 2022, when compared with the same period in 2021. The increase is attributable to the costs incurred in our Colorado and California operations. In our fiscal fourth quarter, we incurred operating costs associated with setting up and documenting our manufacturing processes and producing test batches of products to verify our systems were generating expected results at our Colorado and California facilities. During this phase, we did not produce significant quantities of product for resale. The production expenses of the test batches were, however, recorded as manufacturing costs. We expect margins to improve on our cannabis product lines in the coming periods as our manufacturing processes are standardized and our need to run test batches and adjust processes decreases.
Other operating expenses increased in the year ended May 31, 2022, compared with the same period in the prior year. The increase was primarily due to an increase in officer and director compensation resulting from expansion of our board of directors and contracting with Randy Lanier, a new director, to represent the Company as Brand Ambassador. We also incurred significant promotion and advertising costs during the current year, primarily for investor relations services. General and administrative expenses increased due to our decision to further develop our cannabis business through acquisition of the Colorado and California facilities and the attendant costs of setting up geographically disbursed manufacturing operations.
Net loss from operations increased in 2022 compared with 2021. The increase in the net loss is attributable to the factors identified above.
Non-operating Expenses.
Non-operating expenses decreased in 2022 compared with 2021. In 2021, we incurred $2,906,000 in financing costs associate with a debt financing for operating capital. The notes payable giving rise to the financing fees were paid off in March 2022. Financing fees incurred in the year ended May 31, 2022 were $227,756. Interest expense increased due to notes payable being outstanding for the entire fiscal year as opposed to three months in the year ended May 31, 2021.
In the year ended May 31, 2021, we also incurred a $592,800 impairment on our investment in PPK. There was no impairment of this investment in the current year.
Discontinued Operations.
In the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company incurred a $14,151 loss on discontinued operations of a business acquired from Elevated Ag Solutions, Inc. in 2020.
In the year ended May 31, 2022, the Company expanded its operations to focus on farm implements and plant nutrients and cannabis manufacturing. In the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company operated only the farm implements and plant nutrients business.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash flow used in operating activities for the year ended May 31, 2022, was $726,932 compared with $258,024 in 2021. During the period, our total cash decreased by $82,432. Cash to fund the negative cash flow from operations was derived primarily from proceeds of notes payable of $1,271,000. The decrease in our cash position at May 31, 2022, is largely attributable to the cash requirements for starting up operations in Colorado and California.
Our historic operations have not been sufficient to support the existing infrastructure, much of which is required in order to maintain public company status. On March 29, 2022, we entered into a senior debt funding transaction that allowed us to pay off an earlier debt financing and provided additional operating capital primarily for start-up operations in California.
We continue to seek out potential acquisition candidates with a focus on acquiring additional operating companies with scale sufficient to support all aspects of the Company’s operations, including the public company infrastructure. The Company is currently heavily dependent on funding through advances from related parties, but no assurances can be given that such funding will continue to be available in future periods. The debt funding matures on May 11, 2023at which time, the principal balance of the note of $2,317,198 plus accrued interest will be due.
We have maintained active operations as a manufacturer and distributor of the Debudder product line since 2018. We do not consider the Company to be a shell company as that term is defined in the Securities Act of 1933, as amended.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. We incurred net losses of $2,875,784 for the year ended May 31, 2022, and had an accumulated deficit of $11,974,041 as of May 31, 2022. These factors raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company may seek to raise money for working capital purposes through a public offering of its equity capital or through a private placement of equity capital or convertible debt. It will be important for the Company to succeed in its efforts to raise capital in this manner to further its business plan in an aggressive manner. Raising additional capital may cause dilution to current shareholders.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
None