Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of MarketWise, Inc., a Delaware corporation (“MarketWise,” “we,” “us,” and “our”), should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 included elsewhere in this report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ significantly from those projected in the forward-looking statements. Factors that might cause future results to differ materially from those projected in the forward-looking statements include, but are not limited to, those discussed in the sections entitled “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward Looking Statements” in this report.
Overview
We are a leading multi-brand platform of subscription businesses that provides premium financial research, software, education, and tools for self-directed investors. We offer a comprehensive portfolio of high-quality, independent investment research, as well as several software and analytical tools, on a subscription basis.
MarketWise started in 1999 with the simple idea that, if we could publish intelligent, independent, insightful, and in-depth investment research and treat the subscriber the way we would want to be treated, then subscribers would renew their subscriptions and stay with us. Over the years, we have expanded our business into a comprehensive suite of investment research products and solutions. We now produce a diversified product portfolio from a variety of financial research companies such as Stansberry Research, Palm Beach Research, Casey Research, InvestorPlace, and Empire Financial Research. Our entire investment research product portfolio is 100% digital and channel agnostic, and we offer all of our research across a variety of platforms, including desktop, laptop, and mobile devices, including tablets and mobile phones.
Today, we benefit from the confluence of a leading editorial team, diverse portfolio of content and brands, and comprehensive suite of investor-centric tools that appeal to a broad subscriber base.
2021 Highlights
We finished 2021 with all time high net cash flow from operations (“CFFO”) and Adjusted CFFO, driven by record net revenue and Billings, as we continued to perform well and grew our subscriber base.
The following table presents net cash provided by operating activities, and the related margin as a percentage of net revenue, and Adjusted CFFO, a non-GAAP measure, and the related margin as a percentage of Billings, for each of the periods presented. For more information on Adjusted CFFO and Adjusted CFFO Margin, see “- Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
Cash flow from operations increased by $7.8 million, or 13.9%, from $55.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $63.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily due to net loss of $953.9 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $927.8 million and net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $89.8 million.
Adjusted CFFO increased by $62.8 million, or 46.8%, from $134.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $197.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by an increase of $181.1 million in Billings at an Adjusted CFFO Margin of 27.0%. The difference between Adjusted CFFO and CFFO is primarily stock-based compensation associated with distributions to the original Class B unitholders. For further information on stock-based compensation, see Note 11, Stock-Based Compensation to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Net revenue increased by $185.0 million, or 50.8%, from $364.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $549.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by a $129.9 million increase in term subscription revenue and a $57.7 million increase in lifetime subscription revenue, partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in non-subscription revenue.
Billings increased by $181.1 million, or 33.0%, to $729.9 million in 2021 as compared to $548.8 million in 2020. We believe this increase is due in large part to strong lifetime and high-value subscription sales, combined with strong new Paid Subscriber performance, as we continued to focus on adding new Paid Subscribers and those subscribers purchased high-value subscriptions over time.
Cash flow from operations increased by $1.7 million, or 3.1%, from $54.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $55.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to net loss of $541.1 million and non-cash charges of $483.4 million, and partially offset by net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $113.6 million.
Adjusted CFFO increased by $65.2 million, or 94.5%, from $69.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $134.3 million for the December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase of $238.8 million in Billings at an Adjusted CFFO Margin of 24.5%.
Net revenue increased by $92.0 million, or 33.8%, from $272.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $364.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by a $59.7 million increase in term subscription revenue and a $35.9 million increase in lifetime subscription revenue, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in non-subscription revenue.
Billings increased by $238.8 million, or 77.0%, to $548.8 million in 2020 as compared to $310.1 million in 2019. Again, this was driven by strong lifetime and high-value subscription sales as well as the success of significant marketing efforts, particularly in second half of 2020.
The Transactions
The Transactions were consummated on July 21, 2021. The Transactions were accounted for akin to a reverse recapitalization, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The Transactions had several significant impacts on our reported financial position and results, as a consequence of reverse capitalization treatment.
These impacts include the net cash proceeds from the Transactions of $113.6 million. This cash amount includes: (a) the reclassification of ADAC’s Trust Account of $414.6 million to cash and cash equivalents that became available at the time of the Transactions; (b) proceeds of $150.0 million from the issuance and sale of MarketWise Class A common stock in the PIPE investment; (c) payment of $48.8 million in non-recurring transaction costs; (d) settlement of $14.5 million in deferred underwriters’ discount; and (e) the payment of $387.7 million to redeeming shareholders of ADAC. See also Note 1, Organization - Reverse Recapitalization with Ascendant Digital Acquisition Corp., to our audited consolidated financial statements.
Key Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our growth and future success are dependent upon several factors, including those below and those noted in the “Risk Factors” section in this report. The key factors below represent significant business opportunities as well as challenges that we must successfully address in order to continue our growth and improve our financial results.
Growing our subscriber base with compelling unit economics. We are highly focused on continuing to acquire new subscribers to support our long-term growth. Our marketing spend is a large driver of new subscriber growth. At the heart of our marketing strategy is our compelling unit economics that combine long-term subscriber relationships, highly scalable content delivery, cost-effective customer acquisition, and high-margin conversions.
Our Paid Subscribers as of December 31, 2021 generated average customer lifetime Billings of approximately $2,600, resulting in a LTV/CAC ratio of approximately 4x. On average, it takes us approximately seven to ten months for a Paid Subscriber’s cumulative net revenue to exceed the total cost of acquiring that subscriber (which includes fixed costs, such as marketing salaries). For more information on our LTV/CAC ratio and the components of this ratio, see “-Definitions of Metrics.”
We adjust our marketing spend to drive efficient and profitable customer acquisition. We can adjust our marketing spend in near real-time, and we monitor costs per acquisition relative to the cart value of the initial subscription. We seek and typically achieve 90-day payback periods to cover this variable component of the direct marketing spend.
As of December 31, 2021, our paid subscriber base was 972 thousand, up 115 thousand, or 13.4% as compared to 857 thousand at December 31, 2020. Growth in our base is provided by both direct-to-paid acquisition and free-to-paid conversions. Direct-to-paid acquisition has traditionally accounted for approximately two-thirds of our annual Paid Subscriber acquisition, and is largely driven by display ads and targeted email campaigns.
Our free subscription products also serve as a significant source of new Paid Subscribers, accounting for approximately one-third of our annual Paid Subscriber acquisition. Our free-to-paid conversion rate reflects the rate at which Free Subscribers purchase paid subscription products. Our annual free-to-paid conversion rate was approximately 1% to 2% between 2019 and 2021. Over that same three year period, our cumulative free-to-paid conversion rate was 5%.
We have invested, and expect to continue to invest, heavily in sales and marketing efforts to drive customer acquisition.
Retaining and expanding relationships with existing subscribers. We believe that we have a significant opportunity to expand our relationships with our large base of Free and Paid Subscribers. Thanks to the quality of our products, we believe our customers will continue their relationship with us and extend and increase their subscriptions over time. As we deepen our engagement with our subscribers, our customers tend to purchase more and higher-value products. Our ARPU as of December 31, 2021 was $742, which decreased 2.2% from $759 as of December 31, 2020. Our ARPU grew at a CAGR of 16% over the three-year period ended December 31, 2021, growing from $478 as of December 31, 2018 to $742 as of December 31, 2021.
Conversion rates are important to our business because they are an indicator of how engaged and how well we are connecting with our subscribers. The time it takes our customers to move from our free products to our lower-priced paid subscriptions and eventually to high-end products and lifetime “bundled” offerings impacts our growth in net revenue, Billings, and ARPU.
Our cumulative high-value conversion rate reflects the rate at which Paid Subscribers that have purchased less than $600 of our products over their lifetime convert into subscribers that have purchased more than $600. We believe our cumulative high-value conversion rate reflects our ability to retain existing subscribers through renewals and our ability to expand our relationship with them when those subscribers purchase higher-value subscriptions. Our cumulative ultra high-value conversion rate reflects the rate at which high value Paid Subscribers that have purchased more than $600 of our products over their lifetime convert into subscribers that have purchased more than $5,000. We believe our ultra high-value conversion rate reflects our ability to successfully build lifetime relationships with our subscribers, often across multiple products and brands. As of December 31, 2021, our cumulative high-value conversion rate and cumulative ultra high-value conversion rate were 39% and 35%, respectively.
Definitions of Metrics
Throughout this discussion and analysis, a number of our financial and operating metrics are referenced which we do not consider to be key business metrics, but which we review to monitor performance, and which we believe may be useful to investors. These are:
Annual free-to-paid conversion rate: We calculate our free-to-paid conversion rate as the number of Free Subscribers who purchased a subscription during the period divided by the average number of Free Subscribers during the period. We believe our free-to-paid conversion rate is an indicator of the type of Free Subscribers that we are signing up and the quality of our content and marketing efforts. Investors should consider free-to-paid conversion rate as one of the factors in evaluating our ability to maintain a robust pipeline for new customer acquisition.
Cumulative free-to-paid conversion rate: We calculate our cumulative free-to-paid conversion rate as the number of Free Subscribers who purchased a subscription during the trailing three-year period divided by the average number of Free Subscribers during the trailing three-year period.
Cumulative high-value conversion rates: Our cumulative high-value conversion rate reflects the number of Paid Subscribers who have purchased >$600 in aggregate over their lifetime as of a particular point in time divided by the total number of Paid Subscribers as of that same point in time.
Cumulative ultra high-value conversion rate: Our cumulative ultra high-value conversion rate reflects the number of Paid Subscribers who have purchased >$5,000 in aggregate over their lifetime as of a particular point in time divided by the number of high-value subscribers as of that same point in time. We believe our cumulative ultra high-value conversion rate reflects our ability to successfully build lifetime relationships with our subscribers, often across multiple products and brands. Investors should consider cumulative ultra high-value conversion rate as a factor in evaluating our ability to retain and expand our relationship with our subscribers.
LTV/CAC ratio: We calculate LTV/CAC ratio as LTV divided by CAC. We use LTV/CAC ratio because it is a standard metric for subscription-based businesses, and we believe that an LTV/CAC ratio above 3x is considered to be indicative of strong profitability and marketing efficiency. We believe that an increasing LTV per subscriber reflects our existing subscribers recognizing our value proposition, which will expand their relationship with us across our platform over time, either through a combination of additional product purchases or by joining our lifetime offerings. Investors should consider this metric when evaluating our ability to achieve a return on our marketing investment. Lifetime value (“LTV”) represents the average margin on average customer lifetime billings (that is, the estimated cumulative spend across a customer’s lifetime). Customer acquisition cost (“CAC”) is defined as direct marketing spend, plus external revenue share expense, plus retention and renewal expenses, plus copywriting and marketing salaries, plus telesales salaries and commissions, plus customer service commissions.
Net revenue retention: Net revenue retention is defined as Billings from all prior period cohorts in the current period, divided by all Billings from the prior period. We believe that a high net revenue retention rate is a measure of customer retention and an indicator of the engagement of our subscribers with our products. Investors should consider net revenue retention as an ongoing measure when evaluating our subscribers’ interest in continuing to subscribe to our products and spending more with us over time.
Key Business Metrics
We review the following key business metrics to measure our performance, identify trends, formulate financial projections, and make strategic decisions. We are not aware of any uniform standards for calculating these key
metrics, which may hinder comparability with other companies who may calculate similarly titled metrics in a different way.
Free Subscribers. Free Subscribers are defined as unique subscribers who have subscribed to one of our free investment publications via a valid email address and continue to remain directly opted in, excluding any Paid Subscribers who also have free subscriptions. Free subscriptions are often daily publications that include some commentary about the stock market, investing ideas, or other specialized topics. Included within our free publications are advertisements and editorial support for our current marketing campaigns. While subscribed to our publications, Free Subscribers learn about our editors and analysts, get to know our products and services, and learn more about ways we can help them be a better investor.
Free Subscribers increased by 4.2 million, or 43.8%, to 13.7 million at December 31, 2021 as compared to 9.5 million at December 31, 2020, as our significant lead-generation efforts that began in earnest during late 2018 and intensified during 2019 and 2020 with the expansion across multiple brands, continued during 2021.
Free Subscribers increased by 4.5 million, or 89.6%, to 9.5 million as of December 31, 2020 as compared to 5.0 million as of December 31, 2019. This growth was driven by our continued lead generation efforts and the expansion of our product set.
Paid Subscribers. We define Paid Subscribers as the total number of unique subscribers with at least one paid subscription at the end of the period. We view the number of Paid Subscribers at the end of a given period as a key indicator of the attractiveness of our products and services, as well as the efficacy of our marketing in converting Free Subscribers to Paid Subscribers and generating direct-to-paid Paid Subscribers. We grow our Paid Subscriber base through performance marketing directly to prospective and existing subscribers across a variety of media, channels, and platforms.
Total Paid Subscribers increased by 115 thousand, or 13.4%, to 972 thousand as of December 31, 2021 as compared to 857 thousand at December 31, 2020, driven by successful marketing efforts and rich content which drove free-to-paid conversions as well as direct-to-paid acquisition. Per-unit subscriber acquisition costs were favorable at the beginning of the year which, when combined with our compelling content, led to unprecedented new subscriber acquisition in first quarter 2021. The travel and leisure boom, where Americans made up for the inability to travel during the pandemic, began in mid-second quarter 2021 and continued through the end of third quarter. During this time, the travel and hospitality industries significantly increased their usage of digital mediums to market their products. With per-unit subscriber acquisition costs rising during this time, we reduced our marketing spend on new customer acquisition, and continued to emphasize marketing higher value content to our existing subscriber base. Costs finally began to improve toward the end of the year and we accelerated our spend to acquire new subscribers. We will continue to focus on our break-even metrics and adjust our direct marketing spend accordingly, as we have done for the past twenty plus years.
Total Paid Subscribers increased by 331 thousand, or 62.9%, to 857 thousand as of December 31, 2020 as compared to 526 thousand as of December 31, 2019. As was the case in 2021, successful marketing efforts and rich content drove the increase in subscribers aided in part by a more favorable cost environment as it related to media costs.
Subscriber count churn has ranged from approximately 1.8% to 2.3% per month over the past three years. Given the rapid growth in subscribers in 2020 and earlier in 2021, subscriber count churn increased to the
higher end of this range for the second half of the year. Typically, churn may run at the higher end of this range after periods of rapid subscriber additions and then may fall back to the lower end of the range through time.
After periods of rapid subscriber growth such as what we experienced in late 2020 and in the first part of 2021, it is not unusual to see an increase in churn as some of the less engaged, new Paid Subscribers churn off. Consistent with this, almost all of the subscribers who churned in the year did so having owned only one entry level publication. This is evidenced by the fact that their ARPU approximately matched the subscription price of our entry level publications. We believe our net revenue retention rate, which has averaged over 90% from 2019 to 2021, is a more meaningful gauge of subscriber satisfaction.
Average Revenue Per User. We calculate ARPU as the trailing four quarters of net Billings divided by the average number of quarterly total Paid Subscribers over that period. We believe ARPU is a key indicator of how successful we are in attracting subscribers to higher-value content. We believe that increasing ARPU is indicative of the trust we build with our subscribers and of the value they see in our products and services.
ARPU decreased by $17, or 2.2%, to $742 as of December 31, 2021 as compared to $759 as of December 31, 2020. The modest year-over-year decrease was driven by a 36% increase in trailing four quarter Paid Subscribers in 2021, which slightly outpaced the increase in trailing four quarter Billings of 33% in 2021. The increase in trailing four quarter average Paid Subscribers in 2021 was largely attributable to the rapid increase in our subscribers base in the first half of 2021. Most of our new subscribers join us on entry level publications, which are generally at lower price points, and thus are initially dilutive to ARPU. We have shown that over time, subscribers have continued to invest in our platform, which have tended to drive increases in ARPU. As of December 31, 2021, we have 19% and 32% more high value and ultra-high value subscribers than we did a year ago.
ARPU increased by $160, or 26.7%, to $759 as of December 31, 2020 as compared to $599 as of December 31, 2019. The year-over-year increase was driven by a 77% increase in trailing four quarters Billings which accompanied a 40% increase in trailing four quarters Paid Subscribers.
We attribute our high ARPUs in each of these periods to the quality of our content and more effective sales and marketing efforts regarding higher value content, bundled subscriptions and lifetime subscriptions. These subscriptions have compelling economics that allow us to recoup our initial marketing spend made to acquire these subscribers. Specifically, our payback period was estimated at 0.9 years for 2021, and was 0.6 and 0.8 years for 2020 and 2019, respectively. We have experienced a stable payback period in the range of 0.6 to 0.9 years reliably over the past three years, despite the increases in customer acquisition costs that the digital subscription industry has experienced in recent years. The payback period reached the low side of the historical range in 2020 as a result of expanded conversion rates and, to a far lesser degree, decreasing costs for media spend as demand dropped as a result of the pandemic. We have seen the costs for media spend revert back to higher rates as we progressed through 2021 and expect our payback for 2021 to be at the higher end of the historical range.
Billings. Billings represents amounts invoiced to customers. We measure and monitor our Billings because it provides insight into trends in cash generation from our marketing campaigns. We generally bill our subscribers at the time of sale and receive full cash payment up front, and defer and recognize a portion of the related revenue ratably over time for term and lifetime subscriptions. For certain subscriptions, we may invoice our Paid Subscribers at the beginning of the term, in annual or monthly installments, and, from time to time, in multi-year installments. Only amounts invoiced to a Paid Subscriber in a given period are included in Billings. While we believe that Billings provides valuable insight into the cash that will be generated from sales of our subscriptions, this metric may vary from period to period for a number of reasons and, therefore, Billings has a number of limitations as a quarter-over-quarter or year-over-year comparative measure. These reasons include, but are not limited to, the following: (i) a variety of contractual terms could result in some periods having a higher proportion of annual or lifetime subscriptions than other periods; (ii) fluctuations in payment terms may affect the Billings recognized in a particular period; and (iii) the timing of large campaigns may vary significantly from period to period.
Billings increased by $181.1 million, or 33.0%, to $729.9 million in 2021 as compared to $548.8 million in 2020. We believe this increase is due in large part to strong lifetime, high-value, and ultra high-value subscription sales, combined with strong new Paid Subscriber performance, as we continued to focus on adding new Paid Subscribers, and those Paid Subscribers having purchased higher-value subscriptions over time. Approximately 42% of our Billings this year came from lifetime subscriptions, 57% from term subscriptions, and 1% from other Billings as compared to 36% from lifetime subscriptions, 63% from term subscriptions, and 2% from other Billings in 2020. Chaikin Analytics, acquired in January 2021, generated $26.6 million in organic new Billings in 2021 by selling their products to our existing subscriber base.
Billings increased by $238.8 million, or 77.0%, to $548.8 million in 2020 as compared to $310.1 million in 2019. Again, this was driven by strong lifetime, high-value, and ultra high-value subscription sales as well as the success of significant marketing efforts, particularly in second half of 2020.
Components of MarketWise’s Results of Operations
Net Revenue
We generate net revenue primarily from services provided in delivering term and lifetime subscription-based financial research, publications, and SaaS offerings to individual subscribers through our online platforms, advertising arrangements, print products, events, and revenue share agreements.
Net revenue is recognized ratably over the duration of the subscriptions, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. In addition to term subscriptions, we offer lifetime subscriptions where we receive a large upfront payment when the subscriber enters into the contract, and for which we will receive a lower annual maintenance fee thereafter. Subscribers are typically billed in advance of the subscriptions. Much of our net revenue is generated from subscriptions entered into during previous periods. Consequently, any decreases in new subscriptions or renewals in any one period may not be immediately reflected as a decrease in net revenue for that period, but could negatively affect our net revenue in future quarters. This also makes it difficult for us to rapidly increase our net revenue through the sale of additional subscriptions in any period, as net revenue is recognized over the term of the subscription agreement. We expect subscription net revenue to continue to increase as we have experienced sales growth in lifetime and multi-year contracts in recent periods.
We earn net revenue from the sale of advertising placements on our websites and from the sale of print products and events. We also recognize net revenue through revenue share agreements where we earn a commission for successful sales by other parties generated through the use of our customer list. We expect advertising and other net revenue to increase in absolute dollars as our business grows.
Net revenue earned in 2018 through 2021 was almost 100% organic. Net revenue from acquisitions was approximately 1% of net revenue earned in 2018 through 2021, and the remainder was attributable to brands developed internally since 2018 and businesses acquired or developed prior to 2018. In the future, we expect to continue to grow revenue organically, as well as through acquisitions, joint ventures, and other strategic transactions.
Employee Compensation Costs
Employee compensation costs, or payroll and payroll-related costs, include salaries, bonuses, benefits, and stock-based compensation for employees classified within cost of revenue, sales and marketing, and general and administrative, and also includes sales commissions for sales and marketing employees.
Stock-based compensation expense is primarily related to the Class B Units. Prior to the Transactions, the Class B Units were classified as liabilities as opposed to equity and remeasured to fair value at the end of each reporting period, with the change in value being charged to stock-based compensation expense. Because the Class B Units were classified as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet prior to the Transactions, all profits distributions made to the holders of the Class B Units were considered to be stock-based compensation expenses. We recognized stock-based compensation expenses related to the Class B Units of $1,058.4 million, $553.6 million and $20.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Upon completion of the Transactions, all Class B Units fully vested as of the transaction date, and the original operating agreement was terminated and replaced by a new operating agreement consistent with the Company’s Up-C structure. This new operating agreement does not contain the put and call options that existed under the previous operating agreement, and the Common Units are treated as common equity under the new operating agreement and do not generate stock-based compensation expense. Therefore, the Class B Units liability was reclassified to equity as of the transaction date and stock-based compensation expense associated with the Class B Units ceased after the transaction date.
Total stock-based compensation expenses include profits distributions to holders of Class B Units of $123.4 million, $78.4 million and $14.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
As a result of the Transactions, in which all Class B Units were converted into Common Units, we do not expect to continue recognizing stock-based compensation expenses related to the Class B Units for periods after the consummation of the Transactions. While going forward we do not expect to incur the levels of stock-based compensation expense we have historically as a result the liability-award classification of the Class B Units, we do expect to incur some stock-based compensation expense in the ordinary course.
On July 21, 2021, the MarketWise, Inc. 2021 Incentive Award Plan (the “2021 Incentive Award Plan”) became effective. We reserved a total of 32,045,000 shares of MarketWise Class A common stock for issuance pursuant to the 2021 Incentive Award Plan and the maximum number of shares that may be issued pursuant to the exercise of incentive stock options granted under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan is 32,045,000, in each case, subject to certain adjustments set forth therein. On September 27, 2021, we granted certain employees restricted stock units (“RSUs”) and stock appreciation rights (“SARs”) under our 2021 Incentive Award Plan. During year ended December 31, 2021, stock-based compensation expense related to the 2021 Incentive Award Plan was $4.9 million. See also Note 11, Stock-Based Compensation to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
The total amount of stock-based compensation expense included within each of the respective line items in the consolidated statement of operations is as follows:
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of payroll and payroll-related costs associated with producing and publishing MarketWise’s content, hosting fees, customer service, credit card processing fees, product costs, and allocated overhead. Cost of revenue is exclusive of depreciation and amortization, which is shown as a separate line item.
Within cost of revenue are stock-based compensation expenses related to the Class B Units of $170.5 million, $102.7 million and $5.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts include profits distributions to holders of Class B Units of $22.8 million, $14.7 million and $2.9 million, respectively. Cost of revenue also includes stock-based compensation expenses related to the 2021 Incentive Award Plan of $1.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We expect cost of revenue to increase as our business grows, including as a result of new acquisitions, joint ventures, and other strategic transactions. However, the level and timing of our variable compensation may not match the pattern of how net revenue is recognized over the subscription term. Therefore, we expect that our cost of revenue will fluctuate as a percentage of net revenue in the future.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs, amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, agency costs, advertising campaigns, and branding initiatives. Sales and marketing expenses are exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown as a separate line item.
Within sales and marketing expenses are stock-based compensation expenses related to the Class B Units of $46.4 million and $10.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Included in stock-based compensation expense are profits distributions to holders of Class B Units of $3.8 million and $2.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Sales and marketing expenses also includes stock-based compensation expenses related to the 2021 Incentive Award Plan of $1.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We expect that our sales and marketing expense will increase in absolute dollars and continue to be our largest operating expense for the foreseeable future as we expand our sales and marketing efforts. However, because we incur sales and marketing expenses up front when we launch campaigns to drive sales, while we recognize net revenue ratably over the underlying subscription term, we expect that our sales and marketing expense will fluctuate as a percentage of our net revenue over the long term. Sales and marketing expenses may fluctuate further as a result of acquisitions, joint ventures, or other strategic transactions we undertake in the future.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs, technical services, software expenses, and hosting expenses. Research and development expenses are exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown as a separate line item.
We expect that our research and development expense will increase in absolute dollars as our business grows, including as a result of new acquisitions, joint ventures, and other strategic transactions, particularly as we incur additional costs related to continued investments in our platform.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of payroll and related costs associated with our finance, legal, information technology, human resources, executive, and administrative personnel, legal fees, corporate insurance, office expenses, professional fees, and travel and entertainment costs.
Within general and administrative expenses are stock-based compensation expenses related to the Class B Units of $841.5 million, $440.3 million and $15.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. These amounts include profit distributions to holders of Class B Units of $96.8 million, $60.8 million and $11.9 million, respectively. General and administrative expenses also include stock-based compensation expenses related to the 2021 Incentive Award Plan of $2.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
We expect to continue to incur additional general and administrative expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including costs to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange, costs related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC, and increased expenses for insurance, investor relations, and professional services. General and administrative expenses may fluctuate further as a result of acquisitions, joint ventures, or other strategic transactions we undertake in the future.
Depreciation and Amortization
Depreciation and amortization expenses consist of amortization of trade names, customer relationship intangibles, and software development costs, as well as depreciation on other property and equipment such as leasehold improvements, furniture and fixtures, and computer equipment. We expect depreciation and amortization expenses to increase on an absolute dollar basis as our business grows, including as a result of new acquisitions, joint ventures, and other strategic transactions, but to remain generally consistent as a percentage of total net revenue.
Related Party Expense
Related party expenses primarily consist of expenses for certain corporate functions performed by a related party for certain historic periods, as well as revenue share expenses. We have built our own corporate infrastructure and do not expect non-revenue share expenses from this related party in the future.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income, net primarily consists of the net gains on our embedded derivative instruments and on sales of cryptocurrencies.
Interest (Expense) Income, Net
Interest (expense) income, net primarily consists of interest income from our money market accounts, as well as interest expense on outstanding borrowings under the 2013 Credit Facility (as defined below) with a related-party. We expect interest expense to increase in the future as a result of the execution of the 2021 Credit Facility. See “-Liquidity and Capital Resources-Credit Facilities.”
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
The Transactions occurred on July 21, 2021. As a result, net income (loss) for the year ended December 31, 2021 was attributed to the pre-Transaction period from January 1, 2021 through July 21, 2021 and to the post-Transaction period from July 22, 2021 through December 31, 2021.
•During the pre-Transaction period, net income (loss) was attributable to consolidated MarketWise, LLC and its respective noncontrolling interests.
•During the post-Transaction period, net income (loss) was attributable to consolidated MarketWise, Inc. and its respective noncontrolling interests. Immediately following the Transactions, MarketWise, Inc.’s controlling interest in MarketWise, LLC was 7.9% and its noncontrolling interest was 92.1%. For the post-Transaction period, net income attributable to controlling interests included a $15.7 million gain on warrant liabilities and a $2.4 million tax provision, both of which are 100% attributable to the controlling interest.
Results of Operations
The following table sets forth our results of operations for the periods presented:
__________________
(1)Included within cost of revenue, sales and marketing, and general and administrative expenses are stock-based compensation expenses as follows:
(2)Cost of revenue, sales and marketing, general and administrative, and research and development expenses are exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown as a separate line item.
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data expressed as a percentage of net revenue for the periods indicated:
__________________
(1)Cost of revenue, sales and marketing, general and administrative, and research and development expenses are exclusive of depreciation and amortization shown as a separate line item.
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased by $185.0 million, or 50.8%, from $364.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $549.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by a $129.9 million increase in term subscription revenue and a $57.7 million increase in lifetime subscription revenue, partially offset by a $2.6 million decrease in non-subscription revenue. Revenue from Chaikin Analytics, the business we acquired in January 2021, was $7.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Both term and lifetime subscription revenue benefited from a significant increase in Paid Subscribers. Term subscription revenue increased as a result of a significant increase in marketing efforts. Lifetime subscription revenue, which is initially deferred and recognized over a five-year period, increased as a result of higher volume of lifetime subscriptions in current and prior years, which continued to benefit us in 2021.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $84.6 million, or 54.7%, from $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $239.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by a $67.8 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to holders of Class B units, a $6.2 million increase in payroll and payroll-related costs due to higher headcount, a $4.9 million increase in credit card fees due to higher sales volume, and a $1.3 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to newly issued awards under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan.
Approximately $8.0 million of the increase in Class B stock-based compensation expense was due to higher distributions, and $59.8 million of the increase was related to the change in fair value of the Class B units and the accelerated vesting of the Class B units, both of which were related to the Transactions.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $82.7 million, or 38.6%, from $214.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $296.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by a $41.3 million increase in amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, a $35.9 million increase in Class B stock-based compensation expense, a $7.2 million increase in payroll and payroll-related costs driven by increased headcount, and a $1.7 million increase in stock based compensation expense related to newly issued awards under the 2021 Inventive Award Plans. This was partially offset by a $4.5 million decrease in marketing and lead-generation expenses as we have reduced our marketing costs due to higher per unit advertising cost resulting from higher post-COVID demand for display advertising that emerged in the second quarter of the year.
Approximately $1.0 million of the increase in Class B stock-based compensation expense was due to higher distributions, and $34.8 million of the increase was related to the change in fair value and the accelerated vesting of the Class B units, all of which were related to the Transactions.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $433.6 million, or 82.3%, from $526.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $960.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by a $401.2 million increase in Class B stock-based compensation expense, a $7.1 million increase in incentive compensation and profits interests expenses, a $7.6 million increase in payroll and payroll-related costs due to increased headcount to support operations, a $4.7 million increase in software expenses, a $3.2 million increase in accounting, legal and consulting fees related to public company readiness efforts, a $2.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expense related to newly issued awards under the 2021 Incentive Award Plan, and a $1.2 million increase in donations.
Approximately $36.0 million of the increase in Class B stock-based compensation expense was due to higher distributions, and $365.2 million of the increase was related to the change in fair value and the accelerated vesting of the Class B units, all of which were related to the Transactions.
Related Party Expense
Related party expense increased by $10.1 million from $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, driven by a discretionary, one-time, non-employee bonus payment of $10.0 million to the Company’s founder, who is a Class B common stockholder, in July 2021.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
Net Revenue
Net revenue increased by $92.0 million, or 33.8%, from $272.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $364.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net revenue was primarily driven by a $59.7 million increase in term subscription revenue and a $35.9 million increase in lifetime subscription revenue, partially offset by a $3.7 million decrease in non-subscription revenue.
Term subscription revenue increased as a result of a significant increase in marketing efforts, along with free-to-paid conversion rate improvement during 2020. Lifetime subscription revenue, which is initially deferred and recognized over a five-year period, increased as a result of higher volume of lifetime subscriptions in prior years, which continued to benefit us in 2020, along with high-value conversion rate improvement during 2020 as compared to 2019.
Operating Expenses
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue increased by $112.1 million, or 263.3%, from $42.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $154.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase of $97.7 million in stock-based compensation expense related to holders of Class B Units, $5.9 million in credit card fees due to higher sales volume, an increase of $3.9 million in payroll and payroll-related costs due to higher headcount, and an increase of $2.5 million in freelance editorial expense primarily related to certain new brands launched during 2019 and 2020.
Approximately $97.0 million of the increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to the increase in fair value as a result of a higher probability assigned to the market approach due to the signing of a letter of intent with ADAC during December 2020. The remaining increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to higher Class B Unit distributions of $11.8 million, partially offset by a $1.5 million decrease attributable to less vesting of Class B Units.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expense increased by $108.2 million, or 102.0%, from $106.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $214.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an $82.0 million increase in direct marketing and lead-generation expenses, a $12.0 million increase in amortization of deferred contract acquisition costs, an increase of $10.6 million in stock-based compensation expense related to holders of Class B Units, and an increase of $3.8 million in payroll and payroll-related costs due to higher headcount.
Approximately $6.5 million of the increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to the increase in fair value as a result of a higher probability assigned to the market approach due to the signing of a letter of intent with ADAC during December 2020. The remaining increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to higher Class B Unit distributions of $2.8 million, and the vesting of additional Class B Units of $1.2 million.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expense increased by $434.9 million, or 474.4%, from $91.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $526.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase of $424.9 million in stock-based compensation expense related to holders of Class B Units, a $4.0 million increase in accounting, legal, and consulting fees related to public company readiness efforts, an increase of $3.8 million in payroll and payroll-related costs due to increased headcount to support operations, a $3.6 million increase in cloud computing and software fees due to increases in transaction volumes, and a $1.6 million increase in incentive compensation and profit interest expenses, partially offset by a $2.4 million decrease in travel and entertainment expenses primarily attributable to COVID-19 restrictions, and a $1.0 million decrease in sales and value-added taxes.
Approximately $365.5 million of the increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to the increase in fair value as a result of a higher probability assigned to the market approach due to the signing of a letter of intent with ADAC during December 2020. The remaining increase in stock-based compensation expense was due to higher Class B Unit distributions of $48.9 million and the vesting of additional Class B Units of $10.5 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we believe that the below non-GAAP financial measures are useful in evaluating our operating performance. We use the below non-GAAP financial measures, collectively, to evaluate our ongoing operations and for internal planning and forecasting purposes. We believe that non-GAAP financial information, when taken collectively, may be helpful to investors because it provides consistency and comparability with past financial performance, and assists in comparisons with other companies, some of which use similar non-GAAP financial information to supplement their GAAP results. This non-GAAP financial information is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP, and may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies. A reconciliation is provided below for each non-GAAP financial measure to the most directly comparable financial measure stated in accordance with GAAP. Investors are
encouraged to review the related GAAP financial measures and the reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to their most directly comparable GAAP financial measures.
Adjusted CFFO / Adjusted CFFO Margin
In addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, we disclose the non-GAAP financial measure Adjusted CFFO. We define Adjusted CFFO as cash flow from operations plus profits distributions that were recorded as stock-based compensation expense from the Class B Units, plus or minus any non-recurring items. Profits distributions to Class B unitholders included amounts attributable to the Class B unitholders’ potential tax liability with respect to the Class B Units (i.e., there was no tax withholding, and the full amount of allocable profit was distributed, subject to the terms of the LLC Agreement prior to the Transactions). We define Adjusted CFFO Margin as Adjusted CFFO as a percentage of Billings.
We believe that Adjusted CFFO and Adjusted CFFO Margin are useful indicators that provide information to management and investors about ongoing operating performance, to facilitate comparison of our results to those of peer companies over multiple periods, and for internal planning and forecasting purposes.
We have presented Adjusted CFFO because we believe it provides investors with greater comparability of our operating performance without the effects of stock-based compensation expense related to profits distributions to Class B unitholders that will not continue following the consummation of the Transactions, in which all Class B Units were converted into Common Units. Following the consummation of the Transactions, however, we will continue to make certain tax distributions to the MarketWise Members in amounts sufficient to pay individual income taxes on their respective allocation of the profits of MarketWise, LLC at the then prevailing individual income tax rates. These distributions will not be recorded on MarketWise, Inc.’s income statement, and will be reflected on MarketWise, Inc.’s cash flow statement as cash used in financing activities. The cash used to make these distributions will not be available to us for use in the business.
Adjusted CFFO and Adjusted CFFO Margin have limitations as analytical tools, and should not be considered in isolation or as substitutes for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as cash flow from operations or operating cash flow margin. Some of the limitations of using Adjusted CFFO and Adjusted CFFO Margin are that these metrics may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry.
We expect Adjusted CFFO and Adjusted CFFO Margin to fluctuate in future periods as we invest in our business to execute our growth strategy. These activities, along with any non-recurring items as described above, may result in fluctuations in Adjusted CFFO and Adjusted CFFO Margin in future periods.
The following table provides a reconciliation of net cash provided by operating activities, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP, to Adjusted CFFO for each of the periods presented:
The non-recurring expense addback in the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to a discretionary, one-time, lifetime-award, non-employee bonus payment of $10.0 million to the Company’s founder, who is a Class B common stockholder.
The following table provides the calculation of net cash provided by operating activities margin as a percentage of total net revenue, the most directly comparable financial measure in accordance with GAAP, and Adjusted CFFO Margin for each of the periods presented:
Adjusted CFFO increased by $62.8 million, or 46.8%, from $134,273 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $197.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, primarily driven by an increase of $181.1 million in Billings at an Adjusted CFFO Margin of 27.0%.
Adjusted CFFO increased by $65.2 million, or 94.5%, from $69.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $134.3 million for the December 31, 2020, primarily driven by an increase of $238.8 million in Billings at an Adjusted CFFO Margin of 24.5%.
The Effect of the COVID-19 Pandemic
COVID-19 was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization and spread across the globe, impacting worldwide activity and financial markets. COVID-19 has had a significant impact on the global supply chain, financial markets, trading activities, and consumer behavior, and the duration of these impacts remain uncertain.
We have continued to operate our business without much disruption during the pandemic, and we required our employees to work remotely in response to stay-at-home orders imposed by the U.S. and local governments in March 2020. COVID-19 has impacted the sales and profitability of many companies’ business over this period, and while it may have caused some volatility to our customer acquisition costs, and Paid Subscriber and Billings growth, our business has continued to perform well.
While it is not possible at this time to estimate the impact, if any, that COVID-19 will have on our business longer term, the continued spread of COVID-19 and the measures taken by governments, businesses, and other organizations in response to COVID-19 could adversely impact our business, financial condition, and our results of operations. For more information, see the “Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” sections in this report.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
General
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $139.6 million. Cash and cash equivalents are comprised of bank deposits, money market funds, and certificates of deposit. Restricted cash is comprised of reserves held with credit card processors for chargebacks and refunds. We have financed our operations primarily through cash received from operations, and our sources of liquidity have enabled us to make continued investments in supporting the growth of our business. In October 2021, we entered into a new $150 million Credit Facility that can be used to finance permitted acquisitions, for working capital and general corporate purposes. We expect that our operating cash flows, in addition to cash on hand, will enable us to continue to make investments in the future. We expect our operating cash flows to further improve as we increase our operational efficiency and experience economies of scale.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to support working capital and capital expenditure requirements for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our subscription growth rate, subscription renewal activity, including the timing and the amount of cash received from subscribers, the pace of expansion of sales and marketing activities, the timing and extent of spending to support development efforts, the introduction of new and enhanced products, and the level of costs to operate as a public company. We may, in the future, enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, products, and technologies.
We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that we require additional financing, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in continued innovation, we may not be able to compete successfully, which would harm our business, operations, and financial condition.
A substantial source of our cash is from our deferred revenue, which is included in the liabilities section of our consolidated balance sheets. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of customer billings, which is recognized as net revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021, we had deferred revenue of $710.2 million, of which $317.1 million was recorded as a current liability and is expected to be recognized as net revenue over the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
As a result of the Transactions, we have incurred and expect that we will incur public company expenses related to our operations, plus payment obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which we expect to be significant. MarketWise, Inc. intends to cause MarketWise, LLC to make distributions to MarketWise, Inc. in an amount sufficient to allow MarketWise, Inc. to pay its tax obligations and operating expenses, including distributions to fund any payments due under the Tax Receivable Agreement.
Furthermore, to the extent we have taxable income, we will make distributions to the MarketWise Members in amounts sufficient for the MarketWise Members to pay taxes due on their share of MarketWise income at prevailing individual income tax rates. Such amounts will be reflected in MarketWise, Inc.’s statement of cash flows as cash used in financing activities, and so will not decrease the amount of cash from operations or net income reflected in MarketWise, Inc.’s financial statements. However, such distributions will decrease the amount of cash available to us for use in our business.
Tax Receivable Agreement
MarketWise, Inc. intends, as MarketWise, LLC’s sole manager, to cause MarketWise, LLC to make cash distributions to MarketWise, Inc. in an amount sufficient to cover MarketWise, Inc.’s obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement. However, MarketWise, LLC’s ability to make such distributions to MarketWise, Inc. may be subject to various limitations and restrictions, such as restrictions on distributions under contracts or agreements to which MarketWise, LLC is then a party, including debt agreements, or any applicable law, or that would have the effect of rendering MarketWise, LLC insolvent. If MarketWise, LLC does not have sufficient cash to fund distributions to MarketWise, Inc. in amounts sufficient to cover MarketWise, Inc.’s obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement, it may have to borrow funds, which could materially adversely affect its liquidity and
financial condition and subject it to various restrictions imposed by any such lenders. To the extent that MarketWise, Inc. is unable to make timely payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement for any reason, the unpaid amounts will be deferred and will accrue interest until paid. MarketWise, Inc.’s failure to make any payment required under the Tax Receivable Agreement (including any accrued and unpaid interest) within 90 calendar days of the date on which the payment is required to be made will constitute a material breach of a material obligation under the Tax Receivable Agreement, which will terminate the Tax Receivable Agreement and accelerate future payments thereunder, unless the applicable payment is not made because (i) MarketWise, LLC is prohibited from making such payment under the terms of the Tax Receivable Agreement or the terms governing certain of its indebtedness or (ii) MarketWise, LLC does not have, and despite using commercially reasonable efforts cannot obtain, sufficient funds to make such payment. See “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions-Tax Receivable Agreement” and “Certain Relationships and Related Party Transactions-MarketWise Operating Agreement” for additional information. Any payments made by MarketWise, Inc. to the MarketWise Members under the Tax Receivable Agreement will not be available for reinvestment in the business and will generally reduce the amount of cash that might have otherwise been available to MarketWise, Inc. and its subsidiaries.
The Tax Receivable Agreement provides that if (i) MarketWise, Inc. materially breaches any of its material obligations under the Tax Receivable Agreement, (ii) certain mergers, asset sales, other forms of business combinations, or other changes of control were to occur, or (iii) MarketWise, Inc. elects an early termination of the Tax Receivable Agreement, then MarketWise, Inc.’s future obligations, or its successor’s future obligations, under the Tax Receivable Agreement to make payments thereunder would accelerate and become due and payable, based on certain assumptions, including an assumption that MarketWise, Inc. would have sufficient taxable income to fully utilize all potential future tax benefits that are subject to the Tax Receivable Agreement, and an assumption that, as of the effective date of the acceleration, any MarketWise Member that has Common Units not yet exchanged shall be deemed to have exchanged such Common Units on such date, even if MarketWise, Inc. does not receive the corresponding tax benefits until a later date when the Common Units are actually exchanged. As a result of the foregoing, MarketWise, Inc. would be required to make an immediate cash payment equal to the estimated present value of the anticipated future tax benefits that are the subject of the Tax Receivable Agreement, based on certain assumptions, which payment may be made significantly in advance of the actual realization, if any, of those future tax benefits and, therefore, MarketWise, Inc. could be required to make payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement that are greater than the specified percentage of the actual tax benefits it ultimately realizes.
Share Repurchase Program
On November 4, 2021, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $35.0 million in aggregate of shares of the Company’s Class A common stock, with the authorization to expire on November 3, 2023. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased 500,270 shares totaling $3.3 million in the aggregate.
Stock repurchases under this program will be made from time to time, on the open market, in privately negotiated transactions, or by other methods, at the discretion of the management of the Company and in accordance with the limitations set forth in Rule 10b-18 promulgated under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended, and other applicable legal requirements. The timing of the repurchases will depend on market conditions and other requirements. The Company currently anticipates the share repurchase program will extend over a two-year period, or such shorter period if $35.0 million in aggregate of shares have been repurchased. The share repurchase program does not obligate the Company to repurchase any dollar amount or number of shares, and the program may be extended, modified, suspended, or discontinued at any time. For each share of Class A common stock the Company repurchases under the share repurchase program, MarketWise, LLC, the Company’s direct subsidiary, will redeem one common unit of MarketWise, LLC held by the Company, decreasing the percentage ownership of MarketWise, LLC by the Company and relatively increasing the ownership by the other unitholders.
Credit Facilities
On October 29, 2021, MarketWise, LLC, entered into a loan and security agreement, with the Guarantors (as defined below), the lenders from time to time party thereto, HSBC Bank USA, N.A., as administrative agent, collateral agent, joint lead arranger, and joint bookrunner, and BMO Capital Markets Corp, as joint lead arranger and joint bookrunner (the “Loan and Security Agreement”), providing for up to $150 million of commitments under
a revolving credit facility (the “Credit Facility”), including a $5 million letter of credit sublimit. HSBC Bank USA, N.A. and BMO Capital Markets Corp. acted as joint lead arrangers and joint bookrunners, and HSBC Bank USA, N.A., BMO Harris Bank N.A., Silicon Valley Bank, Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., and PNC Bank National Association are lenders.
The Credit Facility is guaranteed by MarketWise, LLC’s direct and indirect material U.S. subsidiaries, subject to customary exceptions (the “Guarantors”), pursuant to a guaranty by the Guarantors in favor of HSBC Bank USA, National Association, as agent (the “Guaranty”). Borrowings under the Credit Facility are secured by a first-priority lien on substantially all of the assets of MarketWise, LLC and the Guarantors, subject to customary exceptions. The Credit Facility has a term of three years, maturing on October 29, 2024.
Subject to certain conditions and the receipt of commitments, the Loan and Security Agreement allows for revolving commitments under the Credit Facility to be increased or new term commitments to be established by up to $65 million. The existing lenders under the Credit Facility are entitled, but not obligated, to provide such incremental commitments.
Borrowings will bear interest at a floating rate which can be, at our option, either (a) an alternate base rate plus an applicable rate ranging from 0.50% to 1.25% or (b) a LIBOR or EURIBOR rate (with a floor of 0.00%) for the specified interest period plus an applicable rate ranging from 1.50% to 2.25%, in each case, depending on MarketWise, LLC’s Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Loan and Security Agreement). We will pay an unused commitment fee ranging from 0.25% to 0.35% based on unused capacity under the Credit Facility and MarketWise, LLC’s Net Leverage Ratio. The Company may use the proceeds of borrowings under the Credit Facility to finance permitted acquisitions and for working capital and other general corporate purposes.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary affirmative covenants for transactions of this type, including, among others, the provision of financial and other information to the administrative agent, notice to the administrative agent upon the occurrence of certain material events, preservation of existence, maintenance of properties and insurance, compliance with laws, including environmental laws, the provision of additional guarantees, and an affiliate transactions covenant, subject to certain exceptions. The Loan and Security Agreement contains customary negative covenants, including, among others, restrictions on the ability to merge and consolidate with other companies, incur indebtedness, grant liens or security interests on assets, make investments, acquisitions, loans, or advances, pay dividends, and sell or otherwise transfer assets.
The Loan and Security Agreement contains financial maintenance covenants that require MarketWise, LLC to maintain an Interest Coverage Ratio (as defined in the Loan and Security Agreement) of not less than 3.00 to 1.00 and a Net Leverage Ratio (as defined in the Loan and Security Agreement) of not more than 2.00 to 1.00 (which ratio may be increased to 2.50 to 1.00 for a period of time following a permitted acquisition for which the aggregate cash consideration exceeds $50 million), in each case, tested at the end of each fiscal quarter. The Loan and Security Agreement also provides for a number of customary events of default, including, among others: payment defaults to the lenders; voluntary and involuntary bankruptcy proceedings; covenant defaults; material inaccuracies of representations and warranties; cross-acceleration to other material indebtedness; certain change of control events; material money judgments; and other customary events of default. The occurrence of an event of default could result in the acceleration of obligations and the termination of lending commitments under the Loan and Security Agreement.
On December 31, 2013, we entered into a secured uncommitted credit agreement (the “2013 Credit Facility”) with a related party, secured by a first priority lien on all our assets. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we repaid all amounts outstanding under the 2013 Credit Facility. In February 2021, the 2013 Credit Facility was terminated.
Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows provided by (used in) operating, investing, and financing activities for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash provided by operating activities was $63.6 million, primarily due to net loss of $953.9 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $927.8 million and a contribution to cash resulting from net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $89.8 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily related to stock-based compensation expenses of $939.0 million, which was driven by the increase in fair value as a result of a higher probability assigned to the market approach due to the signing of a letter of intent with ADAC during December 2020, and the granting and vesting of certain Class B Units. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenue of $175.6 million due to our overall increase in sales, and an increase in accrued expenses of $14.2 million, partially offset by a net increase in deferred contract acquisition costs of $95.8 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash provided by operating activities was $55.9 million, primarily due to net loss of $541.1 million and non-cash charges of $483.4 million, and partially offset by net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $113.6 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily related to stock-based compensation income of $475.2 million, which was driven by the decrease in fair value of the Class B Units. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenue of $178.8 million due to our overall increase in sales, partially offset by a net increase in deferred contract acquisition costs of $64.9 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by operating activities was $54.2 million, primarily due to net income of $28.0 million adjusted for non-cash charges of $10.8 million and net changes in our operating assets and liabilities of $15.4 million. The non-cash adjustments primarily related to stock-based compensation expenses of $5.6 million resulting from the granting and vesting of certain Class B Units. The changes in operating assets and liabilities were primarily driven by an increase in deferred revenue of $36.7 million due to our overall increase in sales, partially offset by an overall net decrease in related-party payables of $13.8 million with lower allocations from our related-party owner, and an increase in accrued expenses of $10.1 million due to higher commission and bonus accruals for the overall growth in sales and headcount.
Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in investing activities was $8.3 million, primarily driven by the payment of $7.1 million related to the acquisition of Chaikin, and $0.9 million to acquire intangible assets.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in investing activities was $9.6 million, primarily driven by the payment of $9.2 million to acquire the noncontrolling interest of TradeSmith, and $0.3 million for property and equipment.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash provided by investing activities was $12.4 million, primarily driven by the return of the $15.0 million in funds held in deposit for a potential acquisition. This was partially offset by the payment of $1.5 million related to the acquisition of Gold Stock Analyst and $0.8 million in capitalized software development costs.
Financing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash used in financing activities was $30.7 million, primarily due to $135.5 million in distributions to members and $5.5 million in distributions to noncontrolling interests, which is offset by a $113.6 million inflow from proceeds from the Transactions.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash used in financing activities was $103.4 million, primarily due to $101.8 million in distributions to members, $5.4 million repayment of borrowings under the 2013 Credit Facility, and $0.5 million in distributions to noncontrolling interests.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, net cash used in financing activities was $27.3 million, primarily due to $20.5 million in distributions to members, issuance of notes receivable to related parties of $3.1 million, $1.9 million repayment of borrowings under the 2013 Credit Facility, and $1.8 million in distributions to non-controlling interests.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, and expenses, and related disclosures. On an ongoing basis, management evaluates its estimates and assumptions. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Management believes that, of our significant accounting policies, which are described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements, the following accounting policies involve a greater degree of judgment and complexity. Accordingly, these are the policies management believes are the most critical to aid in fully understanding and evaluating our consolidated financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
We primarily earn revenue from services provided in delivering subscription-based financial research, publications, and SaaS offerings to individual subscribers through our online platforms using the five-step method described in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements.
Subscription revenues are recognized evenly over the duration of the subscriptions, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those services. Subscribers are typically billed in advance of the subscriptions. The key estimates related to our revenue recognition are related to our estimated customer lives for our lifetime subscriptions, determination of standalone selling prices, and the amortization period for our capitalized contract costs.
We also offer lifetime subscriptions where we receive an upfront payment upon entering into the contract and receive a lower amount annually thereafter. Certain upfront fees on lifetime subscriptions are paid in installments over a 12-month period and, from time to time, over multiple years. We recognize revenue related to lifetime subscriptions over the estimated customer lives, which is five years. Management has determined the estimated life of lifetime customers based on historic customer attrition rates. The estimated life of lifetime customers was five years for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Our contracts with subscribers may include multiple performance obligations if subscription services are sold with other subscriptions, products, or events within one contract. For such contracts, we allocate net revenues to each performance obligation based on its relative standalone selling price. We generally determine standalone selling prices based on the prices charged to subscribers on a standalone basis.
We capitalize incremental costs that are directly related to the acquisition or renewal of customer contracts, to the extent that the costs are expected to be recovered and if we expect the benefit of these costs to be longer than one year. We have elected to utilize the practical expedient and expense costs to obtain a contract with a subscriber when the expected benefit period is one year or less. Our capitalizable incremental costs include sales commissions to employees and fees paid to marketing vendors that are generally calculated as a percentage of the customer sale. We
also capitalize revenue share fees that are payable to other companies, including related parties, who share their customer lists with us for each successful sale we make to a customer from their list. Capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the shorter of the expected customer life and the expected benefit related directly to those costs, which is approximately four years. The amortization period for contract costs was approximately four years for each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Transactions and Valuation of Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangible Assets
When we acquire a business, we allocate the fair value of purchase consideration to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated fair values as of the acquisition date. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill.
Such valuations require management to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing assets acquired and liabilities assumed include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired customers, trade names, acquired technology from a market participant perspective, and determining useful lives and discount rates. Management’s estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. While management believes the assumptions and estimates it has made in the past have been appropriate, they are inherently uncertain and subject to refinement. During the measurement period, which is up to one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to earnings. We did not have significant measurement period adjustments during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Stock-Based Compensation
Historically, we granted Class B Units to certain key employees. Prior to the Transactions, the Class B Units were classified as liabilities as opposed to equity and remeasured to fair value at the end of each reporting period, with the change in value being charged to stock-based compensation expense. Because the Class B Units were classified as liabilities on our consolidated balance sheet, all profits distributions made to the holders of the Class B Units were considered to be stock-based compensation expenses. Expense was recognized using the greater of the expenses as calculated based on (i) the legal vesting of the underlying units and (ii) a straight-line basis.
Because our Class B Units were not publicly traded, we estimated the fair value of our Class B Units. Historically, the fair values of Class B Units were estimated by our board of managers based on our equity value. Our board of managers considered, among other things, contemporaneous valuations of our equity value prepared by an unrelated third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation. To estimate the fair value of the Class B Units, a two-step valuation approach was used. First our equity value was estimated using a market approach and a discounted cash flow approach by projecting our net cash flows into the future and discounting these cash flows to present value by applying a market discount rate. This calculated equity value was then allocated to the common units outstanding using an option pricing model by determining the distributions available to unit holders in a hypothetical liquidation. Our board of managers exercised reasonable judgment and considered several objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our Class B Units, including:
•our historical and expected operating and financial performance;
•current business conditions;
•our stage of development and business strategy;
•macroeconomic conditions;
•our weighted average cost of capital;
•risk-free rates of return;
•the volatility of comparable publicly traded peer companies; and
•the lack of an active public market for our equity units.
As more fully described in Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements, we completed our Transactions in July 2021. Upon consummation of the Transactions, the vesting of all outstanding Class B awards was accelerated and each Class B Unit was exchanged for Common Units in MarketWise, LLC. The original operating agreement was terminated and replaced by a new operating agreement consistent with the Company’s Up-C structure. This new operating agreement does not contain the put and call options that existed under the previous operating agreement, and the Common Units under the new operating agreement are treated as common equity and do not generate stock-based compensation expense. The Class B Units liability was reclassified to equity as of the transaction date. See Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See the section titled “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in Note 2 of the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this report for more information.