Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations summarizes the significant factors affecting the consolidated operating results, financial condition, liquidity and capital resources of MoneyLion and is intended to help the reader understand MoneyLion, our operations and our present business environment. This discussion should be read in conjunction with MoneyLion’s audited consolidated financial statements and notes to those financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” within this Annual Report on Form 10-K. References to “we,” “us,” “our,” “Company” or “MoneyLion” refer to MoneyLion Technologies Inc. and, as context requires, its wholly-owned subsidiaries for the periods prior to the Business Combination Closing Date and to MoneyLion Inc. and, as context requires, its wholly-owned subsidiaries for the period thereafter. “Fusion” refers to Fusion Acquisition Corp. for the periods prior to the Business Combination Closing Date.
Overview
MoneyLion offers a personalized, all-in-one, digital financial platform that provides convenient, low-cost access to banking, borrowing and investing solutions tailored for our customers, rooted in data and delivered through our proprietary technology platform. We use innovative, data-driven approaches to address our customers’ individual life inflection points and financial circumstances. When our customers enjoy periods of financial excess, we provide tools for them to easily manage their spending and saving goals through our digital banking and automated investing solutions. When our customers experience moments of financial need, we provide them immediate access to innovative lending or earned income advance products and credit improvement programs that can bridge these times of financial stress and improve their financial health. We provide access to personalized proprietary products as well as financial and non-financial products offered by third-party providers. Our subsidiary, MALKA, provides digital media and content production services to us and to its own clients in entertainment, sports, gaming, live streaming and other sectors.
The Company’s key product offerings include:
RoarMoney Premium Mobile Banking - RoarMoney is our FDIC-insured digital demand deposit account with zero minimums, premium features and rewards. Our RoarMoney demand deposit accounts are currently issued by MetaBank. Customers can open a RoarMoney account in minutes through the MoneyLion mobile application, add funds to their account and begin spending using a RoarMoney virtual debit card. RoarMoney accounts also include a physical MoneyLion Debit Mastercard that can be used at any of the approximately 55,000 Allpoint ATM network locations to make no-fee withdrawals. We earn revenue from interchange fees from payment networks based on customer expenditures on the debit card. We also earn revenue from cardholder fees such as a small monthly administrative fee charged to our customers and a fee charged to customers when an out-of-network ATM is utilized to withdraw cash. Both interchange fees and cardholder fees are reflected in fee income. We incur direct costs in connection with the RoarMoney account offering, which include fees paid to the payment networks and our partner bank.
Personalized Investing - MoneyLion Investing is an online investment account that offers access to separately managed accounts invested based on model portfolios comprised of ETFs and managed on a discretionary basis. Advisory services related to the MoneyLion investment account are provided by ML Wealth, an SEC-registered investment adviser and an indirect wholly-owned subsidiary of MoneyLion. Brokerage and custodial services are provided by DriveWealth, a third-party provider. This fully-managed account model allows customers to set their investment strategy and let ML Wealth manage investment decisions to implement that strategy on a discretionary basis. An investment account holder simply identifies their investing comfort zone to receive a personalized portfolio, a mix of stock and bond ETFs. Our managed investment account is available on a standalone basis. We earn revenue from a small monthly administration fee from our customers who use this product, which is reflected in fee income.
Crypto - MoneyLion Crypto is an online cryptocurrency account that enables customers to buy, sell and hold cryptocurrency. The account is provided by Zero Hash. RoarMoney accountholders can open a MoneyLion Crypto account through the MoneyLion mobile application and fund it via their RoarMoney account. In addition, customers can also round up purchases made either on their RoarMoney account or an external bank account to the nearest dollar. The accrued round ups can then be transferred into the customer’s MoneyLion Crypto account and invested in Bitcoin. As of December 31, 2021, the only cryptocurrencies available through the MoneyLion Crypto account were Bitcoin and Ether. In January 2022, MoneyLion Crypto expanded to include Bitcoin Cash and Litecoin. We earn revenue from Zero Hash as they pay us a share of the fees that they earn from our customers in exchange for MoneyLion enabling Zero Hash to effect digital currency-related transactions for our customers. This revenue is reflected in fee income.
Instacash - Instacash is our 0% APR advance product that gives customers early access to their recurring income deposits. Customers can access Instacash advances at any time during a regular deposit period up to their advance limit, providing customers with the flexibility to cover temporary cash needs and avoid costly overdraft fees. There are no fees associated with regular delivery of funds to either a RoarMoney account (typically delivered within 12-48 hours) or an external checking account (typically delivered within two to five business days). However, customers have the option to pay an additional fee in order to receive their funds on an expedited basis (typically within minutes or less), the amount of which is based on the amount of the disbursement and whether the funds are delivered to a RoarMoney account or an external checking account. Customers may also choose to leave MoneyLion an optional tip for use of the Instacash service. We earn revenue from tips and instant transfer fees, both reflected in fee income.
Credit Builder Plus - Our Credit Builder Plus membership program offers a proven path for our customers to access credit and establish or rebuild history, build savings, establish financial literacy and track their financial health. For a monthly cost of $19.99, customers receive a suite of services including banking and investment accounts, credit tracking and financial literacy content, rewards programs and access to loans of up to $1,000 at competitive rates offered by MoneyLion lending subsidiaries, allowing our customers to establish up to twelve months of payment history with all three credit bureaus. We offer our Credit Builder Plus members access to the Lion’s Share Loyalty Program, where members can earn rewards of up to $19.99 per month. We earn revenue from monthly membership fees paid by our customers. These fees are reflected in membership subscription revenue. As part of the Credit Builder Plus membership program, members may apply for a Credit Builder Plus secured personal loan. In addition to a free standard disbursement option, we also offered our customers an option to disburse their funds to their MoneyLion-serviced RoarMoney bank account or external bank account on an expedited basis for an instant transfer fee. This instant disbursement option for Credit Builder Plus loans was removed in the second quarter of 2021. Prior to our launch of Credit Builder Plus in 2019, we offered a ML Plus membership through which we originated unsecured personal loans, ML Plus loans. The ML Plus membership transitioned into the Credit Builder Plus membership in the second quarter of 2020. We earn revenue from interest income, reflected in net interest income on finance receivables, and, prior to the removal of the instant disbursement option, instant transfer fees, reflected in fee income.
Financial Tracking - We offer our customers access to financial tracking tools such as Financial Heartbeat, GamePlan and credit score tracking. Financial Heartbeat is an intelligent, automated tool that guides customers on their financial journey. Financial Heartbeat evaluates customers’ financial situation across four key dimensions: SAVE (savings and financial preparedness), SPEND (spending and personal budget), SHIELD (insurance needs and coverage) and SCORE (credit tracking and health). Through our easy-to-use interface, customers can review the key issues impacting their financial situation, decide what actions to take, evaluate which products to use and receive guidance on how to stay motivated on their journey towards financial wellness. GamePlan provides our customers with a personalized action plan, including a checklist with tasks, meant to help them reach their financial goals across different categories such as spending, saving and more. Financial tracking tools are offered to our customers at no cost and we do not earn revenue from these services.
MoneyLife - Consistent with our vision of establishing MoneyLion as a lifestyle brand, in 2021 we introduced MoneyLife, an online financial education content destination. MoneyLife is an influencer-focused, video content-driven educational platform where customers can share and discover ideas, advice and insights regarding their financial lives. With high usability and sleek design, MoneyLife includes highly personalized content driven by financial advice and education influencers, tools to achieve financial goals and additional ways of earning rewards to shop and save. Through MoneyLife, we provide an additional daily destination site for current customers, drive additional prospective customers to MoneyLion and increase customer engagement and cross-sell opportunities for both MoneyLion and its affiliate partners.
Affiliate marketing program - We work with various affiliate partners that offer products or services that we may recommend to our customers via display ads, offers or campaigns through our digital platform. Our customers can access these offers on a standalone basis. We earn revenue from fees from our affiliate partners in exchange for meeting certain success metrics related to their campaigns such as customers’ clicks, impressions or completed transactions. This revenue is reflected in affiliates income.
Unsecured personal loans - We used to offer unsecured personal loans to our customers. We earned revenue from interest income, which was reflected in net interest income on finance receivables, and fees, which were reflected in fee income. We phased out this offering in the first quarter of 2020 and it is not expected to contribute to revenue going forward.
Credit-related decision servicing - MoneyLion provided credit-related decision servicing to third parties. We earned revenue from fees generated from this service. These fees were reflected in fee income. We phased out this offering in the first quarter of 2020 and it is not expected to contribute to revenue going forward.
Receivables originated on our platform, including Credit Builder Plus loans and Instacash advances, were primarily financed through IIA until the end of the fourth quarter of 2021. As of December 31, 2020, IIA had assets of approximately $86 million, primarily from institutional investors, and had been our primary source of funding for originated receivables since 2018. As of December 31, 2021, IIA had no assets. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, MoneyLion transitioned its primary source of funding for originated receivables from IIA to special purpose vehicle financings from third-party institutional lenders. As of December 31, 2021, there was an outstanding principal balance of $78 million under the ROAR 1 SPV Credit Facility and an outstanding principal balance of $68 million under the ROAR 2 SPV Credit Facility. See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Description of Business and Basis of Presentation” and “- Debt” for more information.
Recent Developments
Recent events impacting our business are as follows:
COVID-19 - The COVID-19 pandemic has caused substantial changes in consumer behavior, restrictions on business and individual activities and high unemployment rates, which led to reduced economic activity and may continue to cause economic volatility. There continue to be significant uncertainties associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, including with respect to the course, duration and severity of the virus and additional variants, future actions that may be taken by governmental authorities and private businesses to contain the COVID-19 pandemic or to mitigate its impact and the effectiveness of such actions, the timing and speed of economic recovery and the ultimate effectiveness of vaccinations for COVID-19.
In response to the economic uncertainty caused by the pandemic, during 2021, we made certain operational changes and implemented certain consumer support programs which were immaterial to our performance. For example, we reduced our marketing activities such as advertising through digital platforms, which have since returned to pre-pandemic levels and also reduced our sponsorship arrangements with third parties. In addition, we implemented underwriting policy changes on a targeted basis to more closely manage credit risk while we further evaluated market conditions. Our underwriting models are dynamic relative to real time changes in our customer’s income and credit profiles and our credit performance remained steady as our underwriting models quickly adapted to these changes. To further support our customers, we expanded our payment deferral options and reduced certain fees, while providing them with relevant content and resources on topics like unemployment insurance and stimulus checks. For instance, for our secured personal loan customers with no prior missed payments, we offered payment deferrals based on a customer’s payment frequency, ranging from one payment deferral for monthly payments and up to three payment deferrals for weekly payments. For our Instacash customers with an outstanding advance, we allowed them to change the scheduled repayment date by up to 14 days. Once the advance was repaid, the customer could request another change to the scheduled repayment on another advance. While there is no limit to the number of changes a customer may be granted, they are limited to one at a time and per advance. Despite the economic uncertainty as a result of COVID-19, we have increased the number of customers on our platform.
In April 2020, the Company borrowed $3.2 million from a bank under the U.S. Small Business Administration’s (“SBA”) Paycheck Protection Program that was introduced as part of the U.S. Government’s COVID-19 relief efforts (the “PPP Loan”). In June 2021, the SBA approved the Company’s application for forgiveness with respect to the entire outstanding balance of the PPP Loan.
Management will continue to monitor the nature and extent of potential impact to the business as the pandemic continues.
Business Combinations - Since January 1, 2020, we have completed the following business combinations:
● WTI Acquisition - In December 2020, Legacy MoneyLion acquired 100% of the outstanding common stock and Series A redeemable convertible preferred shares of Wealth Technologies, Inc. in exchange for 539,592 shares of Legacy MoneyLion Series C-1 Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock, representing total consideration of approximately $27.9 million, which provided us with WTI’s market-leading wealth management decisioning and administration technology. The co-founder and equity holder of WTI was a significant stockholder of Series A redeemable convertible preferred stock of Legacy MoneyLion and was the Chairman of the Legacy MoneyLion board of directors as of the date of the transaction. The purchase price has been allocated to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based upon their respective fair market values. The excess of the aggregate purchase price over the fair values of the net assets acquired was recognized as goodwill of approximately $21.6 million.
● Merger with Fusion - On September 22, 2021, Legacy MoneyLion completed the Business Combination with Fusion and became a publicly traded company. The Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with U.S. GAAP, for which Legacy MoneyLion was determined to be the accounting acquirer. Since the Business Combination was accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, no goodwill or other intangible assets were recorded, in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Fusion was treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. Operations prior to the Business Combination are those of Legacy MoneyLion. See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Business Combination” for additional information.
●
MALKA Acquisition - On November 15, 2021, MoneyLion completed its acquisition of MALKA (the “MALKA Acquisition”). MALKA is a creator network and content platform that provides digital media and content production services to us and to its own clients in entertainment, sports, gaming, live streaming and other sectors. The MALKA Acquisition accelerates MoneyLion’s ability to engage with consumers across all digital and emerging channels, allowing MoneyLion to directly connect with communities natively inside and outside of its existing platform. We intend for MALKA to operate as an indirect, wholly-owned subsidiary of MoneyLion Inc. with MALKA’s pre-acquisition management team leading day-to-day operations.
Related to the closing of the MALKA Acquisition, MoneyLion issued 4,181,441 in restricted shares of MoneyLion Class A Common Stock and paid approximately $10.0 million in cash to the sellers in exchange for all of the issued and outstanding membership interests of MALKA. MoneyLion also paid down approximately $2.2 million of MALKA debt facilities. The sellers may earn up to an additional $35 million payable in restricted shares of MoneyLion Class A Common Stock if MALKA’s revenue and EBITDA exceeds certain targets in 2021 and 2022. The total purchase price of the MALKA Acquisition was approximately $52.7 million.
●
Even Acquisition - On February 17, 2022, MoneyLion completed its acquisition of Even Financial (the “Even Acquisition”). Even Financial digitally connects and matches consumers with real-time personalized financial product recommendations from banks, insurance and fintech companies on mobile apps, websites and other consumer touchpoints through its marketplace technology. Even Financial’s infrastructure leverages machine learning and advanced data science to solve a significant pain point in financial services customer acquisition, seamlessly bridging financial institutions and channel partners via its industry-leading API and embedded finance marketplaces.
The Even Acquisition strengthens MoneyLion’s platform by improving consumers’ abilities to find and access the right financial products to help them manage their financial lives. Even Financial’s growing network includes over 400 financial institution partners and 500 channel partners, covering a breadth of financial services including loans, credit cards, mortgages, savings and insurance products. The Even Acquisition also expands MoneyLion’s addressable market, extends the reach of MoneyLion’s own products, diversifies its revenue mix and furthers MoneyLion’s ambition to be the premier financial super app for hardworking Americans.
At the closing of the Even Acquisition, MoneyLion (i) issued to the equityholders of Even Financial an aggregate of 28,164,811 shares of Series A Convertible Preferred Stock, par value $0.0001 per share, of MoneyLion (the “Preferred Stock”), with a face value of $10.00 per share (the “Conversion Price”), (ii) paid to certain Even Financial management equityholders approximately $14.5 million in cash and (iii) exchanged 8,883,228 options to acquire Even Financial common stock for 5,901,846 options to acquire MoneyLion Class A Common Stock. The equityholders of Even Financial are also entitled to receive an additional payment from MoneyLion of up to an aggregate of 8 million shares of Preferred Stock, with a face value per share equal to the Conversion Price, based on the attributed revenue of Even Financial’s business during the 13-month period commencing January 1, 2022 (the “Earnout”). Based on the Conversion Price of the shares of Preferred Stock issued at the closing of the Even Acquisition and to be issued pursuant to the Earnout, the value of the options to acquire MoneyLion Class A Common Stock and the cash paid to the management equityholders, the total purchase price was approximately $440 million, subject to customary purchase price adjustments for working capital and inclusive of amounts used to repay approximately $5.7 million of existing indebtedness of Even Financial.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
The Company is subject to a number of risks including, but not limited to, the need for successful development of products, the need for additional capital (or financing) to fund operating losses, competition from substitute products and services from larger companies, protection of proprietary technology, dependence on key individuals and risks associated with changes in information technology.
New customer growth and increasing usage across existing customers
Our ability to effectively acquire new customers through our acquisition and marketing efforts, and drive usage of our products across our existing customers is key to our growth. We invested in the platform approach and believe our customers’ experience is enhanced by using our full product suite as we can better tailor the insights and recommendations. In turn, this generates higher revenue and lifetime value from our customer base.
Product expansion and innovation
We believe in the platform approach and providing relevant products to our customers to help them better manage their financial lives, both in times of need and excess. We will continue to invest in enhancing our existing suite of products and developing new products. Any factors that impair our ability to do so may negatively impact our efforts towards retaining and attracting customers.
General economic and market conditions
Our performance is impacted by the relative strength of the overall economy, market volatility, consumer spending behavior and consumer demand for financial products and services. The willingness of our customers to spend, invest, or borrow may fluctuate with their level of disposable income. Other factors such as interest rate fluctuations or monetary policies may also impact our customers’ behavior and our own ability to fund advances and loan volume.
Competition
We compete with several larger financial institutions and technology platforms that offer similar products and services. We compete with those that offer both single point solutions similar to any one of our products as well as more integrated, complete solutions. Some of our competitors may have access to more resources than we do and thus may be able to offer better pricing or benefits to our customers.
Pricing of our products
We derive a substantial portion of our revenue from fees earned from our products. The fees we earn are subject to a variety of external factors such as competition, interchange rates and other macroeconomic factors, such as interest rates and inflation, among others. We may provide discounts to customers who utilize multiple products to expand usage of our platform. We may also lower pricing on our products to acquire new customers. For example, we offer our customers discounts such as Shake ‘N’ Bank cashback and other cashback rewards opportunities as part of our RoarMoney bank account product offering and such discounts are provided to customers based on eligible MoneyLion debit card transactions. On average, approximately 40% of our eligible RoarMoney bank account customers receive this benefit. We also offer our Credit Builder Plus members access to our Lion’s Share Loyalty Program where members can earn up to $19.99 per month. The size of the Lion’s Share reward depends on a customer’s number of logins into the MoneyLion app and purchases using their RoarMoney account in that month. On average, approximately 25% of our Credit Builder Plus members who met the minimum eligibility criteria received a Lion’s Share reward.
Product mix
We provide various products and services on our platform, including a membership program, loans, earned income advances and cryptocurrency, investment and bank accounts. Each product has a different profitability profile. The relative usage of products with high or low profitability and their lifetime value could have an impact on our performance.
Access and cost of financing
Our credit products and other receivables were primarily financed through IIA until the end of the fourth quarter of 2021. Beginning in the fourth quarter of 2021, we transitioned our primary source of funding for originated receivables from IIA to special purpose vehicle financings from third-party institutional lenders. Loss of one or more of the financing sources we have for our credit products and other receivables could have an adverse impact on our performance, and it could be costly to obtain new financing.
Key Performance Metrics
We regularly review several metrics, including the following key metrics, to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate financial projections and make strategic decisions.
Total Originations
We define Total Originations as the dollar volume of the secured personal loans originated and Instacash advances funded within the stated period. We consider Total Originations to be a key performance metric as it can be used to measure the usage and engagement of the customers across our secured personal lending and Instacash products and is a significant driver of net interest income on finance receivables and fee income. Total Originations were $1.1 billion and $410 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and were originated directly by MoneyLion.
Total Customers
We define Total Customers as those customers that have opened at least one account, including banking, membership subscription, secured personal loan, Instacash advance, managed investment account, cryptocurrency account or affiliate product. We consider Total Customers to be a key performance metric as it can be used to understand lifecycle efforts of our customers, as we look to cross-sell products to our customer base and grow our platform. Total Customers were 3.3 million and 1.4 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately 27% and 33%, respectively, of our Total Customers that have opened a banking or managed investment account have funded accounts. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, approximately 64% and 53%, respectively, of our Total Customers have engaged in any activity on our platform.
Total Products
We define Total Products as the total number of products that our Total Customers have opened including banking, membership subscription, secured personal loan, Instacash advance, managed investment account, cryptocurrency account, affiliate product, or signed up for our financial tracking services (with either credit tracking enabled or external linked accounts), whether or not the customer is still registered for the product. If a customer has funded multiple secured personal loans or Instacash advances, it is only counted once for each product type. We consider Total Products to be a key performance metric as it can be used to understand the usage of our products across our customer base. Total Products were 8.0 million and 4.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Adjusted Revenue
Adjusted Revenue is defined as total revenues, net, plus amortization of loan origination costs less provision for loss on membership receivables and provision for loss on fees receivables, revenue derived from phased out products and non-operating income. We believe that Adjusted Revenue provides a meaningful understanding of revenue from ongoing products and recurring revenue for comparability purposes. Adjusted Revenue is a non-GAAP measure and should not be viewed as a substitute for total revenues, net. Refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for further discussion.
Our Adjusted Revenue is further broken into the following categories:
This breakdown of Adjusted Revenue across the categories of fees, payments, advice and interest helps provide our management with a better understanding of Adjusted Revenue by type and may help to inform strategic pricing and resource allocations across our products.
Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss)
We believe Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss) provide a meaningful understanding of an aspect of profitability based on our current product portfolio. These are non-GAAP measures and should not be viewed as a substitute for gross profit nor net income (loss). Refer to the “Non-GAAP Measures” section below for further discussion.
Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table is reference for the discussion that follows.
Revenues
We generate revenues primarily from originating loans, providing membership subscriptions, various product related fees and promoting affiliate services.
Total revenues increased by $91.7 million, or 115.5%, to $171.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $79.4 million for the same period in 2020.
Net interest income on finance receivables
Net interest income on finance receivables is generated by interest earned on unsecured personal loans, ML Plus loans, and Credit Builder Plus loans, which is offset by the amortization of loan origination costs.
Net interest income on finance receivables increased by $2.7 million, or 61.1%, to $7.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $4.3 million for the same period in 2020. Net interest income on finance receivables comprises the following:
Credit Builder Plus loans
Net interest income related to Credit Builder Plus loans increased by $5.4 million, or 128.1%, to $9.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $4.2 million for the same period in 2020. We launched Credit Builder Plus in 2019 and it became our only secured personal loan product in the second quarter of 2020 as we transitioned from ML Plus loans, which contributed to the increase in net interest income as Credit Builder Plus loans increased across both existing and new customers.
ML Plus loans
Net interest income related to ML Plus loans decreased by $0.9 million to $0.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.9 million for the same period in 2020. We transitioned from originating ML Plus loans in the second quarter of 2020 as we offered our new and existing customers our Credit Builder Plus loans. Therefore, these loans are immaterial to our ongoing performance as they represent less than 1% of receivables on our consolidated balance sheets.
Unsecured personal loans
Net interest income related to unsecured personal loans decreased by $1.3 million to $(0.1) million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.2 million for the same period in 2020. During the first quarter of 2020, we phased out originating unsecured personal loans. Therefore, these loans are immaterial to our ongoing performance as they represent less than 1% of receivables on our consolidated balance sheets.
Amortization of loan origination costs
The amortization of loan origination costs increased by $0.6 million, to $2.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.9 million for the same period in 2020.
Membership subscription revenue
Membership subscription revenue increased by $6.4 million, or 24.5%, to $32.4 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $26.0 million for the same period in 2020 due to an increasing number of customers using the Credit Builder Plus membership program. This was slightly offset by a lower monthly Credit Builder Plus membership fee charged to customers compared to the higher priced ML Plus membership offered in the first half of 2020. There was a non-recurring adjustment of $3.6 million in 2020 that reduced membership revenue during that period. Membership subscription revenue would have increased $2.8 million during this period excluding this adjustment.
Affiliates income
Affiliates income increased by $8.7 million, or 387.9%, to $10.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $2.2 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to an increase in income generated from running campaigns promoting various affiliate partners through our digital platform, driven by the expansion of our partner network and growth in Total Customers.
Fee income
Fee income increased by $69.5 million, or 149.0%, to $116.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $46.6 million for the same period in 2020.
Fee income is primarily comprised of the following:
Instant transfer fees
Fee income related to instant transfer fees on Instacash, Credit Builder Plus loans and ML Plus loans increased by $51.6 million to $78.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $26.4 million for the same period in 2020. The increase is largely attributable to the growth of Instacash advances, across both existing and new customers. We launched the instant transfer disbursement option for Instacash customers in 2019 and have since seen a consistent percentage of our Instacash customers elect this disbursement option. In November 2021, our pricing structure was changed from a fixed to a variable structure based on the size of the advance. Additionally, there was a decrease in instant transfer fees on Credit Builder Plus loans as beginning in the second quarter of 2021, the instant transfer disbursement option was removed for Credit Builder Plus loans.
Tips
Fee income related to tips from Instacash increased by $11.7 million to $23.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.8 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was driven by the growth of Instacash advances, across both existing and new customers.
Interchange fees
Fee income related to interchange fees from our bank account increased by $5.8 million to $11.1 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $5.3 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was driven by an increase in bank account customers and transaction volume on the platform.
Cardholder fees
Fee income related to cardholder fees from our bank account increased by $1.2 million to $2.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.3 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily driven by a small monthly administration fee that we began charging our bank account customers in the third quarter of 2020 as well as an increase in bank account customers and usage of ATM-related services.
Administration fees
Fee income related to administration fees from our managed investment account decreased by $0.1 million to $1.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.1 million for the same period in 2020. We charge our investment account customers a small administration fee. We transitioned from a quarterly to monthly frequency, while holding the fee amount the same, in the fourth quarter of 2020, while also instituting a waiver of the fee for Credit Builder Plus members.
Credit-related decision services fees
Fee income related to credit-related decision services decreased to zero for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.7 million for same period in 2020. These decreases in revenue were due to the phasing out of this offering in the first quarter of 2020. We do not expect this to contribute to revenue going forward.
Other income
Other income increased by $4.5 million to $4.7 million, for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $0.2 million for the same period in 2020. This increase was primarily driven by revenue generated by digital media and content production services.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses consist of the following:
Marketing
Marketing increased by $32.1 million, or 290.3%, to $43.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.1 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in costs related to advertising through digital platforms of $26.8 million and other marketing-related activities of $5.6 million, partially offset by a decrease in costs related to sponsor agreements with third parties of $0.3 million. Marketing expenses also included $1.1 million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 related to the Business Combination.
Provision for loss on receivables
Provision for loss on receivables consists of amounts charged during the period to maintain an allowance for credit and advance losses. The allowance represents management’s estimate of the credit losses in our loan and advance portfolio and is based on management’s assessment of many factors, including changes in the nature, volume and risk characteristics of the finance receivables portfolio, including trends in delinquency and charge-offs and current economic conditions that may affect the customer’s ability to pay.
Provision for loss on receivables increased by $39.5 million, or 185.3%, to $60.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $21.3 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase to provision related to Instacash advance receivables of $30.4 million, Instacash instant transfer fees and tips of $4.2 million and Credit Builder Plus loan receivables of $1.0 million, evidenced by the increase in Total Originations from approximately $410 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to approximately $1.1 billion for the same period in 2021. Provision related to membership fees increased by $1.3 million. Related to the ML Plus loans, a legacy product we transitioned from in the second quarter of 2020, the provision increased by $2.3 million, from $(3.3) million in the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 compared to $(1.0) million for the same period in 2021.
Other direct costs
Other direct costs increased by $4.5 million, or 104.4%, to $8.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $4.3 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted from an increase in costs related to our bank account offering, paid to our partner bank, card associations and third-party service providers, which was largely driven by the increase in bank account customers and transaction volume on the platform.
Interest expense
Interest expense increased by $4.3 million, or 145.8%, to $7.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $3.0 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted from an increase in debt from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021. See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Debt” for more information.
Personnel expenses
Personnel expenses increased by $21.7 million, or 89.6%, to $45.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $24.2 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted from an increase in personnel-related costs, such as compensation and benefits, including $6.3 million in non-recurring, discretionary incentive bonus expense related to the Business Combination. Stock-based compensation also increased by $3.4 million. Total employees across all locations increased from 234 as of December 31, 2020 to 556 as of December 31, 2021.
Underwriting expenses
Underwriting expenses increased by $2.0 million, or 32.2%, to $8.3 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $6.2 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in data costs for Total Originations and Total Customers.
Information technology expenses
Information technology expenses increased by $0.4 million, or 6.3%, to $7.5 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $7.0 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in internet hosting expenses of $0.9 million, offset by a decrease in software licenses and subscriptions of $0.4 million.
Bank and payment processor fees
Bank and payment processor fees increased by $10.8 million, or 78.8%, to $24.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $13.7 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in payment processing fees driven by the growth in Total Originations and Total Customers.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
Change in fair value of warrant liability was an expense of $39.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to an expense of $14.4 million for the same period in 2020. The change in fair value of warrant liability is due to changes in inputs that drive the fair value calculations.
Change in fair value of subordinated convertible notes
Change in fair value of subordinated convertible notes was an expense of $41.9 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $4.0 million for the same period in 2020. The increase in expense resulted from the issuance of the convertible subordinated notes in December 2020 and January 2021, which were converted into common stock immediately prior to the Business Combination Closing; the noteholders subsequently received shares of MoneyLion Class A Common Stock upon the Business Combination Closing.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration from mergers and acquisitions
Change in fair value of contingent consideration from mergers and acquisitions was an expense of $6.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to zero for the same period in 2020. The change in fair value and related increase in expense resulted from MALKA’s operating performance exceeding initial estimates available at the time of the MALKA Acquisition.
Professional fees
Professional fees increased by $11.5 million, or 136.4%, to $19.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $8.4 million for the same period in 2020. This increase resulted primarily from an increase in fees related to accounting and consulting services of $5.5 million and legal services of $5.9 million, resulting in part from supplemental accounting and legal support related to the Business Combination and other transaction-related activity such as the MALKA Acquisition and Even Acquisition.
Other operating expenses
Other operating expenses increased by $18.0 million to $19.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1.2 million for the same period in 2020. The increase was driven by an increase of $10.3 million in losses for unrecovered customer purchase transactions related to our banking product, $3.5 million insurance-related expenses, digital media and content production services costs of $2.6 million, $1.9 million related to a reserve for costs related to ongoing legal matters and other general operating expenses. This was offset by the gain related to the forgiveness of loans of $3.2 million as the SBA approved the Company’s application for forgiveness with respect to the entire outstanding balance of the PPP loan in the second quarter of 2021.
Non-GAAP Measures
In addition to total revenues, net, net income (loss) and gross profit, which are measures presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP, management believes that Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EBITDA provide relevant and useful information which is widely used by analysts, investors and competitors in our industry in assessing performance. Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental measures of MoneyLion’s performance that are neither required by nor presented in accordance with U.S. GAAP. Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered as substitutes for U.S. GAAP metrics such as total revenues, net, net income (loss), gross profit or any other performance measures derived in accordance with U.S. GAAP and may not be comparable to similar measures used by other companies.
We define Adjusted Revenue as total revenues, net plus amortization of loan origination costs less provision for loss on membership receivables and provision for loss on fees receivables, revenue derived from phased out products and non-operating income. We believe that Adjusted Revenue provides a meaningful understanding of revenue from ongoing products and recurring revenue for comparability purposes.
We define Adjusted Gross Profit as gross profit less revenue derived from phased out products and non-operating income. We define Adjusted Net Income (Loss) as net income (loss) plus change in fair value of warrants, change in fair value of subordinated convertible notes, change in fair value of contingent consideration from mergers and acquisitions, stock-based compensation, one-time transaction related expenses and other one-time expenses less origination financing cost of capital. We define Adjusted EBITDA as Adjusted Net Income (Loss) plus depreciation and amortization expense and interest expense related to corporate debt. We believe that these measures provide a meaningful understanding of an aspect of profitability based on our current product portfolio.
Adjusted Revenue, Adjusted Gross Profit, Adjusted Net Income (Loss) and Adjusted EBITDA are useful to an investor in evaluating our performance because these measures:
● are widely used by investors to measure a company’s operating performance;
● are metrics used by rating agencies, lenders and other parties to evaluate our credit worthiness; and
● are used by our management for various purposes, including as measures of performance and as a basis for strategic planning and forecasting.
The reconciliation of total revenues, net to Adjusted Revenue for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
(1) Amortization of loan origination costs are included within net interest income from finance receivables.
(2) We deduct provision for loss on receivables related to membership receivables from total revenues, net as it is related to revenue-based receivables. For U.S. GAAP reporting purposes, provision for loss on receivables related to membership receivables is included within provision for loss on receivables on the statement of operations. Refer to Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further discussion.
(3) We deduct provision for loss on receivables related to fees receivables from total revenues, net as it is related to revenue-based receivables. For U.S. GAAP reporting purposes, provision for loss on receivables related to fees receivables is included within provision for loss on receivables on the statement of operations. Refer to Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further discussion.
(4) Revenue, net derived from products that have been phased out includes net interest income and fees related to unsecured personal loans, which are included within net interest income from finance receivables and fee income, respectively, and credit-related decision servicing fees, which is included within fee income. Revenue from unsecured personal loans was $(0.1) million and $1.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue from credit-related decision servicing was zero and $0.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(5) Non-operating income is included within other income and consists of interest income earned on cash balances and is considered non-operating.
The reconciliation of gross profit, which is prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, to Adjusted Gross Profit for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
(1) We deduct provision for loss on receivables related to membership receivables from total revenues, net as it is related to revenue-based receivables. For U.S. GAAP reporting purposes, provision for loss on receivables related to membership receivables is included within provision for loss on receivables on the statement of operations. Refer to Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further discussion.
(2) We deduct provision for loss on receivables related to fees receivables from total revenues, net as it is related to revenue-based receivables. For U.S. GAAP reporting purposes, provision for loss on receivables related to fees receivables is included within provision for loss on receivables on the statement of operations. Refer to the Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” for further discussion.
(3) Revenue, net derived from products that have been phased out includes net interest income and fees related to unsecured personal loans, which are included within net interest income from finance receivables and fee income, respectively, and credit-related decision servicing fees, which is included within fee income. Revenue from unsecured personal loans was $(0.1) million and $1.2 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Revenue from credit-related decision servicing was zero and $0.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(4) Non-operating income is included within other income and consists of interest income earned on cash balances and is considered non-operating.
The reconciliation of net loss, which is prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP, to Adjusted Net Loss and to Adjusted EBITDA for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is as follows:
(1) We add back one-time expenses that are related to transactions, including mergers and acquisitions and financings, that occurred. Generally these expenses are included within professional fees in the statement of operations.
(2) We add back other one-time expenses, not related to transactions, such as litigation-related expenses and non-recurring costs or gains. Generally these expenses are included within other expenses or professional fees in the statement of operations.
(3) Origination financing cost of capital represents the preferred return attributable to IIA investors. This is included within temporary equity on the consolidated balance sheet. As we transitioned away from IIA in December 2021, this will have no impact on our Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted Net Income (Loss) going forward.
(4) We add back the interest expense related to all outstanding corporate debt, excluding outstanding principal balances related to the Roar 1 SPV Credit Facility and the Roar 2 SPV Credit Facility. For U.S. GAAP reporting purposes, interest expense related to corporate debt is included within interest expense in the statement of operations.
Changes in Financial Condition to December 31, 2021 from December 31, 2020
Assets
Cash and restricted cash
Cash and restricted cash increased by $225.3 million, or 1,076.6%, to $246.2 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $20.9 million as of December 31, 2020. Refer to the “Cash Flows” section below for further discussion on the net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, investing activities and financing activities during the period.
Receivables, net
Receivables, net increased by $71.8 million, or 120.3%, to $131.4 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $59.7 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily driven by the increase in Total Originations, including Credit Builder Plus loans and Instacash advances, membership fees and Instacash tips and instant transfer fees as Instacash continued to see strong growth. This was partially offset by the decrease in ML Plus loans as we completed our transition to Credit Builder Plus loans in 2020 as well as unsecured personal loans as we phased out this offering in 2020. Refer to the “Results of Operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020” section above for further discussion on the changes in revenues and provisions for loss on receivables.
Goodwill and intangible assets, net
Goodwill and intangible assets, net increased by $46.8 million, or 151.8%, to $77.7 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $30.8 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase was attributable to the MALKA Acquisition, which closed in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Other assets
Other assets increased by $22.7 million, or 194.1%, to $34.4 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.7 million as of December 31, 2020. This was primarily attributable to an increase in prepaid expenses of $7.2 million, including $5.4 million in insurance premiums, receivable from payment processor - debit card collections and others of $12.3 million and other assets of $3.2 million.
Liabilities
Debt agreements
Debt agreements increased by $140.0 million, or 300.4%, to $186.6 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $46.6 million as of December 31, 2020. This increase was primarily attributable to $146.0 million of aggregate new debt related to the ROAR 1 SPV Credit Facility and the ROAR 2 SPV Credit Facility and the additional $20.0 million borrowings on the Second Lien Loan (as defined herein), partially offset by the conversion of the fair value Subordinated Convertible Notes (as defined herein) of $14.0 million, repayment of $5.0 million of the Second Lien Loan and forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $3.2 million. Refer to the Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Debt” for further discussion on financing transactions during the period.
Accounts payable and accrued expenses
Accounts payable and accrued expenses increased by $42.5 million, or 202.6%, to $63.5 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $21.0 million as of December 31, 2020, which was attributable to an increase in operating expenses during the period, $5.4 million of accrued liability related to insurance premiums, $3.7 million of transaction costs related to the Business Combination that remain unpaid as of December 31, 2021 and $18.0 million of contingent consideration related to the MALKA Acquisition. Refer to the “Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020” section above for further discussion on operating expense activity during the period.
Warrant liability
Warrant liability decreased by $16.4 million, or 66.5%, to $8.3 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $24.7 million as of December 31, 2020. Part of the change is due to the conversion of older warrants and acquisition of new warrants as part of the Business Combination described in Note 3, “Business Combination.” Also refer to the “Results of Operations for the Twelve Months Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020” section above for further discussion on the change in fair value of warrant liability.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As a result of the Business Combination, we raised net proceeds of $293.2 million, including the contribution of cash held in Fusion’s trust account from its initial public offering of $91.1 million, post redemption of Fusion’s common stock held by Fusion’s public stockholders prior to the Business Combination, and $250.0 million of private investment in public equity (“PIPE”) at $10.00 per share of MoneyLion Class A Common Stock, net of transaction expenses. Prior to the Business Combination, the funds received from previous common stock and redeemable convertible preferred stock equity financings, as well as the Company’s ability to obtain lending commitments, provided the liquidity necessary for the Company to fund its operations. We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents and cash flows from operating activities will be sufficient to meet our operating working capital needs for at least the next twelve months. Our future financing requirements will depend on several factors including our growth, the timing and level of spending to support continued development of our platform, the expansion of marketing activities and merger and acquisition activity. In addition, growth of our finance receivables increases our liquidity needs, and any failure to meet those liquidity needs could adversely affect our business. Additional funds may not be available on terms favorable to us or at all. If the Company is unable to generate positive operating cash flows, additional debt and equity financings or refinancing of existing debt financings may be necessary to sustain future operations. As part of the Even Acquisition, which closed on February 17, 2022, we agreed to pay approximately $14.5 million in cash to certain Even Financial management equityholders.
The following table presents the Company’s cash, restricted cash and receivable from payment processor, as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows
The following table presents cash provided by (used in) operating, investing and financing activities during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $8.6 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $3.0 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. The primary driver was a decrease in profitability of approximately $12.6 million during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, primarily as the result of increases in marketing expenses, other direct costs, personnel expenses, bank and payment processor fees, professional fees and other expenses, which were partially offset by increases in net revenues.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $144.4 million and $42.7 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash used in investing activities was primarily related to an increase in net originations and collections of finance receivables of $90.2 million and $12.1 million spent on the MALKA Acquisition during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $378.2 million and $14.8 million for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in cash provided by financing activities was primarily attributable to net proceeds from the Business Combination of $293.2 million, proceeds of $146.0 million from aggregate new debt related to the ROAR 1 SPV Credit Facility and the ROAR 2 SPV Credit Facility and an increase in proceeds from the issuance of convertible notes of $26.8 million, partially offset by an increase in outflows to noncontrolling interests of $73.9 million and payments for redeemed common stock and stock options of $22.4 million.
Financing Arrangements
Refer to the Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Debt” for further discussion on financing transactions during the period.
Contractual Obligations
The table below summarizes debt, lease and other minimum cash obligations outstanding as of December 31, 2021:
Secured Loans and Other Debt
For more information regarding our secured loans and other debt, see Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Debt” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Equity
MoneyLion Class A Common Stock
After the Business Combination Closing, MoneyLion’s Certificate of Incorporation authorized the issuance of an aggregate of 2,200 million shares of capital stock, consisting of 2,000,000,000 shares of MoneyLion Class A Common Stock, $0.0001 par value per share and 200,000,000 shares of preferred stock, $0.0001 par value per share. Immediately following the Business Combination, 970,000 shares of MoneyLion Class A Common Stock were redeemed for $9.7 million.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
For more information regarding our redeemable convertible preferred stock, see Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of critical accounting policies and estimates.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
See Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently issued accounting pronouncements that may potentially impact our results of operations, financial condition or cash flows.