Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “us,” “our” or “we” refer to McLaren Technology Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes included herein.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
All statements other than statements of historical fact included in this Report including, without limitation, statements under this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward- looking statements. When used in this Report, words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend” and similar expressions, as they relate to us or the Company’s management, identify forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements are based on the beliefs of management, as well as assumptions made by, and information currently available to, the Company’s management. Actual results could differ materially from those contemplated by the forward- looking statements as a result of certain factors detailed in our filings with the SEC. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to us or persons acting on the Company’s behalf are qualified in their entirety by this paragraph.
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a newly organized blank check company incorporated on February 24, 2021, as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effect a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses.
The registration statement for our initial public offering was declared effective on November 2, 2021. On November 5, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering of 20,125,000 units, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option to purchase 2,625,000 units, at a purchase price of $10.00 per unit. Transaction costs amounted to $13,436,005 consisting of $4,025,000 of underwriting commissions, $7,043,750 of deferred underwriting commissions, $1,847,600, which represents the fair value of the representative shares in excess of cash paid, and $519,655 of other offering costs, and was all charged to stockholders’ deficit.
Simultaneously with the consummation of the initial public offering, we consummated the private placement of 9,050,000 placement warrants to the sponsor, at a price of $1.00 per placement warrant, generating gross proceeds to us of $9,050,000.
Upon the closing of the initial public offering and the private placement, an amount of $205,275,000 ($10.20 per unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the units in the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants was deposited into a trust account, located in the United States with Continental acting as trustee, and will be invested only in U.S. government securities, within the meaning set forth in Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act, having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the trust account that may be released to us to pay our tax obligations and up to $100,000 of interest that may be used for our dissolution expenses, the proceeds from the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants held in the trust account will not be released from the trust account until the earliest to occur of: (a) the completion of the initial business combination, (b) the redemption of any public shares properly submitted in connection with a stockholder vote to amend our certificate of incorporation (i) to modify the substance or timing of our obligation to allow redemption in connection with the initial business combination or certain amendments to our charter prior thereto or to redeem 100% of the public shares if we does not complete our initial business combination within the completion window or (ii) with respect to any other provision relating to stockholders’ rights or pre-initial business combination activity, and (c) the redemption of the public shares if we are unable to complete our initial business combination within the completion window, subject to applicable law. The proceeds deposited in the trust account could become subject to the claims of our creditors, if any, which could have priority over the claims of our public stockholders.
We will have only until the completion window to complete the initial business combination. However, if we are unable to complete the initial business combination within the completion window (and our stockholders have not approved an amendment to our charter extending this time period), we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s liquidity needs up to November 5, 2021 had been satisfied through a payment from the sponsor of $25,000 (see Note 5) for the founder shares to cover certain offering costs and the loan under an unsecured promissory note from the sponsor of up to $300,000 (see Note 5). Since the Company’s initial public offering through December 31, 2021, the Company’s liquidity needs were satisfied through funds from the private placement warrants. At December 31, 2021, the Company had $1,017,354 in its operating bank account and working capital of $1,017,795, which mainly consisted of the portion of proceeds of the sale of the private placement warrants not held in the trust account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of the sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us with working capital loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any working capital loans.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that we will have sufficient working capital to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Going Concern
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standard Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution described in Note 1, should the Company be unable to complete an initial business combination, raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The Company has until February 5, 2023, 15 months from the closing of the initial public offering, to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate an initial business combination by the specified period. If an initial business combination is not consummated by February 5, 2023, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. These financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recovery of the recorded assets or the classification of the liabilities that might be necessary should the Company be unable to continue as a going concern. The Company intends to complete an initial business combination before the mandatory liquidation date. However, there can be no assurance that the Company will be able to consummate any business combination by February 5, 2023.
Risks and Uncertainties
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations, and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of these financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Results of Operations
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity for the period from February 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and the initial public offering. We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents from the proceeds derived from the initial public offering. We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from February 24, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $333,127, which consisted of formation costs of $345,322 offset by interest income of $12,195.
Contractual Obligations
We had contractual obligation relating to the administrative support agreement, registration rights, underwriters’ agreement and promissory note as discussed below.
Administrative Support Agreement
Commencing on the date that our securities were first listed on the Nasdaq Global Market, we agreed to pay an affiliate of our sponsor $10,000 per month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support services. Upon completion of the initial business combination or our liquidation, we will cease paying these monthly fees.
Registration Rights
The holders of the founder shares, the private placement warrants (including securities contained therein) and warrants (including securities contained therein) that may be issued upon conversion of working capital loans, and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and any shares of Class A common stock and warrants that may be issued upon conversion as part of the working capital loans and Class A common stock issuable upon conversion of the founder shares, are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement signed on November 5, 2021, requiring us to register such securities for resale (in the case of the founder shares, only after conversion to the Class A common stock). The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to our completion of our initial business combination and rights to require us to register for resale such securities pursuant to Rule 415 under the Securities Act. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidated damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
On November 5, 2021, we paid a cash underwriting discount of 2.0% per unit, or $4,025,000.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial public offering, or $7,043,750, which will be paid to the underwriters from the funds held in the trust account upon completion of our initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Promissory Note
On March 1, 2021, the sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the initial public offering. This loan is noninterest bearing, unsecured and was due at the earlier of December 31, 2021 or the closing of the initial public offering. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had fully repaid the outstanding balance of $248,545.
Critical Accounting Policies
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We will account for our common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheet.
We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable common stock to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable common stock are affected by charges against additional paid in capital and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss Per Common Share
We comply with the accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per common share is computed by dividing net loss by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. At December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities and other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stock and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted loss per common share is the same as basic loss per common share for the period presented.
Warrants
We account for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in FASB ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common shares and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all of the criteria for equity classification, the warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. We account for our outstanding warrants as equity-classified instruments.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
Inflation
We do not believe that inflation had a material impact on our business, revenues or operating results during the period presented.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company,” as defined in Section 2(a) of the Securities Act, as modified by the JOBS Act, and it may take advantage of certain exemptions from various reporting requirements that are applicable to other public companies that are not emerging growth companies including, but not limited to, not being required to comply with the auditor attestation requirements of Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, reduced disclosure obligations regarding executive compensation in our periodic reports and proxy statements, and exemptions from the requirements of holding a nonbinding advisory vote on executive compensation and stockholder approval of any golden parachute payments not previously approved.
Further, Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such election to opt out is irrevocable. We have elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when a standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, us, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of our financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.