Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. When reviewing the discussion below, you should keep in mind the substantial risks and uncertainties that could impact our business. In particular, we encourage you to review the risks and uncertainties described in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. These risks and uncertainties could cause actual results to differ materially from those projected in forward-looking statements contained in this report or implied by past results and trends. Our fiscal year ends on December 31. Our historical results are not necessarily indicative of the results that may be expected for any period in the future.
Overview
We are a leading provider of cloud-based software solutions for financial institutions, including banks, credit unions, mortgage lenders, specialty lending providers, and CRAs. Financial institutions are undergoing digital transformation as they seek to transition business models, create new revenue streams, and increase customer engagement. We support our customers’ digital transformations by helping them create a superior consumer experience with our mission-critical loan origination software, or LOS, digital lending platform, and data analytics. Our solutions allow our customers to meet their clients’ financial needs across the institution, which enables improved client acquisition and retention. Additionally, our solutions allow our customers to operate more efficiently by enabling automated loan decisioning and enhanced risk management.
The effective delivery and management of secure and advanced digital solutions in the complex and heavily regulated financial services industry requires significant resources, personnel, and expertise. We provide digital solutions that are designed to be highly configurable, scalable, and adaptable to the specific needs of our customers. We design and develop our solutions with an open platform approach intended to provide comprehensive integration among our solution offerings and our customers’ internal systems and third-party systems. Our solutions are central to the financial institution’s technology ecosystem and help drive additional business volume for our customers both directly and indirectly through our Partner Marketplace. Our omni-channel borrowing experience seamlessly integrates all the touch points a borrower may have with the financial institution (remote via the web or an app, in person at a branch, or telephonically through an operator). In addition to our streamlined workflow, which has been refined over twenty years with input from across our customer base, our Partner Marketplace provides our customers optional integrations, the collective capabilities of which we believe further distinguish our solution from that of competitors.
The financial services sector is in the midst of a transition from offering primarily in-branch services to providing hybrid in-person and digital experiences for consumers. This transition has recently accelerated, leading to increased investment in software that enables digital capabilities. We are well-positioned to assist our customers to compete with tier 1 banks and digital market entrants. We enable mid-market financial institutions to leverage their cost of capital advantage and community presence by allowing them to execute faster. With the digital edge we provide, our customers can become more competitive in this evolving environment, which, in turn, can drive further volume on our platform.
We deliver our solutions to the substantial majority of our customers using a SaaS model under which our customers pay subscription fees for the use of our solutions as well as fees for transactions processed using our solutions. Our subscription fees consist of revenues from software solutions that are governed by pricing and terms contained in contracts between us and our customers. The initial term of our contracts is typically three years, but may range from one to seven years. Our customer contracts are typically not cancellable without penalty. Our contracts almost always contain an evergreen auto-renewal term that is often for a one-year extension after the initial term, but can extend the auto-renewal of the contract up to the length of the original term. Our subscription fee revenues include annual base fees, platform partner fees, and, depending on the product, fees per search or per loan application or per closed loan (with contractual minimums based on volume) that are charged on a monthly basis, which we refer to as volume-based fees. We earn additional revenues based on the volume of loan applications or closed loans processed above our customers’ contractual minimums.
As a result of this pricing approach, our revenues from our customers grow as our customers add additional transaction types, purchase more modules, utilize more of our partner integrations, or see increased transaction volume. We generally sell our solutions through our direct sales organization or channel partners and recognize our subscription fee revenues over the terms of the customer agreements.
Our revenues per customer vary from period to period based on the length and timing of customer implementations, sales of additional solutions to existing customers, changes in the number of transactions processed (including impacts from seasonality and cyclicality), and variations among existing customers and new customers with respect to the mix of purchased solutions and related pricing.
We seek to strengthen and grow our customer relationships by providing consistent, high-quality implementations and customer support services, which we believe drive higher customer retention and incremental sales opportunities within our existing customer base. We plan to continue investing in migrating our solutions onto a single platform resident in a public cloud and driving product development to further increase customer cross-selling opportunities and retention. We believe that our increased focus on our go-to-market strategy and strategic partnerships will drive incremental opportunities for revenue and accelerate client cross-sell growth.
In addition, we believe there is untapped market potential in the loan origination and digital banking markets. We believe significant opportunity for additional customer acquisition and revenue growth exists as financial institutions continue to adopt online lending and account opening practices and require more efficient technologies. We provide these services to institutions of all sizes and complexities, but currently focus on the middle market. By focusing on better sales execution, providing and allocating resources where needed, and improving marketing efforts, we are confident in our ability to expand our customer base within our current target market.
We cater largely to financial institutions such as community banks and credit unions with assets under management between $100 million and $10 billion. In recent years community banks have continued to compete with their typically larger non-community bank competitors, and the FDIC reported that in 2019 net interest income accounted for over 78 percent of community bank net operating revenues. A large opportunity exists in expanding our target market to new customers with less than $100 million or greater than $10 billion in assets under management. In our down-market, smaller institutions commonly use spreadsheets or other inexpensive alternatives. These companies have a smaller volume of loans per month, but there is opportunity to alter our solutions to offer decreased pricing and functionality in order to lower implementation fees.
We have continuously invested in expanding and improving our solutions since they were first introduced two decades ago, and we intend to continue investing both organically and inorganically through acquisitions to expand our portfolio. We are focused on introducing new solutions and enhancing services and capabilities in areas including digital lending, data insights, and collections to further expand our reach into the consumer lending markets. In addition to developing our solutions organically, we may selectively pursue acquisitions, joint ventures, or other strategic transactions that provide additional capabilities or customers, or both. Acquisitions to date have included CRIF Lending Solutions in June 2018, and TCI, in November 2020. TCI is the creator of DecisionLender, a SaaS loan origination solution. We believe that with the addition of TCI, our position as a vendor of choice is enhanced among financial institutions seeking solutions to manage their needs from initiation of client relationships to facilitating the extension of credit to their clients. In December 2020, we acquired all of the assets of TazWorks. TazWorks provides software and data solutions to CRAs focused on the employment and tenant screening market, a market that is adjacent and complementary to our current solutions for credit-focused CRAs. In April 2021, we acquired Saylent, a data analytics and marketing solution that offers insights to financial institutions that help drive account and credit and debit card usage and should allow us to accelerate market availability of already planned product investments.
We have designed our Partner Marketplace to act as the gateway for third parties to access our customers, which allows our customers to leverage the capabilities from these third parties to enable an accelerated loan process with improved efficiency and reduced cost. We are able to capitalize on one-time service fees from our partners upon their integration into our Partner Marketplace and a revenue share from our partners as they derive revenues from our software solution. As we grow our business, we expect to add additional product partners and drive additional monetization opportunities. We also intend to cultivate and leverage existing and future partners to grow our market presence.
We believe that delivery of consistent, high-quality implementations and customer support services is a significant driver of purchasing and renewal decisions of our prospects and customers. To develop and maintain a reputation for high-quality service, we seek to build deep relationships with our customers through our customer support organization, which we staff with personnel who are motivated by our common mission of using technology to help our customers succeed and who are knowledgeable with respect to the regulated and complex nature of the financial services industry. As we grow and scale our business, we intend to continue to invest in and grow our internal services and support organization, as well as partner with high quality third-party organizations, to support our customers’ needs and maintain our reputation.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The COVID-19 pandemic has had widespread, rapidly-evolving, and unpredictable impacts on global societies, economies, financial markets, and business practices (including in California where our corporate headquarters are located). Federal and state governments have implemented various measures in an effort to contain the virus, which have caused, and are continuing to cause, business slowdowns or shutdowns in affected areas, both regionally and worldwide.
Our focus remains on promoting employee health and safety, serving our customers, complying with regulations, and ensuring business continuity. We continue to assess local regulations and restrictions across the United States and the administration of vaccine programs to ensure that our return to work is thoughtful, prudent, and handled with an abundance of caution with the health of our employees being the top priority.
There continues to be uncertainty as to the duration and extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the emergence of new variants, may adversely impact our business operations, financial performance, and results of operations, as well as macroeconomic conditions, at this time. See Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” for further discussion of the impact and possible future impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Key Operating Measures
In addition to the United States generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, measures described below in “-Components of Operating Results,” we monitor the following operating measures to evaluate growth trends, plan investments, and measure the effectiveness of our sales and marketing efforts:
Annual Recurring Revenue
We calculate annual recurring revenue, or ARR, as the total subscription fee revenues calculated in the latest twelve-month measurement period for those revenue-generating entities in place throughout the entire twelve-month measurement period plus the subscription fee revenues calculated on an annualized basis from new entity activations in the measurement period. We believe that the annualized subscription fee revenues calculated from these new activations in a particular measurement period provide a reasonable estimate of the total subscription fee revenues to be recognized from these entities once they are on our platform for a full twelve-month period due to the long-term nature of our agreements and the volume-based aspect of our pricing model. Although our business can be impacted by seasonality of consumer borrowing trends, we anticipate the impacts of any seasonality to be comparable on a period-to-period basis. Our calculation includes only subscription fee revenues and excludes any professional services revenues and other revenues. We believe ARR is an important metric indicating the scale and growth of our business. Our ARR was $240.1 million, $193.0 million, and $142.8 million as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. Our use of ARR has limitations as an analytical tool, and investors should not consider it in isolation. Other companies in our industry may calculate annual recurring revenue differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure. We have refined our methodology for calculating ARR as reflected in the above recalculated numbers for historical periods.
Total Customers
We define a customer as a legal entity that has a contractual relationship with us to use our software solutions. A single entity could have agreements across multiple lines of business, all of which together would be considered a single customer. The net rate at which we add customers varies based on our implementation capacity, the size and unique needs of our customers, the readiness of our customers to implement our solutions, customer acquisition through any strategic transactions we complete, and customer attrition, including as a result of merger and acquisition activity among financial institutions whereby the acquirer requests assignment of the agreement to the resulting entity or a renegotiation of the acquirer’s agreement to include the acquired company’s activities. We believe the number of total customers is a key indicator of our market penetration, growth, and future revenues. Our ability to attract new customers is primarily impacted by the effectiveness of our marketing programs and our direct sales force. Accordingly, we have invested in and intend to continue to invest in our marketing programs and direct sales force. We had 1,901, 1,852, and 1,236 customers on our platform as of December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. We have refined our methodology for calculating the customer count as reflected in the above recalculated numbers for historical periods.
Organic Customer Growth Rate
We utilize our organic customer growth rate to not only monitor the satisfaction of our customers but also to measure our ability to successfully bring new customers on board and evaluate the effectiveness of our business strategies. We define organic customer growth rate as the percentage increase in the number of total customers on the last day of the measurement period compared to the number of total customers on the day twelve months prior to the measurement date, which measures the change in total customers, net of both customer terminations and customer additions between the respective measurement periods. Our organic customer growth rate calculation excludes and will exclude the impact of any acquisitions or divestitures. We had an organic customer growth rate of 2.2% for the measurement period ended December 31, 2021, and 2.0% for the measurement period ended December 31, 2020. Our use of organic customer growth rate has limitations as an analytical tool, and investors should not consider it in isolation.
ARR Net Retention Rate
We have refined our calculation of the ARR Net Retention Rate by calculating the ARR recorded in the latest twelve-month measurement period for the cohort of revenue-generating entities in place throughout the entire prior twelve-month measurement period. We divide the result by the cohort’s ARR recorded in the twelve-month period that is immediately prior to the beginning of the current measurement period. This calculation refinement will allow us to capture future retention analytics through time for each cohort. Our ARR Net Retention Rate was 103% for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our ARR Net Retention Rate provides insight into growth in the usage of our solutions, sales of new solutions and services into revenue generating entities during the current year and attrition. Our previous ARR Net Retention Rate for 2020 of 120% was calculated according to our prior calculation methodology at an aggregated entity level.
The most significant drivers of improvements in our ARR Net Retention Rate each year are the increases in adoption of additional solutions such as additional products, channels, loan types, or modules, the increase in volume transacted on our systems, and price increases. The most significant factors in the decrease in ARR Net Retention Rate are customer attrition and reduced volume transacted on our systems either due to decreased product usage or lower transaction volumes. Our use of ARR Net Retention Rate has limitations as an analytical tool, and investors should not consider it in isolation. Other companies in our industry may calculate revenue retention rate differently, which reduces its usefulness as a comparative measure.
Components of Operating Results
We have one primary business activity and operate in a single operating and reportable segment.
Revenues
Our revenues consist of three components: subscription fees, professional services, and other revenues.
Subscription Fee Revenues
Our subscription fees consist of revenues from software solutions that are governed by pricing and terms contained in contracts between us and our customers. Our subscription fee revenues include annual base fees, platform partner fees, and, depending on the solution, fees per search or per loan application or per closed loan (with contractual minimums based on volume) that are charged on a monthly basis, which we refer to as volume-based fees.
Our software solutions are hosted in either our data centers or cloud-based hosting services and are generally available for use as hosted application arrangements under subscription fee agreements. Subscription fees from these applications are recognized over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term beginning on the date our solution is made available to the customer. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and deferred revenues or revenues, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Additional fees for monthly usage above the levels included in the standard subscription fee are recognized as revenue in the month when the usage amounts are determined and reported.
Professional Services Revenues
We offer implementation, configuration, consulting, and training services for our software solutions and SaaS offerings. Revenues from services are recognized in the period the services are performed, provided that revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Other Revenues
We enter into referral and marketing agreements with various third parties, in which revenues are primarily generated from transactions initiated by the third parties’ customers. We may introduce our customers to a referral partner or offer additional services available from the referral partner via an integration with our solutions. We market our partners’ solutions to our customers as a way not only to generate revenue but also to ensure that our customers are leveraging the full benefit of our solution, which includes the capabilities offered through our partners. Revenues are recognized in the period the services are performed, provided that collection of the related receivable is reasonably assured.
Cost of Revenues
Cost of revenues consists primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses, and share-based compensation for employees providing services to our customers. This includes the costs of our implementation, customer support, data center, and customer training personnel. Additional expenses include fees paid to third-party vendors in connection with delivering services to customers.
Cost of revenues also includes cloud-based hosting services, an allocation of general overhead costs, and the amortization of developed technology. We allocate general overhead expenses to all departments based on the number of employees in each department, which we consider to be a fair and representative means of allocation.
We capitalize certain software development costs related to programmers, software engineers, and quality control teams working on our software solutions. We commence amortization of capitalized costs for solutions that have reached general release. Capitalized software development costs are amortized to cost of revenues over their estimated economic lives.
We intend to continue to increase our investments in our implementation and customer support teams and technology infrastructure to serve our customers and support our growth. We expect cost of revenues to continue to grow in absolute dollars, after adjusting for one-time cost share-based compensation charges resulting from our corporate conversion, as we grow our business but to fluctuate as a percentage of revenues based principally on the level and timing of implementation and support activities and other related costs. For more information on our corporate conversion in connection with our IPO, see Note 1 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Gross Profit and Gross Margin
Gross profit is revenues less cost of revenues, and gross margin is gross profit as a percentage of revenues. Gross profit has been, and will continue to be, affected by various factors, including the mix of our subscription fees, professional service and other revenues, the costs associated with our personnel, third-party vendors, and cloud-based hosting services, and the extent to which we expand our implementation and customer support services. We expect that our gross margin will fluctuate from period to period depending on the interplay of these various factors. Our gross margin was 66.5% 70.7% and 69.0% for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively.
Operating Expenses
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including commissions, employee benefits, bonuses, and share-based compensation. Sales and marketing expenses also include expenses related to advertising, lead generation, promotional event programs, corporate communications, travel, outside consulting fees, and allocated overhead. Commissions related to software sales are generally capitalized and then amortized over the expected period of customer benefit.
Sales and marketing expenses are also impacted by the timing of significant marketing programs such as our annual client conference, which we typically hold during the second quarter. We plan to continue investing in sales and marketing by increasing our number of sales and marketing personnel and expanding our sales and marketing activities. As a result, we expect our sales and marketing expenses to increase in absolute dollars, after adjusting for one-time cost share-based compensation charges resulting from our corporate conversion, and as a percentage of revenues over the long term as we scale the business and integrate our acquisitions. We believe these investments will help us build brand awareness, add new customers, and expand sales to our existing customers as they continue to buy more solutions from us.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses include salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses, share-based compensation. Research and development expenses also include third-party contractor expenses, software development costs, allocated overhead, and other related expenses incurred in developing new solutions and enhancing existing solutions.
Certain research and development costs that are related to our software development, which include salaries and other personnel-related costs attributed to programmers, software engineers, and quality control teams working on our software solutions, are capitalized and are included in intangible assets, net on the consolidated balance sheets.
We believe that continuing to improve and enhance our solutions is essential to maintaining our reputation for innovation and growing our customer base and revenues. We plan to continue investing in research and development by increasing the number of our software developers. As a result, we expect our research and development expenses to increase in absolute dollars, after adjusting for one-time cost share-based compensation charges resulting from our corporate conversion, over the long term as we scale the business, including through integration of our acquisitions.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other personnel-related costs, including employee benefits, bonuses, and share-based compensation, of our administrative, finance and accounting, information systems, legal, and human resources employees. General and administrative expenses also include consulting and professional fees, insurance, and travel.
General and administrative expenses include depreciation and amortization of property and equipment and amortization of acquired intangibles. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives, such as customer relationships, trademarks, and non-competition agreements, are amortized over their estimated useful lives on either a straight-line or accelerated basis, depending on the nature of the intangible asset.
We expect to continue to incur incremental expenses associated with the growth of our business and to meet increased compliance requirements associated with operating as a public company. These expenses include costs to comply with Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and other regulations governing public companies, increased costs of directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, and investor relations activities, partially offset by the termination of sponsor-related costs. As a result, we expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in absolute dollars, after adjusting for one-time cost share-based compensation charges resulting from our corporate conversion, but to decrease as a percentage of revenues over the long term as we scale the business and continue to adjust to being a public reporting company.
Total Other (Income) Expense, Net
Total other (income) expense, net consists primarily of interest expense, net and loss on debt repayment and extinguishment. Interest expense consists of interest attributable to our credit facilities, amortization of a financing obligation from a failed sale-leaseback transaction during 2020, and amortization of lender-related fees and other direct incremental costs of securing financing, partially offset by interest income from our interest-bearing cash accounts. Loss on debt repayment and extinguishment consists of the removal of deferred financing fees associated with the November 2021 and July 2021 repayments.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our income tax expense, deferred tax assets and liabilities, and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits reflect management’s best estimate of current and future taxes to be paid. We are subject to federal income taxes in the United States and numerous state jurisdictions. Significant judgments and estimates are required in the determination of the consolidated income tax expense.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. If they are not, deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance. In making such a determination, all available positive and negative evidence is considered, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If it is subsequently determined that deferred tax assets would be more likely than not realized in the future, in excess of their net recorded amount, an adjustment would be made to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes. After a review of the four sources of taxable income (as described above), and after consideration of our continuing cumulative income position, inclusive of impact from permanent differences, as of December 31, 2021, the Company has not recorded a valuation allowance on its deferred tax assets.
We have recorded an uncertain tax position with respect to our R&D credits. There are no penalties or interest recorded on these liabilities as the credits have not yet been fully utilized, and therefore the uncertain tax position is recorded primarily as a reduction of the deferred tax asset related to these credits.
Results of Operations
Consolidated Statements of Operations
The following table sets forth our consolidated statements of operations data for each of the periods indicated:
(1)Upon completion of our IPO, 500,000 options to purchase common shares, and 426,711 Class B Units originally issued at a price of $0.06 per unit, to employees, directors, and officers of the Company, or the Carried Equity Units, became fully vested, and we recognized accelerated share-based compensation expense in the amount of $21.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Prior to the closing of our IPO, all of the outstanding Class B Units converted into shares of common stock on a one-for-one basis. Share-based compensation is as follows:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues, net
Revenues increased $68.3 million, or 34%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was partially due to revenue from TCI and TazWorks acquisitions, which accounted for growth of 21%. The remaining increase primarily resulted from new and ramping customers as well as volume and revenue increases from existing customers. Lending Software Solutions accounted for growth of 12%, and Data Verification Software Solutions accounted for growth of 1%. For both of our solutions, we receive incremental revenues if customers exceed their minimum commitments for monthly transactions, which typically is applications or closed and funded loans for Lending Software Solutions and credit, tenant, or employment verification reports for our Data Verifications Software Solutions.
Cost of Revenues and Gross Profit
Subscription and services
Subscription and services cost of revenues increased $27.6 million, or 56%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was partially due to $7.0 million in additional third-party costs, driven by higher volumes and additional costs related to TCI and TazWorks revenue. There was also an increase of $6.3 million in share-based compensation expense primarily related to the vesting of Carried Equity Units and new equity grants upon completion of our IPO. The remaining increase was related to higher compensation and benefits spend, largely from the addition of employees from TCI, TazWorks, and Saylent.
Amortization of Developed Technology
Amortization of developed technology increased $3.6 million, or 41%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an additional $2.4 million in amortization related to the acquisitions of developed technology of TCI, TazWorks, and Saylent. The remaining increase was due to additional capitalized software costs related to internally developed software and the related amortization.
Gross Profit
Gross profit increased $37.1 million, or 26%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increase of revenues, as described above, partially offset by an increase in cost of revenues due to an increase in third-party costs, share-based compensation expense, and the acquisitions of TCI, TazWorks, and Saylent.
Operating Expenses
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses increased $30.5 million, or 56%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase includes an additional $12.6 million stock compensation expense primarily related to the vesting of options and new equity grants upon completion of our IPO and $6.8 million amortization from intangible assets. Additionally, during the year ended December 31, 2021, we amended the employment agreement with one of our executive officers and settled the remaining retention bonus resulting in an $1.0 million increase compared to 2020. The remaining increase was largely related to higher advisory services spend in connection with our IPO, increased insurance costs for director and officer insurance, and various system implementations.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased $17.6 million, or 94%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an additional $7.1 million stock compensation expense related to the vesting of Carried Equity Units and new equity grants upon completion of our IPO, as well as additional personnel-related expenses, largely from acquisitions.
Sales and Marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased $8.8 million, or 93%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to an additional $1.9 million share-based compensation expense related to the vesting of Carried Equity Units and new equity grants upon completion of our IPO, as well as increased headcount on our sales and marketing teams.
Loss on Termination of Financing Obligation
Loss on termination of financing obligation due to related party decreased $5.8 million, or 100%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to the termination of the financing obligation during 2020, for which no similar event occurred in 2021.
Impairment of Trademarks
Impairment on trademarks decreased $5.4 million, or 100%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss in 2020 was related to impairment of definite-lived trademarks triggered by our decision to rebrand certain products. There was no such loss in 2021.
Acquisition Related Costs
Acquisition related costs decreased $0.8 million, or 51%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease was due to lower acquisitions costs for Saylent during 2021 compared to TazWorks and TCI during 2020.
Total Other Expense, net
Total other expense, net increased $7.9 million, or 23%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to the loss on debt repayment and extinguishment of $9.9 million, partially offset by lower interest expense on debt during 2021.
Provision for (Benefit From) Income Taxes
Provision from income taxes increased $3.3 million, or 187%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to several permanent tax differences resulting from certain share-based compensation incurred at the time of our IPO, which offset the decrease in income before provision for income taxes.
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
For a comparison of our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, and discussion of cash flows for the year ended December 31, 2019, see Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations in our Prospectus.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have financed our operations primarily through cash flows from operations, long-term debt, and, concurrent with the completion of our IPO on July 30, 2021, through proceeds from the issuance of our common stock. In connection with our IPO, we sold 10.0 million shares of our common stock at a price of $26.00 per share, before underwriting discounts and commissions, which generated net proceeds to us of approximately $242.1 million, after deducting $17.9 million in underwriting discounts and commissions and offering costs.
As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents of $113.6 million and unused capacity under our revolving line of credit of $50.0 million. Based upon our current levels of operations, we believe that our cash flows from operations along with our other sources of liquidity are adequate to meet our cash requirements for at least the next twelve months.
Our primary uses of cash are funding operations, funding acquisitions, capital expenditures, debt payments, and interest expense. Our use of cash is impacted by the timing and extent of the required payments for each of these activities.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our growth rate, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the continued expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced solutions, the seasonality impacts on our business, the timing and extent of spending to support our growth strategy, the continued market acceptance of our solutions, and the future acquisitions of solutions or businesses. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise such financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. We continue to monitor our financing requirements and may pursue refinancing opportunities to potentially reduce interest rates and extend maturities. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, operating results, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Operating Leases
We lease office space under various operating lease agreements that expire through December 2026. We recognize the related rent expense on a straight-line basis over the term of each lease. Free rent and rental increases are recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of each lease.
One lease is with a related party with a term date of December 2022. The monthly payments during each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019 were $0.1 million.
Long-Term Debt
For a detailed description of our long-term debt, please see Note 5 to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods presented (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collection from sales of subscriptions to our customers. Our primary uses of cash from operating activities are for personnel-related expenses, marketing expenses, and payments to third-party vendors.
Operating cash flow is derived by adjusting our net income (loss) for non-cash operating items, such as depreciation and amortization, provision for doubtful accounts, amortization of debt issuance costs, share-based compensation expense, deferred income taxes, loss on disposal of fixed assets, loss on debt repayment and extinguishment, impairment charges, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which reflect timing differences between the receipt and payment of cash associated with transactions and when they are recognized in our results of operations.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $89.8 million, primarily driven by net loss adjusted for depreciation and amortization, share-based compensation expense, loss on debt repayment and extinguishment, and deferred income taxes. Net loss was $10.0 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $100.4 million and a decrease of $0.6 million in operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges consist primarily of depreciation and amortization of $50.5 million, share-based compensation of $30.7 million, deferred income taxes of $4.9 million, and loss on debt repayment and extinguishment of $9.9 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily the result of an increase in deferred revenue of $3.8 million and accounts receivable of $1.6 million due to our increased customer growth and timing of new and existing customers implementations during the period. The change was offset by an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets of $5.7 million, due in part to the timing of payments and also increases in prepaid D&O public company insurance policies.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $67.5 million as a result of net income of $9.2 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $57.5 million and an increase of $0.8 million in operating assets and liabilities. The non-cash charges primarily consist of depreciation and amortization of $40.2 million, share-based compensation of $2.8 million, loss on disposal of fixed assets and termination of financing obligation of $5.8 million, impairment of trademarks of $5.4 million, and deferred income taxes of $1.6 million. The change in operating assets and liabilities primarily consisted of increases in accounts receivable of $3.2 million and prepaid expenses and other assets of $2.1 million, partially offset by a $1.5 million increase in accounts payable, resulting primarily from timing of payments, an increase of $2.7 million in accrued expenses primarily due to the higher compensation cost and payroll timing, and an increase in deferred revenue of $1.9 million due to our increased customer growth and timing of new and existing customers implementations during the period.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $126.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted of $84.6 million and $35.9 million cash paid for the acquisitions of TazWorks and Saylent, respectively, $4.9 million for capitalized software additions, and $0.8 million for purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash used in investing activities of $115.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of $103.1 million and $5.0 million of cash paid for the acquisitions of TCI and TazWorks, respectively, $3.2 million for capitalized software additions, and $4.1 million cash paid for purchases of property and equipment.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $110.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of $247.3 million in IPO proceeds, net of underwriters' discounts and commissions, and $535.0 million proceeds from issuance of long-term debt, offset by $631.3 million in principal payments of long-term debt, including $628.7 million for the full repayment of the First and Second Liens. The year ended December 31, 2021 also included a $25.7 million payment on the financing obligation due to related party, $4.8 million payments of deferred offering costs, $2.1 million payment to sellers of TCI $7.2 million payment of debt issuance costs, and $1.9 million of repurchases of Class A Units and Class B Units.
Net cash used in financing activities of $10.0 million for year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of $4.2 million of principal payments of long-term debt, and $3.1 million of repurchases of Class A Units and Class B Units.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, as well as the reported amounts of revenues and expenses incurred during the reporting periods. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates including those related to revenue recognition, deferred revenue, assets recognized from costs to obtain a contract with a customer, accounts receivable, fair value of financial instruments, share-based compensation, business combinations, goodwill and intangible assets, impairment of long-lived assets, research and development and capitalized software, and income taxes. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of our existing contracts, our evaluation of trends in the industry, and information available from outside sources as appropriate. Our actual results may differ from those estimates. While our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our consolidated financial statements, we believe these critical accounting policies are the most important to understanding when evaluating our reported financial results.
Revenue Recognition
Revenue-generating activities are directly related to the sale, implementation, and support of our solutions. We derive the majority of our revenues from subscription fees for the use of our solutions, which include annual fees, platform partner fees, and volume-based fees, as well as revenues for customer support and professional implementation services related to our solutions.
Subscription Fee Revenues
Our software solutions are generally available for use as hosted application arrangements under subscription fee agreements. Our software solutions consist of an obligation for us to provide continuous access to a technology solution that we host and routine customer support, both of which we account for as a stand-ready performance obligation. Subscription fees from these applications are recognized over time on a ratable basis over the customer agreement term beginning on the date our solution is made available to the customer. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and deferred revenues or revenues, depending on whether the revenue recognition criteria have been met. Additional fees for monthly usage above the levels included in the standard subscription fee are recognized as revenue in the month when the usage amounts are determined and reported.
We have a limited number of legacy customers that host and manage our solutions on premises under term license and maintenance agreements. This type of arrangement is no longer sold and represents an immaterial amount of our subscription fee revenues. However, there is no planned sunset or end of life for these on-premises solutions.
Professional Services Revenues
We offer implementation, consulting, and training services for our software solutions and SaaS offerings. Revenues from services are recognized in the period the services are performed, provided that collection of the related receivable is probable.
Other Revenues
We enter into referral and marketing agreements with various third parties, in which our revenues are primarily generated from transactions initiated by the third parties’ customers. We may introduce our customers to a referral partner or offer additional services available from the referral partner via an integration with our software solutions. Revenues are recognized in the period the services are performed, provided that collection of the related receivable is probable.
Significant Judgments
Performance Obligations
A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of accounting in the new revenue standard. Determining whether products and services are considered distinct performance obligations that should be accounted for separately versus together may require significant judgment. Judgments include whether the series guidance under Accounting Standards Codification, or ASC, 606 applicable to our subscription services and whether implementation and training services represent distinct performance obligations. We have contracts with customers that often include multiple performance obligations, usually including multiple subscription and implementation services. For these contracts, we account for individual performance obligations that are distinct separately by allocating the contract’s total transaction price to each performance obligation in an amount based on the relative standalone selling price, or SSP, of each distinct good or service in the contract.
In determining whether SaaS services are distinct, we considered whether the series guidance applies to our subscription services. We considered various factors including that substantially all of our SaaS arrangements involve the transfer of a service to the customer, which represents a performance obligation that is satisfied over time because the customer simultaneously receives and consumes the benefits of the services provided. Customer support services, forms maintenance, and subscription services are considered a series of distinct services that are accounted for as a single performance obligation as the nature of the services are substantially the same and have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). For these contracts, we allocate the ratable portion of the consideration to each period based on the services provided in such period.
In determining whether implementation services are distinct from subscription services, we considered that there is not a significant level of integration between implementation and subscription services. Further, implementation services in our contracts provide benefit to the customer with other readily available resources and the implementation services generally are not interdependent with the SaaS subscription services. Therefore, implementation services are generally accounted for as a separate performance obligation, as they represent distinct services that provide benefit to the customer apart from SaaS services.
Consulting and training services are generally considered a separate performance obligation as they are considered distinct services that provide a benefit to the customer on their own.
Share-Based Compensation
We account for share-based compensation by estimating the fair value of share-based payment awards at the grant date. We estimate the fair value of our share-based options using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, and the portion that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over the requisite service period.
Calculating share-based compensation expense requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected term of the share-based awards, fair value per share, share price volatility, risk free interest rates, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. Prior to our IPO, we utilized an independent valuation specialist to assist with our determination of the fair value per share. The methods used to determine the fair value per share included discounted cash flow analysis, comparable public company analysis, and comparable acquisition analysis. Starting in the third quarter of 2020 and until our IPO, the probability-weighted expected return method was used and considered multiple exit scenarios, including a near term initial public offering. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of share-based awards represent our best estimates, but these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if factors change and we use different assumptions, share-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
We account for forfeitures when they occur. We have elected to recognize share-based compensation expense for service-based awards on a straight-line basis over the service vesting period. We recognize compensation expense for awards subject to performance conditions using the graded attribution method.
Business Combinations
The purchase price allocation for business combinations requires extensive use of accounting estimates and judgments to allocate the purchase price to the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their respective fair values. We determine whether substantially all of the fair value of the gross assets acquired is concentrated in a single identifiable asset or a group of similar identifiable assets. If this threshold is met, the single asset or group of assets, as applicable, is not a business. If it is not met, we determine whether the single asset or group of assets, as applicable, meets the definition of a business.
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC, 805, Business Combinations. The results of businesses acquired in a business combination are included in our consolidated financial statements from the date of the acquisition. Purchase accounting results in assets and liabilities of an acquired business generally being recorded at their estimated fair values on the acquisition date. Any excess consideration over the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recognized as goodwill. Transaction costs associated with business combinations are expensed as incurred and are included in acquisition related costs in the consolidated statements of operations. We perform valuations of assets acquired and liabilities assumed and allocate the purchase price to the respective assets and liabilities. Determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed requires management to use significant judgment and estimates, including the selection of valuation methodologies, estimates of future revenues, costs and cash flows, discount rates, and selection of comparable companies. We engage the assistance of valuation specialists in concluding on fair value measurements in connection with determining fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. During the measurement period, if new information is obtained about facts and circumstances that existed as of the acquisition date, changes in the estimated fair values of the net assets recorded may change the amount of the purchase price allocated to goodwill. During the measurement period, which expires one year from the acquisition date, changes to any purchase price allocations that are material to our consolidated financial results will be adjusted prospectively.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
In connection with our acquisitions and asset purchase discussed within our financial statements also included in this registration statement, we record certain intangible assets. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their estimated useful lives on either a straight-line or accelerated basis, depending on the nature of the intangible asset. Developed technology, customer relationships, and trademarks with finite useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis. We periodically review the estimated useful lives and fair values of our identifiable intangible assets, taking into consideration any events or circumstances which might result in a diminished fair value or revised useful life.
The excess purchase price over the fair value of assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. We evaluate and test the recoverability of goodwill for impairment at least annually, on October 1, or more frequently if circumstances indicate that goodwill may not be recoverable. We perform the impairment testing by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether the existence of events or circumstances leads to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of its reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. We have one reporting unit. If, after assessing the totality of events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we perform the first step of a two-step analysis by comparing the book value of net assets to the fair value of the reporting unit. To calculate any potential impairment, we compare the fair value of a reporting unit with it carrying amount, including goodwill. Any excess of the carrying amount of the reporting unit’s goodwill over its fair value is recognized as an impairment loss, and the carrying value of goodwill is written down.
Determining the fair value of goodwill is subjective in nature and often involves the use of estimates and assumptions including, without limitation, use of estimates of future prices and volumes for our solutions, capital needs, economic trends, and other factors which are inherently difficult to forecast. If actual results, or the plans and estimates used in future impairment analyses are lower than the original estimates used to assess the recoverability of these assets, we could incur impairment charges in a future period. In assessing the qualitative factors, we consider the impact of certain key factors including macroeconomic conditions, industry and market considerations, management turnover, changes in regulation, litigation matters, changes in enterprise value, and overall financial performance. No impairment of goodwill was identified during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, or 2019.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We evaluate the carrying value of long-lived assets, including intangible assets with finite lives and property and equipment, whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of the asset may not be recoverable. An impairment loss is recognized when estimated undiscounted future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset, including disposition, are less than the carrying value of the asset. The impairment to be recognized is measured as the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the assets. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we performed an impairment test of definite-lived trademarks which was triggered by our decision to rebrand certain products. Specifically, management made a decision to rebrand the LendingQB and LoansPQ products which are being replaced by the new “MeridianLink” branded product line. As a result of the rebranding decision in December 2020, which was determined to be a triggering event, we recorded an impairment equal to substantially all of the total LendingQB and LoansPQ trademarks carrying values of $5.4 million. Other than the trademark impairment mentioned above, there have been no other impairments of long-lived assets during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, or 2019.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the assets and liability method, which requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in the consolidated financial statements or in our tax returns. Deferred taxes are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as from net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax amounts are determined by using the tax rates expected to be in effect when the taxes will actually be paid, or refunds received, as provided for under currently enacted tax law. Changes in deferred tax assets and liabilities are recorded in the benefit from income taxes.
We recognize deferred tax assets to the extent that these assets are more likely than not to be realized. If they are not, deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance. In making such a determination, all available positive and negative evidence are considered, including future reversals of existing taxable temporary differences, projected future taxable income, tax-planning strategies, and results of recent operations. If it is subsequently determined that deferred tax assets would be more likely than not realized in the future, in excess of their net recorded amount, an adjustment would be made to the deferred tax asset valuation allowance, which would reduce the provision for income taxes.
We account for uncertainty in income taxes recognized in our consolidated financial statements by applying a two-step process to determine the amount of tax benefit to be recognized which includes (a) the tax position must be evaluated to determine the likelihood that it is more likely than not of being sustained based solely on the technical merits of the position, and if so, (b) the tax position is then assessed to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the consolidated financial statements. The amount of the benefit that may be recognized is the largest amount that has a greater than 50% likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. The benefit from income taxes includes the effects of any resulting tax reserves, or unrecognized tax benefits, that are considered appropriate as well as the related net interest and penalties.
We report tax related interest and penalties, if any, as income tax expense. There were no material interest or penalties recorded for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, or 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2, “Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements included in Part II, Item 8 included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recent accounting pronouncements, including the expected dates of adoption and estimated effects on our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an emerging growth company, as defined in the JOBS Act. Under the JOBS Act, emerging growth companies can delay adopting new or revised accounting standards issued subsequent to the enactment of the JOBS Act until such time as those standards apply to private companies. We have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards that have different effective dates for public and private companies until the earlier of the date that it (i) is no longer an emerging growth company or (ii) affirmatively and irrevocably opts out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our financial results may not be comparable to companies that comply with the new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates. We expect to use the extended transition period for any other new or revised accounting standards during the period in which it remains an emerging growth company