ITEM 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussions of the financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this annual report. Certain statements in this discussion and elsewhere in this report constitute forward-looking statements, within the meaning of section 21E of the Exchange Act, that involve risks and uncertainties. The actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. See "Risk Factors" elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
OVERVIEW
Milestone Scientific is a biomedical technology research and development company that patents, designs, develops and commercializes innovative diagnostic and therapeutic injection technologies and devices for medical, dental and cosmetic use. Since our inception, we have engaged in pioneering proprietary, innovative, computer-controlled injection technologies, and solutions for the medical and dental markets. We believe our technologies are proven and well established. Our common stock was initially listed on the NYSE American on June 1, 2015 and trades under the symbol “MLSS”.
We have focused our resources on redefining the worldwide standard of care for injection techniques by making the experience more comfortable for the patient by reducing the anxiety and stress of receiving injections from the healthcare provider. Our computer-controlled injection devices make injections precise, efficient, and virtually painless.
Milestone Scientific has developed a proprietary, computer-controlled anesthetic delivery device, using The Wand®, a single use disposable handpiece. The device is marketed in dentistry under the trademark CompuDent®, and STA Single Tooth Anesthesia System® and is suitable for all dental procedures that require local anesthetic. Our proprietary DPS Dynamic Pressure Sensing technology® is our technology platform that advances the development of next-generation devices. It regulates flow rate and monitoring pressure from the tip of the needle, through platform extensions for local anesthesia for subcutaneous drug delivery, used in various dental and medical injections. It has specific medical applications for cosmetic botulinum toxin injections, epidural space identification in regional anesthesia procedures and intra-articular joint injections.
Milestone Scientific remains focused on advancing efforts to achieve the following three primary objectives:
●
Establishing Milestone’s DPS Dynamic Pressure Sensing technology platform as the standard-of-care in painless and precise drug delivery, providing for the first time, objective visual and audible in-tissue pressure feedback, and continuing to expand platform applications;
●
Following obtaining successful FDA clearance of our first medical device, Milestone Scientific is transitioning from a research and development organization to a commercially focused medical device company; and
●
Expanding our global footprint of our CompuFlo Epidural and CathCheck System by utilizing a direct field sales force and partnering with distribution companies worldwide.
Because of combining the ability to regulate the flow rate and monitor pressure at the tip of the needle, Milestone Scientific developed the industry’s first solution for painlessly administering an intra-ligamentary injection, i.e., “single-tooth anesthesia” which could be used as the only injection necessary for achieving dental anesthesia, foregoing the need to administer traditional injections such as a nerve branch block. In addition to single-tooth anesthesia, the STA System can effectively perform all the traditional injections that dentists routinely give but can provide them virtually pain free and with numerous clinical advantages. This device, which also utilizes a disposable handpiece, is currently marketed by Milestone Scientific as the Wand STA® System.
Milestone Scientific believes its dental devices have set a new standard of care for dental injections. Our dental devices have been used to administer tens of millions of injections worldwide. Each of our devices has a related single use disposable handpiece, leading to a continuing revenue stream following sale of the device. At present, we sell disposable handpieces unique to our legacy product (the Wand and CompuDent) to users who have not upgraded to our current dental product, the Wand STA System.
Building on the success of our proprietary, core technology platform for dental injections, and desiring to pursue other growth opportunities, we have recently begun to expand the uses and applications of our proprietary, patented technologies to achieve greater operational efficiencies, enhanced patient safety and therapeutic adherence, patient satisfaction, and improved quality of care across a broad range of medical specialties. In June 2017, we received FDA regulatory clearance to sell the CompuFlo Epidural Computer Controlled Anesthesia System in the United States for certain medical applications. We intend to continue to expand the uses and applications of our DPS Dynamic Pressure Sensing technology.
We believe that we and our technology solutions are widely recognized by key opinion leaders (i.e., academics, anesthesiologists and practicing dentists whose opinions are widely respected), industry experts and medical and dental practitioners as a leader in the emerging, computer-controlled injection industry.
Wand STA Dental Market
Since its market introduction in early 2007, the Wand STA System and prior C-CLAD devices have been used to deliver over 80 million safe, effective, and comfortable injections. The instrument has also been favorably evaluated in numerous peer-reviewed, published clinical studies and associated articles. Moreover, there appears to be a growing consensus among users that the STA Instrument is proving to be a valuable and beneficial instrument that is positively impacting the practice of dentistry worldwide.
Beginning January 1, 2016, Milestone Scientific entered into a non-exclusive distribution agreement with Henry Schein, Inc. (“Henry Schein”). In June 2016, that agreement was replaced with an exclusive distribution arrangement for our dental products for the United States and Canada with Henry Schein. In December 2020, the exclusive distribution arrangement with Henry Schein was replaced with a non-exclusive distribution arrangement, for distribution in the United States and Canada.
In January 2021, the Company began a process of signing non-exclusive dental distribution arrangements with dental distributors in specific geographical locations in the United States and Canada. To date there are twelve new non-exclusive dental distributors engaged in the United States and Canada. The goal is to add not only additional non-exclusive distributors in the United States, but as well as exploring other co-operation opportunities with Dental Service Organization, education institutions, dental schools and entities in specific dental market segments.
The goal of changing our marketing plan from a sole exclusive distributor in the USA and Canada, to a large number of non-exclusive distributors is to increase placement of our Wand STA System and thus the expansion of our dental disposables.
On the global front, we have granted exclusive marketing and distribution rights for the Wand STA System to select dental suppliers in various international regions in Asia, Africa, South America, and Europe. They include FM Produkty Dla Stomatologii in Poland and Unident AB in the countries of Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and Iceland. Additionally, the Company is in the process of evaluating current international distributors and adding new distributors, globally as required based on the economics of the region.
Medical Market
During 2016, Milestone Scientific filed for 510(k) marketing clearance with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for both intra-articular and epidural injections with the CompuFlo Epidural System. In June 2017, the FDA approved the CompuFlo Epidural System for epidural injections. During the end of the second quarter 2021, Milestone Scientific invested in sales force expansion, thus building up a stronger direct sales force aiming at increasing the adoption and penetration of its technology. At the beginning of the year Milestone Scientific had three sales managers and by July 31, 2021 had established a direct sales force consisting of eleven full time employees covering the US North and Southeast regions along with California. Milestone Scientific continues to partner with distributors for the international markets
In December 2016, we received notification from the FDA that based upon the 510(k)-application submitted for intra-articular injections, we did not adequately document that the device met the equivalency standard required for 510(k) clearances. Following consultation with the FDA Office of Device Evaluation, we intended to file a new 510(k) application for the device in 2019. However, due to financing constraints, a new 510(k) application was not filed in 2019. The Company has decided not to proceed with securing FDA approval for the intra-articular instrument at the present time.
In April 2020, Milestone Scientific, announced that it has validated and integrated the new CathCheck™ feature into the CompuFlo® Epidural System. Using CathCheck, physicians and nurses can now monitor the placement of a catheter to determine the presence or absence of a pulsatile waveform (heartbeat), providing new information that can be used to determine if the catheter is in place or has become dislodged from the epidural space. This can be performed within seconds by measuring the pulsatile waveform within the epidural space.
In October 2020, Milestone Scientific announced a Group Purchasing Agreement with Premier Inc., a leading healthcare improvement company. The Agreement, which became effective November 1, 2020, allows Premier members, at their discretion, to take advantage of special pricing and terms pre-negotiated by Premier for the CompuFlo Epidural System and CathCheck. This agreement expires on February 28, 2022. A new Group Purchase Agreement with Premier Inc. was signed in November 2021, effective as of March 1, 2022. This agreement expires on February 28, 2025.
The following table shows a breakdown of Milestone Scientific’s product sales (net), domestically and internationally, by business segment product category:
Current Product Platform
See Item 1. Description of Business.
Summary of Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, Milestone Scientific evaluates its estimates, including those related to accounts receivable, inventories, stock-based compensation, and contingencies. Milestone Scientific bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not clear from other sources. Actual results may differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note C to the consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this report, Milestone Scientific believes that the following accounting policies and significant judgment and estimates are most critical in understanding and evaluating the reported financial results.
Principles of Consolidation
Milestone Scientific's discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations is based upon its consolidated financial statements that have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States ("GAAP") and include the accounts of Milestone Scientific and its wholly-owned and majority-owned subsidiaries including, Wand Dental, and Milestone Medical. All significant, intra-entity transactions and balances are eliminated in the consolidation.
Variable Interest Entities
A variable interest entity ("VIE") is an entity that either (i) has insufficient equity to permit the entity to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support or (ii) has equity investors who lack the characteristics of a controlling financial interest. A VIE is consolidated by its primary beneficiary. The primary beneficiary has both the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the entity's economic performance and the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits from the entity that could potentially be significant to the VIE.
If Milestone Scientific determines that it has operating power and the obligation to absorb losses or receive benefits, Milestone Scientific consolidates the VIE as the primary beneficiary. Milestone Scientific’s involvement constitutes power that is most significant to the entity when it has unconstrained decision-making ability over key operational functions within the entity. Milestone Scientific has completed the VIE analysis relating to Milestone China and Anhui Maishida Medical Technology, Co. Ltd. (“Anhui”).
Milestone Scientific has determined that due to the loss of equity investment in Anhui, the company no longer has significant influence of Anhui and therefore Anhui is not a variable interest. Milestone Scientific has a variable interest in Milestone China, it considered the guidance in ASC 810, “Consolidation” as it relates to determining whether Milestone China is a VIE and, if so, identifying the primary beneficiary. Milestone Scientific would be considered the primary beneficiary of the VIE if it has both of the following characteristics:
●
Power Criterion: The power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the entity’s economic performance; and
●
Losses/Benefits Criterion: The obligation to absorb losses that could potentially be significant or the right to receive benefits that could potentially be significant to the VIE
Milestone Scientific does not have the ability to control the activities that most significantly impact Milestone China's economics and, therefore, the power criterion has not been met. Management placed the most weight on the relationship and significance of activities of Milestone China to the CEO of Milestone China who have the power to direct the activities that most significantly impact the economic performance of Milestone China. Management has concluded that Milestone Scientific is not the primary beneficiary under ASC 810. Accordingly, Milestone China has not been consolidated into the financial statements of Milestone Scientific and is accounted for under the equity method. See Note F.
Assessment of our Ability to Continue as a Going Concern
In accordance with (“ASC”) 205-40, “Presentation of Financial Statements - Going Concern”, the Company continually evaluates whether there are conditions or events, considered in the aggregate, that raise substantial doubt about the Company's ability to continue as a going concern within one year after the date that the consolidated financial statements are issued. Milestone Scientific has incurred operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities in virtually each year since its inception.
In the second quarter of 2020, the Company was successful in raising approximately $19.7 million in public offerings. Based on the expected cash needed for operating activities, the Company’s current cash and liquidity is sufficient to finance the operating requirements for at least the next 12 months from the filing date of this annual report.
Other Uncertainties
The coronavirus (COVID-19) that was reported to have surfaced in Wuhan, China in December 2019 and that has now spread to other countries throughout the world has adversely impact our operations and those of our third-party partners. As a result of the reduced hours and closings of dental offices throughout the country and the rest of the world due to the continuing spread of COVID-19, revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were adversely affected.
There has been a slow pick up in dental instrument and disposable sell through to dentists beginning in the third quarter. In addition, it is uncertain as to what the effect will be on the anticipated commercialization of our CompuFlo Epidural and CathCheck system as a medical device . The extent to which the coronavirus impacts our operations, our third-party partners, the dental offices and hospital operations and demand depends on future developments which are still highly uncertain. Such future developments could have a material adverse effect on our financial results and our ability to conduct business as expected.
Accounts Receivable
Milestone Scientific sells a significant amount of its products on credit terms to its major distributors. Milestone Scientific estimates losses from the ability or inability of its customers to make payments on amounts billed. Most of credit sales are due within ninety days from invoicing.
Inventories
Inventories principally consist of finished goods and component parts stated at the lower of cost (first-in, first-out method) or net realizable value. Inventory quantities on hand are reviewed on a quarterly basis and a provision for excess and obsolete inventory is recorded if required based on past and expected future sales, potential technological obsolescence and product expiration requirement and regulations.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Milestone Scientific reviews long-lived assets for impairment whenever events or circumstances (i.e. a triggering event) indicate that the carrying amounts may not be recoverable.
The Company’s impairment review process is based upon an estimate of future undiscounted cash flow. Factors the Company considers that could trigger an impairment review include the following:
•
significant under performance relative to expected historical or projected future operating results,
•
significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business,
•
significant negative industry or economic trends; and
•
significant technological changes, which would render the technology obsolete
Recoverability of assets that will continue to be used in the Company's operations is measured by comparing the carrying value to the future net undiscounted cash flows expected to be generated by the asset or asset group. Future undiscounted cash flows include estimates of future revenues, driven by market growth rates, and estimated future costs.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the Company expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To perform revenue recognition the Company performs the following five steps:
i.
identification of the promised goods or services in the contract;
ii.
determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations including whether they are distinct in the context of the contract;
iii.
measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration;
iv.
allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations based on estimated selling prices; and
v.
recognition of revenue when (or as) the Company satisfies each performance obligation. A performance obligation is a promise in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer and is the unit of account in ASC 606.
The Company derives its revenues from the sale of its products, primarily dental instruments, handpieces, and other related products. The Company sells its products through a global distribution network and that includes both exclusive and non-exclusive distribution agreements with related and third parties.
Revenue from product sales is recognized upon transfer of control of a product to a customer, generally upon date of shipment. For certain arrangements where the shipping terms are FOB destination, revenue is recognized upon delivery. The Company has no obligation on product sales for any installation, set-up, or maintenance, these being the responsibility of the buyer. Milestone Scientific's only obligation after sale is the normal commercial warranty against manufacturing defects if the alleged defective unit is returned within the warranty period.
Results of Operations.
The following table sets forth the consolidated results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 .
Year ended December 31, 2021, compared to year ended December 31, 2020.
Net sales for years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were as follows:
Consolidated revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were approximately $10.3 million and $5.4 million, respectively. Dental revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were approximately $10.1 million and $5.4 million, respectively. Dental revenue increased approximately $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020, due to the re-opening of dental offices throughout the country, and the rest of the world, including China. Medical revenue increased approximately $136,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to 2020 due to the company arranging meetings at hospital and pain clinics by the direct sales force organization and medical device distributors in European markets.
Gross Profit for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Consolidated gross profit for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were approximately 61% and 67%, respectively. The decreased in the gross profit is due to the lower margin in sales to China. The Company incurred additional freight cost due to importing delays from China.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for years ended December 31, 2021 , and 2020 were as follows:
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 were approximately $12.7 million and $10.7 million, respectively. This increase of approximately $2.0 million is categorized in several areas. Employee salaries, and benefits expenses increased approximately $1.4 million, and directors fees increased $500,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company hired additional employees to work on the commercialization of the CompuFlo® Epidural System. The Company's trade shows, royalty, marketing, quality control, and general expenses increased approximately $622,000 while other SG&A, professional, and consulting expense decreased approximately $544,000 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Consolidated research and development expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, were approximately $878,000 and $308,000, respectively. The increase of approximately $570,000 is related to the Company exploring possible enhancements to the product line STA Single Tooth Anesthesia System.
Profit (Loss) from Operations for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
The loss from operations was approximately $7.4 million and $7.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, an decrease of $74,610. The decrease the result of increased in dental revenue, due to re-opening of dental offices throughout the country, the rest of the world, including China, partially offset by an increase in selling, general and administrative expenses as discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Milestone Scientific has incurred annual operating losses and negative cash flows from operating activities since its inception. Milestone Scientific is actively pursuing the generation of positive cash flows from operating activities through an increase in revenue from its dental business and the medical business worldwide, and a reduction in operating expenses. On December 31, 2021, Milestone Scientific had cash and cash equivalents of approximately $14.7 million and working capital of approximately $15.8 million. For the twelve years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had cash flows used in operating activities of approximately $4.0 million and $7.0 million, respectively.
Management believes that the Company has sufficient cash, along with the current cash flow and support from the dental business to mitigate the expected selling expenditures for commercialization of the Epidural medical device, as well as other operating expenditures and planned new product development programs, over the next twelve months from the filing date of this report. Dental offices in the United States and world-wide are in the process of reopening to near pre COVID-19 volumes. For the medical sector, hospitals in the United States are opening for elective procedures and as such we are looking for new and innovative medical solutions. The positive movement in the hospitals will be a beneficial step to our sales efforts for the epidural instrument.
Contractual Obligations
The impact of the consolidated contractual obligations at December 31, 2021, expected on the liquidity and cash flows in future periods, is as follows:
(1) Purchase obligations include agreements for the purchase of dental and medical devices, including purchase obligations entered into post year end, which will require payment in during the year ended 2022.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note C - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the consolidated financial statements for explanation of recent accounting pronouncements impacting Milestone Scientific.