ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of the Company’s historical performance and financial condition should be read together with the consolidated financial statements and related notes in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplemental Data” of this Report. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on the views and beliefs of our management, as well as assumptions and estimates made by our management, see “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Information”. These statements by their nature are subject to risks and uncertainties, and are influenced by various factors. As a consequence, actual results may differ materially from those in the forward-looking statements. See “Item 1A. Risk Factors” of this report for the discussion of risk factors.
Summary of The Information Contained in Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations (MD&A) is provided in addition to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and notes to assist readers in understanding our results of operations, financial condition, and cash flows. MD&A is organized as follows:
● Plan of Operations. A description of our plan of operations for the next 12 months including required funding.
● Results of Operations. An analysis of our financial results comparing the years ended April 30, 2022 and 2021.
● Liquidity and Capital Resources. An analysis of changes in our consolidated balance sheets and cash flows and discussion of our financial condition.
● Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates. Accounting estimates that we believe are important to understanding the assumptions and judgments incorporated in our reported financial results and forecasts.
Plan of Operations
We had a working capital deficit of $17,744 as of April 30, 2022. With our current cash on hand and based on our current average monthly expenses, we don’t currently anticipate the need for additional funding in order to continue our operations at their current levels and to pay the costs associated with being a public company for the next 12 months. We may however require additional funding in the future to expand or complete acquisitions. Our plan for the next twelve months is to continue using the same marketing and management strategies and continue providing a quality product with excellent customer service while also seeking to expand our operations organically or through acquisitions as funding and opportunities arise, and, as discussed above, we have also purchased a homesite which we intend to construct a custom home on which we then plan to sell. As our business continues to grow, customer feedback will be integral in making small adjustments to improve the product and overall customer experience. We plan to raise additional required funding when required through the sale of debt or equity, which may not be available on favorable terms, if at all, and may, if sold, cause significant dilution to existing stockholders. If we are unable to access additional capital moving forward, it may hurt our ability to grow and to generate future revenues.
Results of Operations
For the Year Ended April 30, 2022 Compared to the Year Ended April 30, 2021
Operating Expenses
During the year ended April 30, 2022, our total operating expenses included general and administrative expenses of $285,754 as compared to $284,520 during the year ended April 30, 2021. The increase is primarily associated with increases in professional fees and officer compensation which were offset by decreases in stock based compensation and registration fees.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of April 30, 2022, we had cash of $107,864 and we had working capital deficit of $17,744. We have financed our cash requirements from the sale of common stock. During the year ended April 30, 2022, we received $324,500 from the sale of common stock.
Contractual Obligations
As of April 30, 2022, we did not have any material capital commitments.
Significant Accounting Policies
For a discussion of our significant accounting policies please see Note 2 to the audited financial statements included as part of this report. Management determined there were no critical accounting policies.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amount of assets, liabilities and contingencies at the date of the financial statements as well as the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period. As a result, management is required to routinely make judgments and estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different conditions or assumptions. Management determined there were no critical accounting estimates.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For more information on recently issued accounting standards, see “Note 1. The Company and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included herein under “Item 8. Financial Statement and Supplemental Data”.