Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Brigham Minerals, Inc. (the "Company," "we," "us," or "our") is the managing member of Brigham Minerals Holdings, LLC (“Brigham LLC”) and is responsible for all operational, management and administrative decisions related to Brigham LLC and its operating subsidiaries’ business. The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our future plans, estimates, beliefs and expected performance. The forward-looking statements are dependent upon events, risks and uncertainties that may be outside our control. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in these forward-looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, market prices for oil, natural gas and NGLs, production volumes, estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves, mineral acquisition capital, economic and competitive conditions, including those resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory changes and other uncertainties, as well as those factors discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report, particularly in “Item 1A - Risk Factors” and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” all of which are difficult to predict. In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, the forward-looking events discussed may not occur. We do not undertake any obligation to publicly update any forward-looking statements except as otherwise required by applicable law.
Overview
Brigham Minerals was formed to acquire and actively manage a portfolio of mineral and royalty interests in the core of what we view as the most active, highly economic, liquids-rich resource plays across the continental United States. Our primary business objective is to maximize risk-adjusted total return to our stockholders through (i) the growth of our free cash flow generated from our existing mineral portfolio and (ii) the continued sourcing and execution of accretive mineral acquisitions in the core of highly economic, liquids-rich resource plays. As of December 31, 2021, we owned 92,375 net royalty acres across 36 counties within the Delaware and Midland Basins in West Texas and New Mexico, the SCOOP/STACK plays in the Anadarko Basin of Oklahoma, the DJ Basin in Colorado and Wyoming and the Williston Basin in North Dakota.
Financial and Operational Overview:
•Our production volumes decreased 5%, to 9,040 Boe/d (70% liquids, 51% oil), for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
•Our mineral and royalty revenues composed of crude oil, natural gas and NGL sales increased 82%, to $156.7 million, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year.
•Our net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $68.0 million. Our net loss for the twelve months ended December 31, 2020 was $58.0 million. Adjusted Net Income for December 31, 2020 was $7.1 million, excluding an after-tax impairment to oil and gas properties of $65.1 million. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus increased 103% to $132.3 million, and 115% to $127.8 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year. Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus are non-GAAP financial measures. For a definition of Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus and a reconciliation to our most directly comparable measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, please read "How We Evaluate Our Operations-Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Ex Lease Bonus."
•As of December 31, 2021, Brigham Minerals had a cash balance of $20.8 million and $137.0 million of capacity on our revolving credit facility, providing the Company with total liquidity of $157.8 million.
•On February 18, 2022, the Board of Directors of Brigham Minerals declared a dividend of $0.45 per share of Class A common stock payable on March 25, 2022 to stockholders of record at the close of business on March 18, 2022. This brings the total capital returned to stockholders related to financial results from fiscal year 2021 to $1.52 per share
2021 Acquisition
On December 15, 2021, Rearden Minerals, LLC, ("Rearden"), a wholly owned subsidiary of Brigham Minerals, acquired certain mineral and royalty assets in the DJ Basin from Principle Energy, LLC and Regal Petroleum LLC (D/B/A Regal Royalty, LLC), in each case, an unrelated seller (collectively, the “Sellers”). Upon closing of the acquisition, the Company and Rearden delivered to the Sellers $43.1 million of cash consideration, net of $1.7 million of customary closing adjustments and 2,180,128 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock. The combined cash consideration and acquisition shares issued totaled $89.4 million.
Market Environment and COVID-19
The ongoing global spread of a novel strain of coronavirus (SARS-Cov-2), which causes COVID-19, remains a global pandemic, however, with the gradual easing of COVID-19 lockdown restrictions globally, primarily due to the increase in accessibility of vaccines and demand for the commodities produced by the oil and natural gas industry have continued to improve. In addition, commodity prices have continued to improve substantially from historic lows in 2020 and the current outlook on commodity prices is generally favorable. However, the duration of COVID-19 pandemic and potential future impact to our business and industry continues to be unpredictable and dynamic.
In connection with the previously mentioned COVID-19 pandemic and resulting market and commodity price challenges experienced during 2020, we saw reduced levels of potential acquisition opportunities. With an improvement in commodity prices in 2021 and into 2022, along with our financial strength, we believe we are well positioned to capture attractive opportunities that will generate stockholder value. Given that our capital allocation is within our control, we believe that the liquidity provided by our cash flow from operations, proceeds from portfolio rationalizations and borrowings under our revolving credit facility will provide us with sufficient capital to execute our current strategy.
Operational Update
Mineral and Royalty Interest Ownership Update
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company completed 62 ground game transactions and one marketed transaction in the DJ Basin acquiring 6,090 net royalty acres (standardized to a 1/8th royalty interest) net of asset sales. The aggregate consideration paid for new assets in 2021 was approximately $150.3 million, including the equity consideration for the DJ Basin acquisition. The Company deployed approximately 35% of its mineral acquisition capital in 2021 to the Permian Basin (18% Delaware and 17% Midland), 1% to the Williston Basin and 64% to the DJ Basin. The acquired minerals are expected to deliver near-term production and cash flow growth with the addition of 231 gross DUCs (3.0 net DUCs) and 292 gross permits (2.2 net permits) to our inventory counts. As of December 31, 2021, the Company owned roughly 92,375 net royalty acres, encompassing 12,220 gross (109.4 net) undeveloped horizontal locations, across 36 counties in what the Company views as the cores of the Delaware and Midland Basins in West Texas and New Mexico, the SCOOP/STACK plays in the Anadarko Basin of Oklahoma, the DJ Basin in Colorado and Wyoming and the Williston Basin in North Dakota.
The table below summarizes the Company’s mineral and royalty interest ownership as of the dates indicated and changes in such ownership on an annual basis.
Operating Activity Update
DUC Conversions
In 2021, the Company identified approximately 495 gross DUCs (2.2 net DUCs) converted to production, representing 69% of its gross DUC inventory (60% of its net DUCs) as of year-end 2020. 2021 conversions of gross wells by status are summarized in the graph below:
Drilling Activity
During 2021 the Company saw 656 gross (5.0 net) wells spud on its acreage position as of December 31, 2021. 60% of gross (75% net) wells spud were in the Permian Basin, with 34% gross (35% net) wells spud in the Delaware Basin and 26% gross (40% net) wells spud in the Midland Basin:
DUC and Permit Inventory
The Company expects any near-term production growth will be driven by the continued conversion of its DUC and permit inventory. Brigham’s DUC and permit inventory as of December 31, 2021 by basin is outlined in the table below:
(1) Individual amounts may not total due to rounding.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We use a variety of operational and financial measures to assess our performance. Among the measures considered by management are the following:
•volumes of oil, natural gas and NGLs produced;
•number of rigs on location, permits, spuds, completions and wells turned-in-line;
•commodity prices; and
•Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus.
Volumes of Oil, Natural Gas and NGLs Produced
In order to track and assess the performance of our assets, we monitor and analyze our production volumes from the various resource plays that comprise our portfolio of mineral and royalty interests. We also regularly compare projected volumes to actual reported volumes and investigate unexpected variances.
Number of Rigs on Location, Permits, Spuds, Completions and Wells Turned-In-Line
In order to track and assess the performance of our assets, we monitor and analyze the number of permits, rigs, spuds, completions and wells on production that are applicable to our mineral and royalty interests in an effort to evaluate near-term production growth from the various basins and resource plays that comprise our asset base.
Commodity Prices
Historically, oil, natural gas and NGL prices have been volatile and may continue to be volatile in the future. During the past five years, the posted price for WTI has ranged from a historic, record low price of negative $36.98 per barrel in April 2020 to a high of $85.64 per barrel in October 2021. The Henry Hub spot market price for natural gas has ranged from a low of $1.33 per MMBtu in September 2020 to a high of $23.86 per MMBtu in February 2021. As of December 31, 2021, the posted price for oil was $75.33 per barrel and the Henry Hub spot market price of natural gas was $3.82 per MMBtu. Lower prices may not only decrease our revenues, but also potentially the amount of oil, natural gas and NGLs that our operators can produce economically as well as the amount of capital they are willing to spend.
The prices we receive for oil, natural gas and NGLs vary by geographical area. The relative prices of these products are determined by factors affecting global and regional supply and demand dynamics, such as economic and geopolitical conditions, the effects of health pandemics such as COVID-19, production levels, availability of transportation and storage, weather cycles and other factors. In addition, realized prices are influenced by product quality and proximity to consuming and refining markets. Any differences between realized prices and NYMEX prices are referred to as differentials. All of our production is derived from properties located in the United States.
Oil. The substantial majority of our oil production is sold at prevailing market prices, which fluctuate in response to many factors that are outside of our control. NYMEX light sweet crude oil, commonly referred to as WTI, is the prevailing domestic oil pricing index. The majority of our oil production is priced at the prevailing market price with the final realized price affected by both quality and location differentials.
The chemical composition of crude oil plays an important role in its refining and subsequent sale as petroleum products. As a result, variations in chemical composition relative to the benchmark crude oil, usually WTI, will result in price adjustments, which are often referred to as quality differentials. The characteristics that most significantly affect quality differentials include the density of the oil, as characterized by its API gravity, and the presence and concentration of impurities, such as sulfur.
Location differentials generally result from transportation costs based on the produced oil’s proximity to consuming and refining markets and major trading points.
Natural Gas. The NYMEX price quoted at Henry Hub is a widely used benchmark for the pricing of natural gas in the United States. The actual volumetric prices realized from the sale of natural gas differ from the quoted NYMEX price as a result of quality and location differentials.
Quality differentials result from the heating value of natural gas measured in Btus and the presence of impurities, such as hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide and nitrogen. Natural gas containing ethane and heavier hydrocarbons has a higher Btu value and will realize a higher volumetric price than natural gas that is predominantly methane, which has a lower Btu value. Natural gas with a higher concentration of impurities will realize a lower volumetric price due to the presence of the impurities in the natural gas when sold or the cost of treating the natural gas to meet pipeline quality specifications.
Natural gas is subject to price variances based on local supply and demand conditions and the cost to transport natural gas to end-user markets.
NGLs. NGL pricing is generally tied to the price of oil, but varies based on differences in liquid components and location.
Oil and Gas Properties
Under the full cost method of accounting, total capitalized costs of oil and natural gas properties, net of accumulated depletion and related deferred income taxes, may not exceed an amount equal to the present value of future net revenues from proved reserves, discounted at 10% per annum ("PV-10"), plus the cost of unevaluated properties, less related income tax effects (full cost ceiling limitation). A write-down of the carrying value of the full cost pool ("impairment charge") is a noncash charge that reduces earnings and impacts equity in the period of occurrence and typically results in lower depletion expense in future periods. A ceiling limitation is calculated at each reporting period. The ceiling limitation calculation is prepared using an unweighted arithmetic average of oil prices ("SEC oil price") and natural gas prices ("SEC gas price") as of the first day of each month for the trailing 12-month period ended, adjusted by area for energy content, transportation fees and regional price differentials, as required under the guidelines established by the SEC. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the SEC gas prices were $66.56, $39.57, and $55.65, respectively, per barrel for oil, adjusted by area for energy content, transportation fees and regional price differentials, and the SEC gas prices were $3.64, $2.00, and $2.60, respectively, per MMBtu for natural gas, adjusted by area for energy content, transportation fees and regional price differentials. As a result of the decline in the SEC oil prices and SEC gas prices during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and taking into consideration certain reclassification of proved undeveloped reserves to probable and possible reserves during the three months ended December 31, 2020, as a result of a slowdown in operator activity, the net book value of oil and natural gas properties exceeded the ceiling limitation as of September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, resulting in an impairment charge of $79.6 million to oil and gas properties, net during the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019.
A significant and prolonged decline in the SEC oil price or the SEC gas price could cause many of our operators to reduce substantially their development activities and capital expenditures, which could lead to additional impairment charges in the future and such impairment charges could be material. In addition to the impact of lower prices, any future changes to assumptions of drilling and completion activity, development timing, acquisitions or divestitures of oil and gas properties, proved undeveloped locations, and production and other estimates may require revisions to estimates of total proved reserves which would impact the amount of any impairment charge. Based on specific market factors and circumstances at the time of prospective impairment reviews, and the continuing evaluation of development activities, production data, economics and other factors, we may be required to write down the carrying value of our properties in future periods. The risk that we will be required to recognize impairments of our oil, natural gas and NGL properties increases during sustained periods of low
commodity prices. In addition, impairments could occur if we were to experience sufficient downward adjustments to our estimated proved reserves or the present value of estimated future net revenues. If we incur impairment charges in the future, our results of operations for the periods in which such charges are taken may be materially and adversely affected.
Hedging
We may enter into certain derivative instruments to partially mitigate the impact of commodity price volatility on our cash flow generated from operations. From time to time, such instruments may include variable-to-fixed-price swaps, fixed-price contracts, costless collars and other contractual arrangements. The impact of these derivative instruments could affect the amount of cash flows we ultimately realize. Historically, we have only entered into minimal fixed-price swap contracts. Under fixed-price swap contracts, a counterparty is required to make a payment to us if the settlement price is less than the swap strike price. Conversely, we are required to make a payment to the counterparty if the settlement price is greater than the swap strike price. We may employ contractual arrangements other than fixed-price swap contracts in the future to mitigate the impact of price fluctuations. If commodity prices decline in the future, our hedging contracts may partially mitigate the effect of lower prices on our future revenue.
Our revolving credit facility allows us to hedge up to 85% of our reasonably anticipated projected production from our proved reserves of oil and natural gas, calculated separately, for up to 60 months in the future. We had no natural gas or oil derivative contracts in place as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recorded a loss on commodity derivative instruments, net of $0.6 million.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus are non-GAAP supplemental financial measures used by our management and by external users of our financial statements such as investors, research analysts and others to assess the financial performance of our assets and their ability to sustain dividends over the long term without regard to financing methods, capital structure or historical cost basis.
We define Adjusted Net Income as Net Income (Loss) before impairment of oil and gas properties, after tax, and loss on extinguishment of debt, after tax. We define Adjusted EBITDA as Adjusted Net Income before depreciation, depletion and amortization, share based compensation expense, interest expense, gain or loss on derivative instruments and income tax expense, less other income. We define Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus as Adjusted EBITDA further adjusted to eliminate the impacts of lease bonus and other revenues we receive due to the unpredictability of timing and magnitude of the revenue.
Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus do not represent and should not be considered alternatives to, or more meaningful than, net income or any other measure of financial performance presented in accordance with GAAP as measures of our financial performance. Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus have important limitations as analytical tools because they exclude some but not all items that affect net income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure. Our computation of Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus may differ from computations of similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table presents a reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA ex lease bonus to the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure for the periods indicated.
(1) Tax effect of $14.4 million tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020.
(2) Tax effect of $0.8 million tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Sources of Our Revenues
Our revenues are primarily derived from the mineral and royalty payments we receive from our operators based on the sale of oil, natural gas and NGLs produced from our properties, as well as from lease bonus payments. Mineral and royalty revenues may vary significantly from period to period as a result of changes in volumes of production sold by our operators, production mix and commodity prices. Lease bonus and other revenues vary from period to period as a result of leasing activity on our mineral interests.
The following table presents the breakdown of our revenues for the following periods:
Principle Components of Our Cost Structure
The following is a description of the principle components of our cost structure. However, as an owner of mineral and royalty interests, we are not obligated to fund drilling and completion capital expenditures to bring a horizontal well on line, lease operating expenses to produce our oil, natural gas and NGLs nor the plugging and abandonment costs at the end of a well’s economic life. All the aforementioned costs are borne entirely by the exploration and production companies that have leased our mineral and royalty interests.
Gathering, Transportation and Marketing Expenses
Gathering, transportation and marketing expenses include the costs to process and transport our production to applicable sales points. Generally, the terms of the lease governing the development of our properties permits the operator to pass through these expenses to us by deducting a pro rata portion of such expenses from our production revenues.
Severance and Ad Valorem Taxes
Severance taxes are paid on sold oil, natural gas or NGLs based on either a percentage of revenues from production sold or the number of units of production sold at fixed rates established by federal, state or local taxing authorities. In general, the production taxes we pay correlate to changes in our oil, natural gas and NGL revenues, which is driven by our production volumes and prices received for our oil, natural gas and NGLs. We are also subject to ad valorem taxes in the counties where our production is located. Ad valorem taxes are generally based on the state or local government’s appraisal of the value of our oil, natural gas and NGL properties, which also trend with anticipated production, as well as oil, natural gas and NGL prices. Rates, methods of calculating property values and timing of payments vary across the different counties in which we own mineral and royalty interests.
Depreciation, Depletion and Amortization
Depreciation, depletion and amortization (“DD&A”) is the systematic expensing of the capitalized costs incurred to acquire evaluated oil and natural gas properties. We use the full cost method of accounting, and, as such, all acquisition-related costs to acquire evaluated properties are capitalized and amortized in aggregate based on the estimated economic productive lives of our properties. Depletion is the expense recorded based on the cost basis of our properties and the volume of hydrocarbons extracted during each respective period, calculated on a units-of-production basis. Estimates of proved reserves are a major component of our calculation of depletion. We adjust our depletion rates quarterly based upon the quarter-end internally generated reserve reports. The year-end reserve reports are audited by CG&A.
General and Administrative
General and administrative (“G&A”) expenses are costs incurred for overhead, including payroll and benefits for our staff, share-based compensation expense, costs of maintaining our headquarters, costs of managing our properties, annual and quarterly reports to stockholders, tax return preparation, independent and internal auditor fees, investor relations activities, incremental director and officer liability insurance costs, independent director compensation, other fees for professional services and legal compliance.
Interest Expense
We finance a portion of our working capital requirements and acquisitions with borrowings under our revolving credit facility. As a result, we incur interest expense that is affected by both fluctuations in interest rates and our financing decisions. We reflect interest and loan commitment fees paid to the lenders under our debt arrangements (currently, our revolving credit facility) and amortization of debt issuance costs in interest expense.
Income Tax Expense
Brigham Minerals is subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes as a corporation. Texas imposes a franchise tax (commonly referred to as the Texas margin tax) at a rate of up to 0.75% on gross revenues less certain deductions, as specifically set forth in the Texas margin tax statute. A portion of our mineral and royalty interests are located in Texas basins.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table provides the components of our revenues and expenses for the periods indicated, as well as each period’s respective average prices and production volumes:
*** A percentage calculation is not meaningful due to change in signs, zero-value denominator or a change greater than 300.
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 76%, or $69.5 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was attributable to a $70.5 million increase in mineral and royalty revenues during the period, partially offset by a $1.0 million decrease in lease bonus revenue. The increase in mineral and royalty revenues was primarily the result of an increase in realized commodity prices of 91% resulting in a $74.7 million increase in mineral and royalty revenues. A decrease in drilling and completion activity on our mineral and royalty interests during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, partially offset by acquisitions of proved developed producing reserves resulted in a 5% decrease in production volumes to 9,040 Boe/d and a corresponding decrease in mineral and royalty revenues of $4.2 million. The decrease in production volumes was primarily due to the reduction in drilling activity which started during the second quarter of 2020 associated with COVID-19 and the OPEC + production dispute as well as Winter Storm Uri's February 2021 production curtailments.
Oil revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 63%, or $42.9 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in oil revenues was primarily attributable to the 77% increase in realized oil price to $66.08 per barrel resulting in an increase in revenue of $48.3 million. An 8% decrease in oil production volumes to 4,594 barrels per day resulted in a $5.4 million decrease in oil revenues, net of $0.5 million in oil revenues from the DJ Acquisition.
Natural gas revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 159%, or $16.6 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in natural gas revenues was primarily attributable to a 156% increase in realized natural gas price to $4.60 per Mcf resulting in an increase in revenue of $16.4 million as well as a $0.2 million increase of natural gas revenues from the DJ Acquisition.
NGL revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 139%, or $10.9 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in NGL revenues was primarily attributable to the 153% increase in NGL prices to $29.35 per barrel resulting in an increase in revenue of $11.4 million. A 6% decrease in NGL volumes to 1,759 Boe/d resulted in a $0.4 million decrease in NGL sales, net of NGL revenues from the DJ Acquisition of $0.2 million, was primarily attributable to a decrease in drilling and completion activities on our properties in the Permian Basin, the Anadarko Basin and the Williston Basin.
Lease Bonus and Other Revenues
When we lease our minerals, we generally receive an upfront cash payment, or a lease bonus. Lease bonus revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by 18%, or $1.0 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in revenues from lease bonus payments is primarily attributable to a $2.2 million decrease in leasing activity in the Permian Basin partially offset by the $0.8 million and $0.4 million increases in leasing activity in the DJ and Anadarko Basins, respectively. Other revenues include payments for right-of-way and surface damages and were not a significant portion of the overall amount.
Operating and other expenses
Gathering, transportation, and marketing expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by 2%, or $0.2 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was largely driven by the 5% decrease in our production volumes.
Severance and ad valorem taxes. For the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 66%, or $3.7 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to the 82% increase in mineral and royalty revenues which was primarily due to an increase in realized commodity prices of 91%, partially offset by a 5% decrease in production volumes.
Depreciation, depletion and amortization. For the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by 24%, or $11.6 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which was primarily due to a decrease in depletion expense of $10.9 million. Lower production volumes decreased our depletion expense by $2.3 million, and a lower depletion rate decreased our depletion expense by $8.6 million. The depletion rate was $11.05 per Boe and $13.63 per Boe for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in the depletion rate was a result of the impairment charge of $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, resulting in lower depletable cost (or amortizable base) in the calculation of the depletion rate for the year ended December 31, 2021. In addition, an increase in total proved reserves of 43% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, which was primarily a result of acquisitions and 68% higher SEC oil price and 82% higher SEC gas prices, contributed to the decrease in depletion rate. We adjust our depletion rates quarterly based upon the quarter-end internally generated reserve reports.
Impairment. In determining the full cost ceiling impairment at December 31, 2021, we estimated the PV-10 of our total proved oil and natural gas reserves using the SEC oil price and the SEC gas price of $66.56 per Bbl and $3.64 per MMBtu, respectively. There was no impairment for the year ended December 31, 2021. As of September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, the net capitalized costs of our oil and gas properties exceeded the full cost ceiling limitation primarily due to the decline in oil and gas prices and reclassification of proved undeveloped reserves to probable and possible reserves during the three months ended December 31, 2020 as a result of a slowdown in operator activity. As a result, we recorded impairments of our oil and gas properties, net of $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In determining the full cost ceiling impairment at December 31, 2020, we estimated the PV-10 of our total proved oil and natural gas reserves using the SEC oil price and the SEC gas price of $39.57 per Bbl and $2.00 per MMBtu, respectively, which is a decrease of 29% and 23%, respectively, from the December 31, 2019 SEC oil price and SEC gas price of $55.65 per Bbl and $2.60 per MMBtu, respectively.
General and administrative before share-based compensation. For the year ended December 31, 2021 decreased by 9% or $1.3 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Decreases to G&A expense are a result of a $2.0 million decrease in incremental legal, professional, and tax fees, partly due to the absence of equity offerings in 2021, partially offset by $0.2 million increase in rent expense and $0.3 million increase in salary and compensation expense.
Share-based compensation. For the year ended December 31, 2021 share-based compensation expense was $9.7 million, net of $3.6 million of share-based compensation expense capitalized to unevaluated property and $4.4 million of share-based compensation expense capitalized to evaluated property. Share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $7.5 million, net of $3.0 million of share-based compensation expense capitalized to unevaluated property and $3.1 million of share-based compensation cost capitalized to evaluated property. The increase in share-based compensation expense of $2.2 million was primarily due to additional RSU and PSU grants made during the year ended December 31, 2021. See table below and "Note 10-Share-Based Compensation" to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further discussion.
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by 91%, or $0.8 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher average outstanding borrowings and higher average interest rates. See table below and “Note 6-Long-Term Debt” and “Note 1-Business and Basis of Presentation” to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further discussion of this transaction.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2019
The following table provides the components of our revenues and expenses for the periods indicated, as well as each period’s respective average prices and production volumes:
(1) Hedged prices reflect the effect of our commodity derivative transactions on our average sales prices. Our calculation of such effects include realized gains and losses on cash settlements for commodity derivatives, which we do not designate for hedge accounting.
*** A percentage calculation is not meaningful due to change in signs, zero-value denominator or a change greater than 300.
Revenues
Total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 10%, or $9.8 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease was attributable to a $11.6 million decrease in mineral and royalty revenues during the period, partially offset by a $1.8 million increase in lease bonus revenue. The decrease in mineral and royalty revenues was primarily the result of a decrease in realized commodity prices of 31% resulting in a $39.3 million decrease in mineral and royalty revenues. This was partially offset by an increase in drilling and completion activity on our mineral and royalty interests, and to a lesser degree by acquisitions of proved developed producing reserves, which resulted in a 28% increase in production volumes to 9,483 Boe/d and a corresponding increase in mineral and royalty revenues of $27.7 million.
Oil revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 17%, or $14.1 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in oil revenues was primarily attributable to the 31% decrease in realized oil price to $37.26 per barrel resulting in a decrease in revenue of $30.8 million. This was partially offset by a 20% increase in oil production volumes to 4,980 barrels per day resulting in a $16.7 million increase in oil revenues. The increase in oil production volumes for the period was primarily attributable to increased drilling and completion activity on our properties in the Permian Basin, and to a lesser degree by acquisitions of proved developed producing reserves.
Natural gas revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 7%, or $0.7 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in natural gas revenues was primarily attributable to the 23% increase in natural gas production volume to 15,871 Mcf/d resulting in a $2.3 million increase in natural gas sales. The increase in natural gas production volumes for the period was primarily attributable to increased drilling and completion activity on our properties in the Permian Basin, and to a lesser degree by acquisitions of proved developed producing reserves. This was partially offset by a 13% decrease in realized natural gas price to $1.80 per Mcf resulting in a decrease in revenue of $1.6 million.
NGL revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 29%, or $1.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase in NGL revenues was primarily attributable to the 67% increase in NGL volumes to 1,858 Boe/d resulting in a $4.1 million increase in NGL sales was primarily attributable to increased drilling and completion activities on our properties in the Permian Basin, and to a lesser degree by acquisitions of proved developed producing reserves. This was partially offset by a 23% decrease in NGL prices to $11.61 per barrel resulting in a decrease in revenue of $2.3 million.
Lease bonus revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 51%, or $1.8 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The increase was primarily attributable to an increase in leasing activity on our interests in Texas, partially offset by a decrease in leasing activity in Colorado and Oklahoma. Other revenues include payments for right-of-way and surface damages and were not a significant portion of the overall amount.
Operating and other expenses
Gathering, transportation, and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 40%, or $2 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was largely driven by the 28% increase in our production volumes as well as an increase in gathering, transportation and marketing rates.
Severance and ad valorem taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 13%, or $0.8 million, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to the 12% decrease in mineral and royalty revenues.
DD&A expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 56%, or $17.3 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, which was primarily due to an increase in depletion expense of $17.0 million. Higher production volumes increased our depletion expense by $8.6 million, and a higher depletion rate increased our depletion expense by $8.4 million. The depletion rate was $13.63 per Boe and $11.22 per Boe for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The increase in the depletion rate was a result of recent acquisition efforts focused on largely de-risked acreage with an increased likelihood of near-term production and development, as well as reclassification of proved undeveloped reserves to probable and possible reserves due to changes in assumptions of the development timing as a result of reduced activity by our operators. We adjust our depletion rates quarterly based upon the quarter-end internally generated reserve reports.
As of September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, the net capitalized costs of our oil and gas properties exceeded the full cost ceiling limitation primarily due to the decline in oil and gas prices and reclassification of proved undeveloped reserves to probable and possible reserves during the three months ended December 31, 2020 as a result of a slowdown in operator activity. As a result, we recorded impairments of our oil and gas properties, net of $79.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In determining the full cost ceiling impairment at December 31, 2020, we estimated the PV-10 of our total proved oil and natural gas reserves using the SEC oil price and the SEC gas price of $39.57 per Bbl and $2.00 per MMBtu, respectively, which is a decrease of 29% and 23%, respectively, from the December 31, 2019 SEC oil price and SEC gas price of $55.65 per Bbl and $2.60 per MMBtu, respectively. No impairment charge was recorded for the year ended December 31, 2019.
G&A before share-based compensation for the year ended December 31, 2020 increased by 18%, or $2.2 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Increases to G&A expense are a result of: (i) $0.7 million in incremental legal, professional, audit, and tax fees as a result of the Company's June 2020 Secondary Offering and September 2020 Secondary Offering, (ii) $0.5 million in additional rent expense, (iii) $0.4 million of incremental directors and officers insurance expenses, and (iv) $0.3 million of additional salaries due to an increase in headcount.
Share-based compensation expense for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 25%, or $2.5 million compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. The decrease in share-based compensation expense was due to a cumulative effect adjustment of $5.2 million pertaining to the period from the grant date to the IPO, which consists of a $2.0 million cumulative effect adjustment related to the estimated fair value of the Incentive Units and a $3.2 million cumulative effect adjustment related to the estimated fair value of the RSAs, partially offset by share-based compensation expense related to awards granted during the year ended December 31, 2020. Brigham Minerals capitalizes a portion of the share-based compensation expense incurred after the IPO. See table below and "Note 10-Share-Based Compensation" to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further discussion.
Interest expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased by 84%, or $4.7 million, compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 due to lower average outstanding borrowings and lower average interest rates. For the year ended December 31, 2020, our weighted average debt outstanding on our revolving credit facility was $2.8 million compared to our weighted average debt outstanding on our credit facilities of $55.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. Our weighted average interest was 1.91% and 7.29% for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. In December 2019, a portion of the net proceeds received from the December 2019 Offering were used to fully repay the outstanding borrowings under our revolving credit facility. See table below and “Note 1-Business and Basis of Presentation” to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further discussion of this transaction.
Loss on extinguishment of debt. We recognized a loss on extinguishment of debt of approximately $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The loss on extinguishment of debt consisted of a $4.0 million write-off of capitalized debt issuance costs, a $2.1 million prepayment fee and legal fees of $0.8 million.
Loss on derivative instruments, net. Brigham Minerals did not have any derivative contracts in place as of December 31, 2020 and 2019. Prior to December 31, 2019, we had certain oil swap contracts based on the NYMEX futures index. For the year ended December 31, 2019, we recognized a loss on derivative instruments, net of $0.6 million, which is attributable to oil derivative instruments. We realized $0.5 million of gains on our settled derivative instruments during the year ended December 31, 2019.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of Our Results of Operations to Our Historical Results of Operations
Our future results of operations may not be comparable to our historical results of operations for the periods presented, primarily for the reasons described below.
Corporate Reorganization and Transactions
The historical consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for periods on or before April 23, 2019 are based on the financial statements of Brigham Resourcse, LLC, our predecessor, and Brigham Minerals prior to our corporate reorganization consummated in connection with our IPO. As a result, such historical consolidated financial data may not give you an accurate indication of what our actual results would have been if the corporate reorganization had been completed at the beginning of the periods presented or of what our future results of operations are likely to be.
In April 2019, Brigham Minerals completed the IPO of 16,675,000 shares of Class A common stock at a price to the public of $18.00 per share. As a result of the IPO, Brigham Minerals became a holding company whose sole material asset consisted of a 43.3% interest in Brigham LLC, which wholly owns Brigham Resources. Brigham Resources continues to wholly own the Minerals Subsidiaries, which own all of Brigham Resources’ operating assets. In connection with the IPO, Brigham Minerals became the sole managing member of Brigham LLC and is responsible for all operational, management and administrative decisions relating to Brigham LLC’s business and consolidates the financial results of Brigham LLC and its wholly-owned subsidiary, Brigham Resources.
On December 16, 2019, Brigham Minerals completed an offering of 12,650,000 shares of its Class A common stock (the "December 2019 Offering"), including 6,000,000 shares issued and sold by Brigham Minerals and an aggregate of 6,650,000 shares sold by certain stockholders of the Company, of which 5,496,813 represents shares issued upon redemption of an equivalent number of their Brigham LLC units, at a price to the public of $18.10 per share.
On June 12, 2020, Brigham Minerals completed an offering of 6,600,000 shares of its Class A common stock (the "June 2020 Secondary Offering"), all of which were sold by certain stockholders of the Company (the “June 2020 Selling Stockholders”), and 4,872,669 of which represented shares issued upon redemption of an equivalent number of the June 2020 Selling Stockholders’ Brigham LLC Units (together with a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock in Brigham Minerals), at a price to the public of $13.75 per share. Brigham Minerals did not sell any shares of its common stock in the June 2020 Secondary Offering and did not receive any proceeds pursuant to the June 2020 Secondary Offering.
On September 15, 2020, Brigham Minerals completed an offering of 5,021,140 shares of its Class A common stock, including 654,931 shares issued pursuant to the option granted to the underwriter to purchase additional shares to cover over-allotments (the "September 2020 Secondary Offering"), all of which were sold by certain stockholders of the Company (the "September 2020 Selling Stockholders"), and 3,062,011 of which represented shares issued upon redemption of an equivalent number of the September 2020 Selling Stockholders’ Brigham LLC Units (together with a corresponding number of shares of Class B common stock in Brigham Minerals), at a price to the public of $8.20 per share. Brigham Minerals did not sell any shares of its Class A common stock in the September 2020 Secondary Offering and did not receive any proceeds pursuant to the September 2020 Secondary Offering. In addition, in connection with the September 2020 Secondary Offering, Brigham Minerals repurchased 436,630 shares of its Class A common stock from the September 2020 Selling Stockholders in a privately negotiated transaction at a price equal to the price per share at which the underwriter purchased shares from the September 2020 Selling Stockholders in the September 2020 Secondary Offering (and Brigham LLC redeemed a corresponding number of Brigham LLC Units held by Brigham Minerals). The repurchased shares are presented in the Company's consolidated balance sheet as Treasury Stock, at cost.
As of December 31, 2021, Brigham Minerals owned a 81.0% interest in Brigham LLC and the Original Owners owned 19.0% of the outstanding voting stock of Brigham Minerals. Certain other entities affiliated with Yorktown Partners LLC and Pine Brook Road Advisors, LP, which are a subset of the Company's Original Owners, collectively owned 8.7% of the outstanding voting stock of Brigham Minerals as of December 31, 2021. Yorktown ceased to be an affiliate of the Company on January 20, 2022 in connection with the resignation of W. Howard Keenan, Jr. from the Board of Directors.
The corporate reorganization that was completed contemporaneously with the closing of the IPO provided a mechanism by which the Brigham LLC Units to be allocated amongst the Original Owners, including the holders of our management incentive units, was determined. As a result, the satisfaction of all conditions relating to the vesting of certain management incentive units held in Brigham Equity Holdings, LLC (“Brigham Equity Holdings”) by our management and employees became probable. Accordingly, at IPO, we recognized a cumulative effect adjustment to share-based compensation expense of approximately $2.0 million pertaining to the period from the grant date through the IPO date, related to the estimated fair value
of the Incentive Units (as defined in “Note 10-Share-Based Compensation-LLC Incentive Units” to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report) at grant, all of which was non-cash.
Income Taxes
Brigham Minerals is subject to U.S. federal and state income taxes as a corporation. Our predecessor was treated as a flow-through entity, and is currently treated as a disregarded entity, for U.S. federal income tax purposes and, as such, is generally not subject to U.S. federal income tax at the entity level. Rather, the tax liability with respect to its taxable income is passed through to its members, including Brigham Minerals. Accordingly, the financial data of our predecessor contains no provision for U.S. federal income taxes or income taxes in any state or locality (other than franchise tax in the State of Texas).
Capital Requirements and Sources of Liquidity
Our current primary sources of liquidity are cash flows from operations, asset sales, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and proceeds from any primary issuances of equity securities. Future sources of liquidity may also include other credit facilities or increases to our current revolving credit facility we may enter into in the future and additional issuances of debt or equity securities. Even with the gradual easing of lockdown restrictions globally and the increase in commodities prices in 2021, COVID-19 remains a global pandemic. As a result, our revenues and cash flows from operations may be negatively impacted and we may not have access to capital markets on terms favorable to us or at all.
Our primary uses of capital are for the payment of dividends to our stockholders for investing in our business, specifically the acquisition of additional mineral and royalty interests and for repaying amounts borrowed under our revolving credit facility. As discussed above, COVID-19 remains a global pandemic. Our cash flows from operations may be negatively impacted, and as a result, the dividend amount we are able to pay our stockholders may be negatively impacted.
As a mineral and royalty interest owner, we incur the initial cost to acquire our interests, but thereafter do not incur any development capital expenditures or lease operating expenses, which are entirely borne by the operator. As a result, the vast majority of our capital expenditures are related to our acquisition of additional mineral and royalty interests. The amount and allocation of future acquisition-related capital expenditures will depend upon a number of factors, including the number and size of acquisition opportunities, our cash flows from operations, investing and financing activities and our ability to assimilate acquisitions. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we deployed approximately $158.4 million for acquisition-related capital expenditures, inclusive of a $8.0 million capitalized share-based compensation expense and $46.3 million of equity. In addition to acquisitions, we have certain contractual long-term capital requirements associated with the our office lease and with our revolving credit facility. See "Note 8 - Leases” and "Note 7 - Long-Term Debt” to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report. We periodically assess changes in current and projected free cash flows, acquisition and divestiture activities, debt requirements and other factors to determine the effects on our liquidity. Based upon our current oil, natural gas and NGL price expectations for the year ended December 31, 2022, we believe that our retained cash flow from operations, lease bonus, portfolio optimization activities and additional borrowings under our revolving credit facility will provide us with sufficient liquidity to execute our current strategy. However, our ability to generate cash is subject to a number of factors, many of which are beyond our control, including commodity prices, weather and general economic, financial, competitive, legislative, regulatory and other factors. If we require additional capital for acquisitions or other reasons, we may seek such capital through additional borrowings, joint venture partnerships, asset sales, offerings of equity and debt securities or other means. If we are unable to obtain funds when needed or on acceptable terms, we may not be able to complete acquisitions that may be favorable to us.
Our liquidity was as follows:
Working Capital
Our working capital, which we define as current assets minus current liabilities, totaled $33.1 million as of December 31, 2021, as compared to $22.6 million at December 31, 2020. Our collection of receivables has historically been timely, and losses associated with uncollectible receivables have historically not been significant.
When new wells are turned to sales, our collection of receivables has lagged approximately six months from initial production as operators complete the division order process, at which point we are paid in arrears and then kept current. Our cash and cash equivalents balance totaled $20.8 million and $9.1 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The increase in cash and cash equivalents was primarily due to increase in cash provided by operating activities, borrowings from our revolving credit facility and sales of mineral and royalty interests offset primarily by acquisitions made and payment of dividends to our stockholders and distributions to the holders of non-controlling interests during the year ended December 31, 2021. See "Note 4-Acquisitions and Divestitures" to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report for further discussion. We expect that our cash flows from operations and additional borrowings under our revolving credit facility will be sufficient to fund our working capital needs. We expect that the pace of our operators’ drilling and completion of our undeveloped locations, production volumes, commodity prices and differentials to WTI and Henry Hub prices for our oil, natural gas and NGL production will be the largest variables affecting our working capital.
Dividends
The following table sets forth information with respect to cash dividends declared by our Board of Directors during 2021:
(1) Dividends paid to holders of Class A common stock.
Our current dividend structure, implemented during the third quarter of 2021, consists of a base dividend of $0.14 per share of Class A common stock plus a variable dividend. The decision to pay any future dividends is solely within the discretion of, and subject to approval by, our Board of Directors. Our Board of Directors’ determination with respect to any such dividends, including the record date, the payment date and the actual amount of the dividend, will depend upon our results of operations, financial condition, capital requirements, contractual restrictions, credit agreement restrictions, restrictions imposed by applicable law and other factors that the Board of Directors deems relevant at the time of such determination. See "Item 5 - Market for Registrant's Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities-Dividend Policy" for further discussion of our dividend policy.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Analysis of Cash Flow Changes Between the Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
Net cash provided by operating activities
Net cash provided by operating activities is primarily affected by production volumes, the prices of oil, natural gas and NGLs, lease bonus revenue and changes in working capital. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily due to 91% increase in realized commodity prices partially offset by the 5% decrease in production volumes and an increase in operating expenses during these periods discussed above. The increase in net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is primarily due to improved collections of receivables and reduced payments for interest and income taxes, partly offset by increased payments for operating expenses.
Net cash used in investing activities
Net cash used in investing activities is primarily composed of acquisitions of mineral and royalty interests, net of dispositions. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our net cash used in investing activities was primarily a result of acquisitions of mineral and royalty interests totaling $103.5 million, offset by sales of mineral and royalty interests totaling $13.6 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, our net cash used in investing activities was primarily a result of acquisitions of mineral and royalty interests totaling $66.5 million and other fixed assets totaling $0.5 million, offset by sales of mineral and royalty interests totaling $1.6 million.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, our net cash used in investing activities was primarily a result of acquisitions of mineral and royalty interests totaling $219.5 million and additions to other fixed assets of $0.4 million, offset by sales of mineral and royalty interests totaling $3.1 million.
Net cash (used in)/provided by financing activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily a result of dividends paid to holders of our Class A common stock of $60.6 million, distributions to holders of non-controlling interest of $17.9 million, partial repayment of our revolving credit facility of $4.0 million, payment of employee tax withholding for settlement of equity compensation awards of $1.1 million and payments of loan closing costs of $0.7 million, related to the December 15, 2021 borrowing base redetermination. This was partially offset by borrowings under our revolving credit facility of $77.0 million.
Net cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the dividends paid to holders of our Class A common stock of $42.2 million, distributions to holders of temporary equity (or non-controlling interest as of February 19, 2021) of $24.7 million, and the repurchase of shares of our Class A common stock from the September 2020 Selling Stockholders for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $3.5 million, partially offset by borrowings under our revolving credit facility of $20.0 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 included the combined net proceeds generated from the IPO and December 2019 Offering of $379.8 million offset by the combined full repayment of the outstanding long-term debt of $175.0 million (net of additional borrowings of $105.0 million incurred during the year), dividends paid to holders of our Class A common stock of $14.7 million, distributions to holders of temporary equity of $20.1 million, payment of debt extinguishment fees of $2.1 million and payment of loan closing costs of $1.3 million.
Revolving Credit Facility
On May 16, 2019 (the “closing date”), Brigham Resources entered into a credit agreement with Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., as administrative agent for the various lenders from time to time party thereto, providing for a revolving credit facility (our “revolving credit facility”). Our revolving credit facility is guaranteed by Brigham Resources’ domestic subsidiaries and is collateralized by a lien on substantial portion of Brigham Resources and its domestic subsidiaries’ assets, including substantial portion of their respective royalty and mineral properties.
Availability under our revolving credit facility is governed by a borrowing base, which is subject to redetermination semi-annually in May and November of each year. In addition, lenders holding two-thirds of the aggregate commitments may request one additional redetermination each year. Brigham Resources can also request one additional redetermination each year, and such other redeterminations as appropriate when significant acquisition opportunities arise. The borrowing base is subject to further adjustments for asset dispositions, material title deficiencies, certain terminations of hedge agreements and issuances of permitted additional indebtedness. Increases to the borrowing base require unanimous approval of the lenders, while decreases only require approval of lenders holding two-thirds of the aggregate commitments at such time. The weighted average interest rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 2.31%. As of December 31, 2021, the elected borrowing base on our revolving credit facility was $230.0 million, with outstanding borrowings of $93.0 million, resulting in $137.0 million availability for future borrowings.
Our revolving credit facility bears interest at a rate per annum equal to, at our option, the adjusted base rate or the adjusted LIBOR rate plus an applicable margin. The applicable margin is based on utilization of our revolving credit facility and ranges from (a) in the case of adjusted base rate loans, 1.500% to 2.500% and (b) in the case of adjusted LIBOR rate loans, 2.500% to 3.500%. Brigham Resources may elect an interest period of one, two, three, six, or if available to all lenders, twelve months. Interest is payable in arrears at the end of each interest period, but no less frequently than quarterly. A commitment fee is payable quarterly in arrears on the daily undrawn available commitments under our revolving credit facility in an amount ranging from 0.375% to 0.500% based on utilization of our revolving credit facility. Our revolving credit facility is subject to other customary fee, interest and expense reimbursement provisions.
Our revolving credit facility matures on May 16, 2024. Loans drawn under our revolving credit facility may be prepaid at any time without premium or penalty (other than customary LIBOR breakage) and must be prepaid in the event that exposure exceeds the lesser of the borrowing base and the elected availability at such time. The principal amount of loans that are prepaid are required to be accompanied by accrued and unpaid interest and fees on such amounts. Loans that are prepaid may be reborrowed. In addition, Brigham Resources may permanently reduce or terminate in full the commitments under our revolving credit facility prior to maturity. Any excess exposure resulting from such permanent reduction or termination must be prepaid. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under our revolving credit facility, the administrative agent acting at the direction of the lenders holding a majority of the aggregate commitments at such time may accelerate outstanding loans and terminate all commitments under our revolving credit facility, provided that such acceleration and termination occurs automatically upon the occurrence of a bankruptcy or insolvency event of default.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires it to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Changes in facts and circumstances or additional information may result in revised estimates, and actual results may differ from these estimates.
A complete list of our significant accounting policies are described in the notes to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021 included elsewhere in this Annual Report.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in the consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes. Although management believes these estimates are reasonable, actual results could differ from these estimates. Changes in estimates are recorded prospectively.
Our consolidated financial statements are based on a number of significant estimates including quantities of oil, natural gas and NGL reserves that are the basis for the calculations of DD&A and impairment of oil and natural gas properties. Reservoir engineering is a subjective process of estimating underground accumulations of oil and natural gas and there are numerous uncertainties inherent in estimating quantities of proved oil and natural gas reserves. The accuracy of any reserve estimate is a function of the quality of available data and of engineering and geological interpretation and judgment. As a result, reserve estimates may differ from the quantities of oil and natural gas that are ultimately recovered. Our reserve estimates are audited by CG&A, an independent petroleum engineering firm. Other items subject to significant estimates and assumptions include the carrying amount of oil and natural gas properties, share-based compensation expenses, and revenue accruals.
Accounts Receivable
Receivables consist of mineral and royalty revenues due from operators for their oil and gas sales to purchasers. Those purchasers remit payment for production to the operator of the properties and the operator, in turn, remits payment to us. Receivables from third parties for which we did not receive actual information, either due to timing delays or due to the unavailability of data at the time when revenues are recognized, are estimated. Volume estimates for wells with available historical actual data are based upon (i) the historical actual data for the months the data is available, or (ii) engineering estimates for the months the historical actual data is not available. We do not recognize revenues for wells with no historical actual data because we cannot conclude that it is probable that a significant revenue reversal will not occur in future periods. Pricing estimates are based upon actual prices realized in an area by adjusting the market price for the average basis differential from market on a basin-by-basin basis.
We routinely review outstanding balances, assess the financial strength of our operators and record a reserve for amounts not expected to be fully recovered, using a current expected credit loss model. We recorded credit losses of $0.5 million, $0.3 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, which was included in general and administrative expenses.
Oil and Gas Properties
We use the full cost method of accounting for our oil and natural gas properties. Under this method, all acquisition costs incurred for the purpose of acquiring mineral and royalty interests and certain related employee costs are capitalized into a full cost pool. Costs associated with general corporate activities are expensed in the period incurred.
Capitalized costs are amortized using the units-of-production method. Under this method, the provision for depletion is calculated by multiplying total production for the period by a depletion rate. The depletion rate is determined by dividing the total unamortized cost base by the net equivalent proved reserves at the beginning of the period.
Costs associated with unevaluated properties are excluded from the amortizable cost base until a determination has been made as to the existence of proved reserves. Unevaluated properties are reviewed periodically to determine whether the costs incurred should be reclassified to the full cost pool and subjected to amortization. The costs associated with unevaluated properties primarily consist of acquisition and leasehold costs and capitalized interest. Unevaluated properties are assessed for impairment on an individual basis or as a group if properties are individually insignificant. The assessment includes consideration of the following factors, among others: expectation of future drilling activity; past drilling results and activity; geological and geophysical evaluations; the assignment of proved reserves; and the economic viability of development if proved reserves are assigned. During any period in which these factors indicate an impairment, the cumulative acquisition costs incurred to date for such property are transferred to the full cost pool and are then subject to amortization. There was no impairment recorded for unevaluated properties for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Sales and abandonments of oil and natural gas properties being amortized are accounted for as adjustments to the full cost pool, with no gain or loss recognized unless the adjustments would significantly alter the relationship between capitalized costs and proved reserves. A significant alteration would not ordinarily be expected to occur upon the sale of reserves involving less than 25% of the reserve quantities of a cost center.
Natural gas volumes are converted to Boe at the rate of six thousand Mcf of natural gas to one Bbl of oil. This convention is not an equivalent price basis and there may be a large difference in value between an equivalent volume of oil versus an equivalent volume of natural gas.
Under the full cost method of accounting, total capitalized costs of oil and natural gas properties, net of accumulated depletion and related deferred income taxes, may not exceed an amount equal to the present value of future net revenues from proved reserves, discounted at 10% per annum ("PV-10"), plus the cost of unevaluated properties, less related income tax effects (full cost ceiling limitation). A write-down of the carrying value of the full cost pool ("impairment charge") is a noncash charge that reduces earnings and impacts equity in the period of occurrence and typically results in lower depletion expense in future periods. A ceiling limitation is calculated at each reporting period. The ceiling limitation calculation is prepared using the unweighted arithmetic average of oil price ("SEC oil price") and natural gas price ("SEC gas price") as of the first day of each month for the trailing 12-month period ended, as required under the guidelines established by the SEC. As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the SEC oil prices were $66.56, $39.57, and $55.65, respectively, per barrel for oil, further adjusted by area for energy content, transportation fees and regional price differentials and the SEC gas prices were $3.64, $2.00, and $2.60, respectively, per MMBtu for natural gas, further adjusted by area for energy content, transportation fees and regional price differentials. As a result of the decline in the SEC oil prices and SEC gas prices during the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, and taking into consideration certain reclassification of proved undeveloped reserves to probable and possible reserves during the three months ended December 31, 2020, as a result of a slowdown in operator activity, the net book value of oil and natural gas properties exceeded the ceiling limitation as of September 30, 2020 and December 31, 2020, resulting in an impairment charge of $79.6 million to oil and gas properties, net during the year ended December 31, 2020. There were no impairment charges during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2019.
Future significant and prolonged declines in the unweighted arithmetic average SEC oil prices used in the full cost ceiling test may cause many of our operators to reduce substantially their development activities and capital expenditures, which could result in additional impairment charges in the future and such impairments could be material. In addition to the impact of lower prices, any future changes to assumptions of drilling and completion activity, development timing, acquisitions or divestitures of oil and gas properties, proved undeveloped locations, and production and other estimates may require revisions to estimates of total proved reserves which would impact the amount of any impairment charge.
We engage CG&A, our independent petroleum engineering firm, to audit our total estimated proved, probable and possible reserves. We expect proved, probable and possible reserve estimates will change as additional information becomes available and as commodity prices and costs change. We evaluate and estimate our proved, probable and possible reserves internally each quarter and CG&A audits our proved, probable and possible reserves annually. Reserve estimates are inherently imprecise. Accordingly, the estimates are expected to change as more current information becomes available. The estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves are based upon the use of technical and economic data including, but not limited to, well logs, geologic maps, seismic data, well test data, production data, historical price and cost information, historical and future operator development plans, and property ownership interests. Standard engineering and geoscience methods, such as reservoir modeling, performance analysis, volumetric analysis and analogy, which are considered to be appropriate and necessary to establish reserve quantities and reserve categorization that conform to SEC definitions and rules and regulations, are also used.
As in all aspects of oil and natural gas evaluation, there are uncertainties inherent in the interpretation of engineering and geoscience data; therefore, these estimates necessarily represent only informed professional judgment.
It is possible that, because of changes in market conditions or the inherent imprecision of reserve estimates, the estimates of future cash inflows, future gross revenue, the amount of oil and natural gas reserves, the remaining estimated lives of oil and natural gas properties or any combination of the above may be increased or reduced. Increases in recoverable economic volumes generally reduce per unit depletion rates while decreases in recoverable economic volumes generally increase per unit depletion rates.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
It should not be assumed that the standardized measure included in this report as of December 31, 2021 is the current market value of our estimated proved reserves. In accordance with SEC requirements, we based the 2021 standardized measure on the SEC oil price and SEC gas price as of December 31, 2021, and prevailing costs on the date of the estimate. Actual future prices and costs may be materially higher or lower than the prices and costs utilized in the estimate. See “Item 1 - Business-Oil, Natural Gas, and NGLs Data-Proved, Probable and Possible Reserves” and “Item 1A - Risk Factors” for additional information regarding estimates of proved, probable and possible reserves.
Mineral and Royalty Revenues
Mineral and royalty revenues are generally recognized when control of the product is transferred to the customer, the performance obligations under the terms of the contracts with customers are satisfied and collectability is reasonably assured. As a non-operator, we have limited visibility into the timing of when new wells start producing and production statements may not be received for 30 to 90 days or more after the date production is delivered. As a result, we are required to estimate the amount of production delivered to the purchaser and the price that we will receive for the sale of the product. The expected sales volumes and prices for these properties are estimated and recorded within the Accounts receivable line item in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets. The difference between our estimates and the actual amounts received for oil and natural gas sales is recorded in the month that payment is received from the third party.
Lease bonus and other income
We earn revenue from lease bonuses, delay rentals, and right-of-way payments. We generate lease bonus revenue by leasing our mineral interests to exploration and production companies. A lease agreement represents our contract with a customer and generally transfers the rights to any oil or natural gas discovered, grants us a right to a specified royalty interest, and requires that drilling and completion operations commence within a specified time period. We recognize lease bonus revenues when the lease agreement has been executed, payment has been received, and we have no further obligation to refund the payment. At the time we execute the lease agreement, we expect to receive the lease bonus payment within a reasonable time, though in no case more than one year, such that we have not adjusted the expected amount of consideration for the effects of any significant financing component per the practical expedient in ASC 606.
Share-Based Compensation
Brigham Minerals accounts for its share-based compensation, including grants of the Incentive Units, restricted stock awards, time-based restricted stock units and performance-based stock units, in the consolidated statements of operations based on their estimated fair values at grant date. Brigham Minerals uses a Monte Carlo simulation to determine the fair value of performance-based stock units. Brigham Minerals recognizes expense on a straight-line basis over the vesting period of the respective grant, which is generally the requisite service period. Brigham Minerals capitalizes a portion of the share-based compensation expense to oil and gas properties on the consolidated balance sheets. Share-based compensation expense is included in general and administrative expenses in Brigham Minerals’ consolidated statements of operations included within this Annual Report. There was approximately $16.5 million of unamortized compensation expense relating to outstanding awards at December 31, 2021, a portion of which will be capitalized. The unrecognized compensation expense will be recognized on a straight-line basis over the remaining vesting periods of the awards. Brigham Minerals accounts for forfeitures as they occur.
Income Taxes
Brigham Minerals accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are calculated by applying existing tax laws and the rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be
recovered or settled. The effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
We periodically assess whether it is more likely than not that we will generate sufficient taxable income to realize our deferred income tax assets, including net operating losses. In making this determination, we consider all available positive and negative evidence and make certain assumptions. We consider, among other things, our deferred tax liabilities, the overall business environment, our historical earnings and losses, current industry trends and our outlook for future years.
Temporary Equity
Brigham Minerals accounted for the Original Owners’ 23.2% interest in Brigham LLC as of December 31, 2020 as temporary equity as a result of certain redemption rights held by the Original Owners as discussed in “Note 9-Temporary Equity and Non-controlling Interest” to the consolidated financial statements of Brigham Minerals included elsewhere in this Annual Report. As such, Brigham Minerals adjusted temporary equity to its maximum redemption amount at the balance sheet date, if higher than the carrying amount. The redemption amount is based on the 10-day volume-weighted average closing price (“VWAP”) of Class A shares at the end of the reporting period. Changes in the redemption value are recognized immediately as they occur, as if the end of the reporting period was also the redemption date for the instrument, with an offsetting entry to additional paid-in capital. Temporary equity is reclassified to permanent equity (i) upon Conversion of Class B common stock (and an equivalent number of Brigham LLC Units) to Class A common stock, or (ii) when holders of Class B common stock no longer control a majority of the votes of the Board of Directors through direct representation on the Board of Directors, and no longer control the determination of whether to make a cash payment upon a Brigham Unit Holder's exercise of its Redemption Right.
As a result of the appointment of an additional independent member to our Board of Directors on February 19, 2021, the holders of Class B common stock no longer hold a majority of the votes of the Board of Directors and no longer control the Board of Directors through direct representation on the Board of Directors. Consequently, after February 19, 2021, Class B common stock is presented as non-controlling interest (as discussed below) in the consolidated balance sheets of Brigham Minerals.
Non-Controlling Interest
As of February 19, 2021 and thereafter, the holders of Class B common stock no longer control a majority of the votes of the Company's Board of Directors through direct representation on the Board of Directors, and no longer control the determination of whether to make a cash payment upon each holder of Brigham LLC Unit's (each a "Brigham LLC Unit Holder") exercise of its Redemption Right (as hereinafter defined). As such, at December 31, 2021, Brigham Minerals accounts for Brigham LLC Unit Holders' 19.0% interest in Brigham LLC not owned by Brigham Minerals as non-controlling interest. For further discussion, see “Note 9-Temporary Equity and Non-controlling Interest.”
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
None that are expected to have a material impact.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.