Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Executive Overview
We continue to make strategic investments to support our operating and financial model designed to drive sustainable sales and profit growth. We have done this through our investment strategy focused on improving guest experience, enhancing customer-centric engagement, optimizing product and service offerings, and accelerating productivity and team engagement, as well as our growth strategy, including executing on accretive acquisition opportunities. During 2022, we:
Invested significantly in our team, including incremental investment in our technician labor.
Transformed 53 stores through rebranding and reimaging.
Acquired 47 stores through acquisition.
Recent Developments
In May 2022, we entered into an agreement with American Tire Distributors, Inc. to sell to our wholesale tire operations and internal tire distribution operations for approximately $105 million in the aggregate. Of the $105 million purchase price, $65 million is expected to be paid at the expected closing date during the first quarter of fiscal 2023 and the remaining $40 million is expected to be paid as earnout payments after the closing. The earnout payments will be earned, on a per-tire basis, based on tires we will buy from American Tire Distributors pursuant to a distribution agreement that we expect to enter with American Tire Distributors at the closing date of the sale of assets.
We expect to enter into additional agreements with American Tire Distributors at or prior to the closing date, including (1) a distribution agreement, in which American Tire Distributors will agree to supply and sell tires to our retail locations; (2) a managed services agreement, in which American Tire Distributors will provide category management, ordering, dashboard, and inventory management services to us; and (3) an agreement relating to preferred data services to be provided to us by American Tire Distributors.
Financial Summary
2022 included the following notable items:
Diluted earnings per common share (“EPS”) were $1.81.
Adjusted diluted EPS, a non-GAAP measure, were $1.85.
Sales increased 20.8 percent, driven by an increase in comparable store sales.
Comparable store sales increased 15.2 percent from the prior year, driven primarily by an increase in average ticket amount and guest traffic.
Operating income of $101.3 million was 40.2 percent higher than the prior year.
Net income was $61.6 million.
Adjusted net income, a non-GAAP measure, was $63.1 million.
Note: Amounts may not foot due to rounding.
Adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS, each of which is a measure not derived in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (“GAAP”), exclude the impact of certain items. Management believes that adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS are useful in providing period-to-period comparisons of the results of our operations by excluding certain non-recurring items and items related to store impairment charges and closings, as well as Monro.Forward or acquisition initiatives. Reconciliations of these non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP measures are provided beginning on page 26 under “Non-GAAP Financial Measures.”
We define comparable store sales as sales for locations that have been opened or owned at least one full fiscal year. We believe this period is generally required for new store sales levels to begin to normalize. Management uses comparable store sales to assess the operating performance of the Company’s stores and believes the metric is useful to investors because our overall results are dependent
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
upon the results of our stores. Comparable sales measures vary across the retail industry. Therefore, our comparable store sales calculation is not necessarily comparable to similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Impact of COVID-19
The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic will depend on factors such as the length of time of the pandemic; how federal, state, and local governments are responding; the efficacy and distribution of the COVID-19 vaccines; the longer-term impact of the pandemic on the economy and consumer behavior; and the effect on our guests, teammates, vendors, and other partners.
During this time, we are focused on protecting the health and safety of our teammates and guests, while seeking to continue operating our business responsibly.
Although vaccine distribution has increased and more businesses are operating at levels similar to pre-pandemic capacity, we have experienced labor inefficiencies and a shortage of teammates in some of our store locations. If we are unable to fill enough teammate positions, we may be unable to earn as much revenue as if we were fully staffed. We have had to pay more for labor because our teammates continue working overtime to meet the surge in demand, which, along with an incremental investment we made in technician labor costs to support current and future sales growth amidst improving consumer demand trends, increased our technician labor costs as a percentage of sales and may decrease our gross profit and net income if not offset by other factors. Although we are experiencing unprecedented challenges during this pandemic, we continue our focus to remain as efficient as possible while still offering safe and high-quality service to our guests.
While we expect many teammates to return to our offices in the future, the timing of such a return could be affected by resurgences of COVID-19 in areas where our offices are located. When we return to our offices, we expect many teammates to continue to work in a hybrid of in-person and remote work. These changes to our operations going forward may present additional challenges and increased costs to ensure our offices are safe and functional for hybrid work that enable effective collaboration of both in-person and remote teammates.
Given the level of volatility and uncertainty surrounding the future impact of COVID-19, we cannot estimate with certainty the long-term impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows. Please see the risks set forth in Part I, Item 1A. “Risk Factors” above for further discussion of the risks that may impact our longer-term operational and financial performance.
Analysis of Results of Operations
We have elected to omit discussion on the earliest of the three years covered by the consolidated financial statements presented. The discussion of our fiscal 2021 performance compared to our fiscal 2020 performance and our financial condition as of March 27, 2021 is incorporated herein by reference to Part II, Item 7., “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” located in our Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended March 27, 2021, filed on May 26, 2021.
Sales
Sales include automotive undercar repair, tire replacement and tire related service sales, net of discounts, returns, etc., and revenue from the sale of warranty agreements and commissions earned from the delivery of tires. See Note 8 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for additional information. We use comparable store sales to evaluate the performance of our existing stores by measuring the change in sales for a period over the comparable, prior-year period of equivalent length. There were 361 selling days in both 2022 and 2021.
Sales growth - from both comparable store sales and new stores - represents an important driver of our long-term profitability. We expect that comparable store sales growth will significantly impact our total sales growth. We believe that our ability to successfully differentiate our guests’ experience through a careful combination of merchandise assortment, price, convenience, and other factors will, over the long-term, drive both increasing guest traffic and the average ticket amount spent.
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
The sales increase was primarily due to an increase in comparable store sales from an increase in average ticket amount and guest traffic as comparable store sales growth increased across our product categories with higher growth in our tires, maintenance, and brakes categories. Additionally, there was an increase in sales from new stores. Partially offsetting these increases was a decrease in sales from closed stores. The following table shows the drivers of the change in sales between 2022 and 2021.
(a)Sales from 2022 and 2021 acquisitions represented 6.0 percent of the changes between 2022 and 2021.
As the COVID-19 pandemic has evolved, demand for automotive undercar repair services as well as replacement tires and tire related services continues to be volatile. During 2022, comparable store sales growth increased across our product categories with higher growth in our higher-margin brakes, alignment, and maintenance categories, as well as our tire category, each of which had experienced declines during 2021.
(a)Steering product category includes front end/shocks and alignment product category sales.
(a)Includes 47 stores opened related to the 2022 acquisitions.
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Cost of Sales and Gross Profit
The increase in gross profit, as a percentage of sales, of 30 basis points (“bps”) for 2022, as compared to the prior year, was primarily due to a decrease in material costs, as a percentage of sales, because of a shift in sales mix from tires to our higher margin service categories. Additionally, through the use of our tire category and management pricing tool, we expanded our gross profit per tire from the prior year. We anticipate that expected inflationary impacts of higher material costs in the coming year will be offset by higher selling prices. The increase in gross profit, as a percentage of sales, was also partially due to a decrease in distribution and occupancy costs, as a percentage of sales, as we gained leverage on these largely fixed costs with higher overall comparable store sales. Partially offsetting these decreases was an increase in technician labor costs, which increased as a percentage of sales, as we made an incremental investment in technician labor to support current and future sales growth amidst improving consumer demand trends for our product and service categories and competitive pressure in the labor market for technicians. We expect to invest more in our teams in the coming year as we continue to build staffing to meet demand.
Operating, Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
The increase of $57.6 million in operating, selling, general and administrative (“OSG&A”) expenses from the prior year is primarily due to increased expenses from comparable stores, mainly store management compensation and operating expenses needed to match demand. However, we gained leverage with higher overall comparable store sales, which resulted in the decrease in OSG&A expenses, as a percentage of sales, from the prior year. The increase in OSG&A expenses for 2022 was also partially due to increased expenses from 48 new stores, as well as an increase in litigation settlement costs (mainly related to the Cerini matter described in Note 15 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements). Partially offsetting these increases were lower expenses for 2022 from seven stores closed compared to the prior year.
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Other Performance Factors
Net Interest Expense
Net interest expense of $24.6 million for 2022 decreased $3.6 million as compared to the prior year and decreased as a percentage of sales from 2.5 percent to 1.8 percent. Weighted average debt outstanding for 2022 decreased by approximately $100 million as compared to 2021. This decrease is primarily related to a decrease in debt outstanding under our Credit Facility. Partially offsetting this decrease was an increase in finance lease debt recorded in connection with the 2022 acquisitions. The weighted average interest rate increased approximately 10 basis points from the prior year.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective income tax rate was 20.3 percent for 2022 compared to 22.3 percent for 2021. The effective tax rate for 2022 and 2021 reflects an income tax benefit of $3.1 million and $0.5 million, respectively, due to the difference in statutory tax rates from a loss year to years in which such net operating loss may be carried back. See Note 9 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In addition to reporting net income and diluted EPS, which are GAAP measures, this Form 10-K includes adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS, which are non-GAAP financial measures. We have included reconciliations to adjusted net income and adjusted diluted EPS from our most directly comparable GAAP measures, net income, and diluted EPS, below. Management views these non-GAAP financial measures as indicators to better assess comparability between periods because management believes these non-GAAP financial measures reflect our core business operations while excluding certain non-recurring items and items related to store impairment charges and closings, as well as Monro.Forward or acquisition initiatives.
These non-GAAP financial measures are not intended to represent, and should not be considered more meaningful than, or as an alternative to, their most directly comparable GAAP measures. These non-GAAP financial measures may be different from similarly titled non-GAAP financial measures used by other companies.
Adjusted net income is summarized as follows:
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Adjusted diluted EPS is summarized as follows:
(a)Amounts, in the periods presented, may be too minor in amount, net of the impact from income taxes, to have an impact on the calculation of adjusted diluted EPS.
Note: The calculation of the impact of non-GAAP adjustments on diluted EPS is performed on each line independently. The table may not add down by +/- $0.01 due to rounding.
The income tax benefit related to net operating loss carryback adjustment to each of net income and diluted EPS is tax affected and reflects the difference in statutory tax rates from a loss year to years in which such net operating loss may be carried back, as finalized in 2022. The other adjustments to diluted EPS reflect adjusted effective tax rates of 24.1 percent and 23.5 percent for 2022 and 2021, respectively. These adjusted effective tax rates exclude the income tax impacts from share-based compensation and differences in statutory tax rates for net operating loss carrybacks. See adjustments from the Reconciliation of Adjusted Net Income table above for pre-tax amounts.
Analysis of Financial Condition
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Capital Allocation
We expect to continue to generate positive operating cash flow as we have done in each of the last three fiscal years. The cash we generate from our operations will allow us to continue to support business operations, including planned investment in additional staffing, invest in attractive acquisition opportunities intended to drive long-term sustainable growth, pay down debt, return cash to our shareholders through our dividend program and repurchase shares of our common stock under our common stock repurchase program.
In addition, because we believe a large portion of our future expenditures will be to fund our growth, through acquisition of retail stores and/or opening greenfield stores, we continually evaluate our cash needs and may decide it is best to fund the growth of our business through borrowings on our Credit Facility. Conversely, we may also periodically determine that it is in our best interests to voluntarily repay certain indebtedness early.
Material Cash Requirements
We enter into contractual obligations in the ordinary course of business that may require future cash payments. Such obligations include, but are not limited to, debt service, leasing arrangements, and other liabilities. The timing and nature of these obligations are expected to have an impact on our liquidity and capital requirements in future periods.
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Contractual Obligations
(a)Finance and operating lease commitments represent future undiscounted lease payments and include $103.5 million and $65.4 million, respectively, related to options to extend lease terms that are reasonably certain of being exercised.
Sources and Conditions of Liquidity
Our sources to fund our material cash requirements are predominantly cash from operations, availability under our Credit Facility, and cash and equivalents on hand.
Summary of Cash Flows
The following table presents a summary of our cash flows from operating, investing, and financing activities.
Cash provided by operating activities
For 2022, cash provided by operating activities was $173.8 million, which consisted of net income of $61.6 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $99.3 million and by a change in operating assets and liabilities of $12.8 million. The non-cash charges were largely driven by $81.2 million of depreciation and amortization. The change in operating assets and liabilities was largely due to our federal and state income taxes payable being a source of cash of $13.8 million due primarily to an income tax refund that was received.
For 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $184.9 million, which consisted of net income of $34.3 million, adjusted by non-cash charges of $90.2 million and by a change in operating assets and liabilities of $60.4 million. The non-cash charges were largely driven by $77.3 million of depreciation and amortization. The change in operating assets and liabilities was primarily due to accounts payable and accrued liabilities, net of vendor rebate receivables, being a source of cash of $37.2 million driven by timing of payments, as well as our inventory balance being a source of cash of $26.6 million due to decreased inventory purchases to adjust to lower demand.
Cash used for investing activities
For 2022, cash used for investing activities was $109.8 million. This was primarily due to cash used for acquisitions and capital expenditures, including property and equipment, of $83.3 million and $27.8 million, respectively. Included in the $83.3 million used for acquisitions was $0.8 million paid to the seller of the 2021 acquisition as the lease assignment for one store location was finalized during the period.
For 2021, cash used for investing activities was $66.3 million. This was primarily due to cash used for capital expenditures, including property and equipment, and acquisitions of $51.7 million and $17.2 million, respectively.
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
Cash used for financing activities
For 2022, cash used for financing activities was $86.0 million which was primarily due to payment of finance lease principal and dividends of $39.4 million and $34.7 million, respectively, as well as payment on our Credit Facility, net of amounts borrowed during the period, of $13.5 million.
For 2021, cash used for financing activities was $434.2 million which was primarily due to payment of amounts previously borrowed on our Credit Facility and finance lease principal of $376.4 million and $33.4 million, respectively, as well as payment of dividends of $29.8 million.
Credit Facility
Interest only is payable monthly throughout the term of our Credit Facility. The borrowing capacity for the Credit Facility of $600 million includes an accordion feature permitting us to request an increase in availability of up to an additional $250 million.
On June 11, 2020, we entered into a First Amendment to the Credit Facility (the “First Amendment”), which, among other things, amended the terms of certain of the financial and restrictive covenants in the credit agreement through the first quarter of 2022 to provide us with additional flexibility to operate our business. The First Amendment amended the interest rate charged on borrowings to be based on the greater of adjusted one-month LIBOR or 0.75 percent. For the period from June 30, 2020 to June 30, 2021, the minimum interest rate spread charged on borrowings was 225 basis points over LIBOR. Additionally, during the same period, we were permitted to declare, make, or pay any dividend or distribution up to $38.5 million in the aggregate and the acquisition of stores or other businesses up to $100 million in the aggregate were permitted if we were in compliance with the financial covenants and other restrictions in the First Amendment and Credit Facility. As of July 1, 2021, the ability of our Board of Directors to declare, make, or pay any dividend or distribution and our ability to acquire stores or other businesses is no longer restricted by the terms of the Credit Facility, as amended by the First Amendment. The Credit Facility requires fees payable quarterly throughout the term between 0.125 percent and 0.35 percent of the amount of the average net availability under the Credit Facility during the preceding quarter.
On October 5, 2021, we entered into a Second Amendment to the Credit Facility (the “Second Amendment”). The Second Amendment, which among other things, amends certain of the financial terms in the Credit Agreement, as amended by the First Amendment. Specifically, the First Amendment had amended the interest rate charged on borrowings to be based on the greater of adjusted one-month LIBOR or 0.75 percent. The Second Amendment amends the interest rate to be based on the greater of adjusted one-month LIBOR or 0.00 percent. In addition, the Second Amendment updates certain provisions regarding a successor interest rate to LIBOR. Except as amended by the First Amendment and Second Amendment, the remaining terms of the credit agreement remain in full force and effect.
Within the Credit Facility, we have a sub-facility of $80 million available for the purpose of issuing standby letters of credit. The sub-facility requires fees aggregating 87.5 to 212.5 basis points annually of the face amount of each standby letter of credit, payable quarterly in arrears. There was a $29.6 million outstanding letter of credit at March 26, 2022.
Mortgages and specific lease financing arrangements with other parties (with certain limitations) are permitted under the Credit Facility. Other specific terms and the maintenance of specified ratios are generally consistent with our prior financing agreement. Additionally, the Credit Facility is not secured by our real property, although we have agreed not to encumber our real property, with certain permissible exceptions.
We were in compliance with all debt covenants at March 26, 2022.
As of May 13, 2022, we had approximately $11.3 million in cash on hand. In addition, we had $430.4 million available under the Credit Facility as of May 13, 2022.
We believe that our sources of liquidity, namely cash flow from operations, availability under our Credit Facility, and cash and equivalents on hand, will continue to be adequate to meet our contractual obligations, working capital and capital expenditure needs, finance acquisitions, fund debt maturities, pay dividends and repurchase our common stock for at least the next 12 months and the foreseeable future.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP, which requires us to make estimates and apply judgments that affect the reported amounts. In Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements, we describe the significant accounting policies used in preparing the consolidated financial statements. Our management believes that the accounting estimates
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
listed below are those that are most critical to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and that require management’s most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments in estimating the effect of inherent uncertainties.
Business Combinations
We use the acquisition method in accounting for acquired businesses. Under the acquisition method, our financial statements reflect the operations of an acquired business starting from the completion of the acquisition. The assets acquired and liabilities assumed are recorded at their respective estimated fair values at the date of the acquisition. Any excess of the purchase price over the estimated fair values of the identifiable net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Significant judgment is often required in estimating the fair value of assets acquired, particularly the right of use (“ROU”) assets and intangible assets, including trade names, customer relationships, and reacquired franchise rights. ROU assets are recorded at the present value of remaining lease payments adjusted to reflect favorable or unfavorable market terms of the lease. As a result, in the case of significant acquisitions, we normally obtain the assistance of a third-party valuation specialist in estimating the value of the ROU assets as well as intangible assets. The fair value measurements are based on available historical information and on expectations and assumptions about the future, considering the perspective of marketplace participants. Favorable or unfavorable market terms used to value the ROU assets are estimated based on comparable market data. Fair values of acquired trade names are estimated using an income approach, specifically the relief-from-royalty method. Customer relationships are valued using the cost approach or an income approach such as the excess earnings method. Reacquired franchise rights are valued using the excess earnings method under an income approach. Assumptions utilized in the determination of fair value include forecasted sales, discount rates, royalty rates (trade names), and customer attrition rates (customer relationships). While we believe the expectations and assumptions about the future are reasonable, they are inherently uncertain. Unanticipated market or macroeconomic events and circumstances, like the COVID-19 pandemic, may occur, which could affect the accuracy or validity of the estimates and assumptions.
Carrying Values of Long-Lived Assets
We assess potential impairments to our long-lived assets, which include property and equipment and ROU assets, whenever events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of an asset may not be recoverable. Long-lived assets are grouped and evaluated for impairment at the lowest level for which there are identifiable cash flows that are independent of the cash flows of other groups of assets. If it is determined that the carrying amounts of such long-lived assets are not recoverable, the assets are written down to their estimated fair values. Fair value of the assets is determined based on the highest and best use of the asset group, considering external market participant assumptions. Since the determination of future cash flows is an estimate of future performance, there may be future impairments if future cash flows do not meet expectations.
Insurance Reserves
We maintain a high retention deductible plan with respect to workers’ compensation and general liability insurance claims (except for in Ohio in which we are self-insured) and are otherwise self-insured for employee medical insurance claims. To reduce our risk and better manage our overall loss exposure, we purchase stop-loss insurance that covers individual claims more than the deductible amounts, and caps total losses in a fiscal year. We maintain an accrual for the estimated cost to settle open claims as well as an estimate of the cost of claims that have been incurred but not reported. These estimates take into consideration the historical average claim volume, the average cost for settled claims, current trends in claim costs, changes in our business and workforce, and general economic factors. These accruals are reviewed on a quarterly basis. For more complex reserve calculations, such as workers’ compensation, we periodically use the services of an actuary to assist in determining the required reserve for open claims.
Income Taxes
We estimate our provision for income taxes, deferred tax assets and liabilities, income taxes payable, and unrecognized tax benefit liabilities based on several factors including, but not limited to, historical pre-tax operating income, future estimates of pre-tax operating income, tax planning strategies, differences between tax laws and accounting rules of various items of income and expense, statutory tax rates and credits, uncertain tax positions, and valuation allowances.
We record deferred tax assets and liabilities based upon the expected future tax outcome of differences between tax laws and accounting rules of various items of income and expense recognized in our results of operations using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the future tax outcome is expected. We evaluate our ability to realize the tax benefits associated with deferred tax assets and establish valuation allowances when we believe it is more likely than not that some portion of our deferred tax assets will not be realized.
Monro, Inc. 2022 Form 10-K
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS
We measure and recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position taken or expected to be taken on an income tax return based on the largest benefit that we determine is more likely than not of being realized upon settlement. We use significant judgment and estimates in evaluating our tax positions. Due to the complexity of some of these uncertain tax positions, the ultimate resolution may result in an actual tax liability that differs from our estimated tax liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits and our effective tax rate may be materially impacted. Income taxes are described further in Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
Accounting Standards
See “Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in Note 1 to the Company’s consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the impact of recently issued accounting standards on our consolidated financial statements as of March 26, 2022 and for the year then ended, as well as the expected impact on the consolidated financial statements for future periods.