Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current plans, expectations and beliefs involving risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors” and other factors set forth in other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 8, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses or entities. We intend to effectuate our initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of our IPO and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
The issuance of additional shares of our common stock in a business combination:
•
may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in the IPO, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
•
may subordinate the rights of holders of shares of our Class A common stock if shares of preferred stock are issued with rights senior to those afforded our Class A common stock;
•
could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our Class A common stock are issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
•
may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the share ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
•
May adversely affect prevailing market prices for our units, shares of Class A common stock and/or warrants; and may not result in adjustment to the exercise price of our warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt or otherwise incur significant debt, it could result in:
•
default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
•
acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
•
our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt is payable on demand;
•
our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt is outstanding;
•
our inability to pay dividends on our Class A common stock;
•
using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our Class A common stock if declared, expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions and other general corporate purposes;
•
limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
•
increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation; and
•
limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, execution of our strategy and other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from March 8, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for our IPO, and the search for a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the trust account following the IPO. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period ended December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $427,312, which consists of formation and operating costs of $428,515 and is offset by a gain on marketable securities (net), dividends and interest, held in Trust Account of $1,203.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our liquidity needs were satisfied prior to the completion of our IPO through $18,750 paid by our sponsor (after giving effect to the repurchase by us of 1,437,500 shares of our Class B common stock from our sponsor for an aggregate purchase price of $6,250) to cover certain of our offering and formation costs in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares to our sponsor.
We generated gross proceeds of $178,550,000 from the (i) the sale of the units in the IPO, after deducting offering expenses, underwriting commissions, but excluding deferred underwriting commissions, and (ii) the sale of the private placement warrants. Of this amount, $175,950,000 will be held in the trust account, which includes $6,037,500 of deferred underwriting commissions. The proceeds held in the trust account will be invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations with a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations.
For the period ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $633,412. The net loss of $427,312 was offset by a gain on marketable securities (net), dividends and interest, held in Trust Account of $1,203, and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which used $240,636 of cash.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,454,762 and marketable securities held in the trust account of $175,951,203 (including $1,203 of interest income) consisting of securities held in a money market fund that invests in U.S. Treasury securities with a maturity of 180 days or less. Interest income on the balance in the trust account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we did not withdraw any interest earned on the trust account to pay our taxes.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest income (if any) to pay taxes. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the trust account. We expect the interest income earned on the amount in the trust account (if any) will be sufficient to pay our taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $1,454,762 held outside the trust account. We intend to use these funds to primarily identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating our initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such initial business combination.
Going Concern
On a routine basis, we assess going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 205-40 “Presentation of Financial Statements-Going Concern”. As of December 31, 2021, we had $1,454,762 in our operating bank account, $1,403,571 of working capital, and $175,951,203 of securities held in the Trust Account to be used for an Initial Business Combination or to repurchase or redeem our common stock in connection therewith. We believe that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet our needs through the earlier of the consummation of an Initial Business Combination or one year from this filing, however there is a risk that our liquidity may not be sufficient. The Sponsor intends, but is not obligated to, provide us with Working Capital Loans to sustain operations in the event of a liquidity deficiency.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Registration Rights
The holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into prior to the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The holders of these securities may at any time, and from time to time, request in writing that the Company register the resale of any or all of these securities on Form S-3 or any similar short form registration statement that may be available at such time; provided, however, that the Company shall not be obligated to
effect such request through an underwritten offering. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to the completion of the initial business combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per unit, or $6,037,500 in the aggregate. Subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement, (i) the deferred fee will be placed in our trust account and released to the underwriters only upon the completion of our initial business combination and (ii) the deferred fee will be waived by the underwriters in the event that we do not complete an initial business combination.
Administrative Services Agreement
We have entered into an Administrative Services Agreement pursuant to which the Company will pay an affiliate of the Sponsor a total of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative services to the company. We began incurring these fees on November 29, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the initial business combination or the Company’s liquidation. We expensed $10,549 for the services provided through the Administrative Services Agreement that was Due to the Sponsor as of December 31, 2021.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements. Our management believes that the estimates, judgment and assumptions used are reasonable based upon information available at the time they are made. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of Class A common stock (including shares of Class A common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of Class A common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 17,250,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption were presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of the accompanying balance sheet. The Class A common stock subject to possible redemption reflected on the balance sheet as December 31, 2021 are reconciled in the following table:
Net loss Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income per common share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period. We have not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement in the calculation of diluted income per share, because the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent accounting standards
In August 2020, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. Management is currently evaluating the new guidance but does not expect the adoption of this guidance to have a material impact on the Company’s financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements. See Note 2 to the audited financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for additional information regarding these and our other significant accounting policies.
Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012
Under the JOBS Act, an “emerging growth company” can take advantage of an extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards. This provision allows an “emerging growth company” to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards that have different transition dates for public and private companies until those standards would otherwise apply to private companies. We meet the definition of an “emerging growth company” and have elected to use this extended transition period for complying with new or revised accounting standards until the earlier of the date we (x) are no longer an emerging growth company, or (y) affirmatively and irrevocably opt out of the extended transition period provided in the JOBS Act. As a result, our consolidated financial statements and the reported results of operations contained therein may not be directly comparable to those of other public companies.