Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in this section to the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our” refer to Momentus.
The following discussion and analysis provide information which our management believes is relevant to an assessment and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition. This discussion and analysis should be read together with our audited consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion and analysis should also be read together with our financial information for the year ended and as of December 31, 2021. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates, and beliefs that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. As a result of many factors, such as those set forth under the “Risk Factors” section above and “Cautionary Statement Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements.
Certain figures, such as interest rates and other percentages, included in this section have been rounded for ease of presentation. Percentage figures included in this section have not in all cases been calculated on the basis of such rounded figures but on the basis of such amounts prior to rounding. For this reason, percentage amounts in this section may vary slightly from those obtained by performing the same calculations using the figures in our consolidated financial statements or in the associated text. Certain other amounts that appear in this section may similarly not sum due to rounding.
Overview
Momentus plans to offer transportation and infrastructure services to help enable the commercialization of space. Satellite operators are our principal customers and target customers. Services that we plan to provide include “last mile” satellite transportation, payload-hosting, on-orbit satellite refueling, on-orbit inspection, on-orbit satellite maintenance, de-orbiting, debris removal, and other satellite-to-satellite service offerings. We believe our planned service offerings will increase deployment options for satellite operators and lower their operating costs relative to traditional approaches while also minimizing environmental impact given our choice of water as a propellant.
Our transportation service offering will focus on delivering our customers’ satellites to precision orbits of their choosing. To accomplish this, we plan to create a hub-and-spoke transportation network in partnership with leading launch service providers, such as SpaceX. Under this model, our customers’ satellites would “ride share” from Earth to space on a midsized or large rocket. Our OTVs would then provide “last mile” transportation services from the rocket’s drop-off orbit to a custom orbit of the satellite operator’s choosing. We believe our hub-and-spoke model has the potential to expand our customers’ deployment options relative to what they would be able to achieve with ride share launch alone, while reducing their costs relative to what they could achieve with a dedicated small launch vehicle. Over time, we plan to begin introducing additional services beyond “last mile” transportation.
Since our founding in 2017, we have been working to develop, test and enhance our vehicles and supporting technologies, particularly our water plasma propulsion technology, and have signed contracts for approximately $67 million in backlog (potential revenue), as of January 31, 2022. These agreements contain firm orders as well as options, allowing customers to opt-in to launches on shorter notice without requiring a separate agreement. The breadth of these signed contracts spans across 24 companies. In general, our customers have the right to cancel their contracts with the understanding that they will forgo their deposits. If a customer cancels a contract before it is required to pay non-refundable deposits, we may not receive revenue from these orders, except for an initial deposit which is paid at the time the contract is signed. Refer to “Risk Factors - We may not be able to convert our orders in backlog into revenue.”
Our first launch with customers is currently anticipated to occur as early as June 2022, subject to receipt of licenses and government approvals, and successful completion of our current efforts to get the system ready for flight. Prior planned launches were cancelled due to not receiving required licenses and other governmental approvals and other factors, and we can offer no assurances that our first launch will occur in June 2022 or that we will ever receive the required licenses and other governmental approvals.
Our services are made possible by the space industry’s rapid technological developments over the past two decades, driven predominantly by significant decreases in launch costs, as well as the advent of smaller, lower-cost satellites. This convergence of trends has resulted in substantial growth in the commercial space market, rooted in higher accessibility for companies entering the new space economy that aim to offer communication, earth observation and data collection services, and other satellite services
We anticipate there could be considerable growth over the coming years in the space transportation segment as companies continue to seek versatile and low-cost ways to deliver single satellites to specific orbits or deploy their satellite constellations. We anticipate that the need for small satellite transportation to LEO will continue to drive overall demand growth for space transportation services in the short-term as technology advancements continue to make space more accessible to new market entrants, although new applications beyond LEO are also emerging. We also believe that over the next decade, new space-based businesses may emerge, for example the generation of solar energy in space, space manufacturing or space data processing. The advent of these new business models could substantially increase demand for space transportation and other space infrastructure services.
Beyond transportation, we anticipate that growth of the satellite constellations market may drive demand for our Hosted Payload, on-orbit satellite refueling, on-orbit inspection, on-orbit satellite maintenance, de-orbiting, debris removal, and other satellite-to-satellite service offerings, if we are successful in executing on our business plan, including fully developing and validating our technology in space. Satellite constellations have relatively low lifespans and, in our view, will require maintenance, de-orbiting, and other general servicing with higher frequency.
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to advance the development of our vehicles, build corporate infrastructure and enhance our sales and marketing functions.
The technology underlying our anticipated service offerings is still in the process of being developed, and has not been fully tested or validated in space. Our ability to execute on our business plan is dependent on the successful development and commercialization of the technologies described in this annual report. Although we believe our water plasma propulsion technology will be a key differentiator of our product offerings, we have to date only conducted one test of this technology in space. Although we believe our test unit generated plasma in space and validated the theoretical basis of our technology, we have yet to experimentally confirm the unit’s ability to generate thrust in space, which is crucial to our ability to conduct actual spacecraft maneuvers in orbit. Until we can accomplish this, the technology will remain in the experimental stages. Moreover, even if the unit generates thrust, there can be no assurance that it can be operated in a manner that is sufficiently reliable and efficient to permit full commercialization of the technology. Our statements and beliefs about the viability of our technology are primarily based on theoretical analyses and experimentally observed results during ground testing and our single test of this technology in space. Development of space technologies is extremely complex, time consuming, and expensive, and there can be no assurance that our predicted theoretical and ground-based results will translate into operational space vehicles that operate within the parameters we expect, or at all. This Annual Report on Form 10-K describes Momentus’ current business plans for continuing to develop its technology and marketing and commercializing its products, however there can be no assurance that Momentus will be able to successfully develop its technologies and implement them in commercially viable vehicles. Refer to “Risk Factors - A key component of our business model is the delivery of satellites using our vehicles from low earth orbit to other orbits. The technology for this maneuver is still in the development stage...”
Services Overview
When our technology is fully developed and validated in the future, we currently plan to provide the following infrastructure services to the space economy:
Space Transportation. We are designing a space transportation service based on a hub-and-spoke model, which combines ride share launch on a medium or large rocket with last-mile delivery using one of our OTVs. Under this model, our customers will deliver their payload to us a few months prior to launch for integration onto our vehicle. Once we have integrated our customers’ payloads, we will then ship our vehicle, holding the customer payload fixture, to the launch site, where it will be integrated onto the rocket. The rocket will then transport our vehicle to the drop-off orbit. After separation from the rocket, our vehicle will transport our customers’ payloads to their chosen final orbit.
We are designing our water plasma thrusters to enable our vehicle to efficiently transport each customer payload to its respective orbit. We believe our hub-and-spoke model has the potential to expand our customers’ deployment options relative to what they could achieve with ride share launch alone, while reducing their costs relative to what they could achieve with a dedicated small launch vehicle.
Initially, after delivering our customer payloads to their final orbits, our vehicles will de-orbit. However, our plan is to develop the capability for our vehicles to be reusable, such that, upon delivery of the payload, they will be capable of remaining in space to conduct additional missions.
Hosted Payload. We are designing our transfer vehicles for modularity and ease of integration with customer payloads, and with a full suite of capabilities that our customers will need on orbit. Under our Hosted Payload model, our vehicle, after transporting a customer payload to a specific orbit, would stay connected to the payload for the duration of its mission to provide continuous power, orbit maintenance, orientation, and communications to support telemetry, commanding, and downlinking of payload data. Our objective is to offer a higher degree of modularity which we believe has the potential to significantly increase orbital accessibility and/or lower manufacturing costs for a wide range of satellite operators.
In-Orbit Servicing. We view in-orbit servicing of satellites as a quickly growing business opportunity. As the number of satellites in space increases, so does their need to be serviced. We plan to design Momentus’ future reusable vehicles to be capable of performing in-orbit servicing and are pursuing development activities that support this objective. Although we are still in very preliminary stages for developing this technology, our aim is to equip future vehicles with robotic arms and an ability to maneuver in close proximity to other spacecraft and dock or berth with them. Once fully developed, we believe these capabilities could allow us to offer a suite of different in-orbit services, such as inspection, refueling, life extension, re-positioning, salvage missions, maintenance and repair, and de-orbiting.
Factors Affecting Our Performance
We believe that our performance and future success depend to a substantial extent on our ability to capitalize on the following opportunities, which in turn is subject to significant risks and challenges, including those discussed below and in the section titled “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In-Space Transport and Service Vehicles and Related Technology Development
Our primary research and development objectives focus on the development of our existing and future in-space transfer and service vehicles and related water plasma propulsion technology.
Vigoride is the first vehicle that Momentus is developing. Once fully developed, tested and validated in space, we expect Vigoride will be sufficient to meet our initial operating plan of offering in-space transportation in LEO to small satellites. Vigoride is intended to transport up to 750 kg of customer payload in LEO, although our payload capacity will likely be lower in most common configurations. We have set the delta-v and host power objectives for Vigoride at 2 km/sec and 1 kW, respectively, which we believe we can achieve a few years into our product roadmap. We have entered into a launch services agreement with SpaceX that secures space for Vigoride on a launch vehicle that SpaceX currently targets operating in June 2022. This would represent the inaugural launch of a complete Momentus vehicle into space and would allow us to further validate Vigoride’s capabilities. While securing space on the manifest is an important step, our plan to launch in June remains subject to the receipt of licenses and other government approvals, and successful completion of our current efforts to get the system ready for flight.
Beyond our planned June launch, we are planning to fly Vigoride again in the second half of 2022, subject to receipt of licenses and government approvals, and successful completion of our current efforts to get the system ready for flight.
Early Vigoride vehicles will not be reusable, meaning that we will de-orbit them following delivery of their customer payloads. However, around the middle of this decade, we plan to make our vehicles capable of reuse such that, upon delivery of their payloads, they will be able to remain in space to conduct follow-on missions. Establishing reusable vehicles will require significant additional research and technological developments. We believe our choice of water as a propellant will help with the creation of reusable vehicles because water can be stored without special conditions, other than ensuring lines and tanks do not freeze or become obstructed with ice, for an indefinite amount of time and pumped easily. Additionally, water is safe and non-hazardous relative to commonly used propellants such as cryogenic components and hypergolic toxic fuels for chemical propulsion, or highly pressurized noble gases (such as xenon or krypton) for electrical propulsion. We believe that if we are able to achieve reusability, it will allow us to lower manufacturing and launch costs on a per-ride basis and achieve higher margins and returns for our investors while also reducing our environmental impact.
Beyond Vigoride, we envision bringing two progressively larger vehicles to market, which we call Ardoride and Fervoride. These vehicles will be similar to our Vigoride vehicle, but with larger structures, larger solar arrays, and more powerful propulsion systems in order to carry progressively larger payloads progressively further from Earth
The successful development of our vehicles with water plasma propulsion technology involves uncertainties, including:
•timing in finalizing systems design and specifications;
•successful completion of test programs and demonstration missions;
•whether we will receive and the timing of receipt of licenses and government approvals that will allow us to fly our vehicles in space and gather valuable data that will assist in further development of our vehicles;
•meeting stated technological objectives and goals for the design on time, on budget and within target cost objectives;
•our ability to obtain additional applicable approvals, licenses or certifications from regulatory agencies and maintaining current approvals, licenses or certifications;
•our ability to secure slots on our launch providers’ manifests;
•performance of our manufacturing facility despite risks that disrupt productions, such as natural disasters;
•performance of our third-party contractors that support our research and development activities;
•performance of a limited number of suppliers for certain raw materials and supplied components and their willingness to do business with us;
•our ability to protect our intellectual property critical to the design and function of our orbital transfer vehicles;
•our ability to continue funding and maintaining our current research and development activities;
•the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on us, our customers, suppliers and distributors, and the global economy; and
•our ability to comply with the terms of the NSA and any related compliance measures instituted by the Security Director.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables could delay the development of our vehicles which in turn could impact our business and results of operations. Refer to “Risk Factors.”
Initial and Successive Launches
Our water plasma propulsion technology (that we are developing) is based on the use of microwave electrothermal or “MET,” thrusters, which we believe could ultimately provide safe, affordable, reliable, and regular in-space services, including Space Transportation, Hosted Payload, and In-Orbit Servicing. To accomplish this, we currently intend to execute on the following strategies:
Launch our commercial program for in-space transportation. We currently plan to fly our Vigoride vehicle on a SpaceX Transporter flight as early as June 2022, subject to receipt of licenses and government approvals, and successful completion of our current efforts to get the system ready for flight.
Launch our commercial program for Hosted Payload. If in the future our vehicles are operationalized for their intended in-space transport uses, we plan to develop a modular approach to satellite systems through our hosted payload model. For missions that require significant power for the payload and/or specific orbits, our objective is for Momentus to be able to provide a unique combination of a low-cost service model, in-orbit flexibility, and high electrical power generation.
Launch our commercial program for In-Orbit Servicing. If we develop reusability for our vehicles as currently contemplated, we believe we will be able to begin offering a suite of different in-orbit services to our clients. Although we have not yet developed these capabilities or the technology that would be required to provide these services, such services may include inspection, refueling, life extension, re-positioning, salvage missions, maintenance and repair, and de-orbiting. As the quantity of satellites sent into space continues to increase, we anticipate growing demand from such services.
The success of our in-space infrastructure services business will depend on our ability to successfully and regularly deliver customer satellites into at custom orbits. Our planned June launch is intended to be a demonstration mission. While we plan to take a few paying customer payloads along, the primary goals of our inaugural mission are to test
Vigoride on orbit and learn from any issues that we may encounter. The lessons learned from this initial flight will help inform changes we can make to future missions as we seek to ultimately certify a design for production. Depending on the nature of issues we encounter, our schedule for future launches and other planned activities could be adversely affected. There can be no assurance that we will not experience operational or process failures and other problems during our inaugural mission or on any other mission. Any failures or setbacks, particularly on our inaugural mission, could harm our reputation and have a material adverse effect on our business, financial condition and results of operation.
Customer Demand
Ahead of our first Vigoride launch, we have received significant interest from a range of satellite operators, satellite manufacturers, satellite aggregators, launch service providers, and others. While we have not recognized any revenue from completed commercial launches through December 31, 2021, we had collected approximately $1.6 million in customer deposits related to future launches. While our standard contracts do not contain refunds or recourse provisions that enable our customers to recover any non-refundable deposits that have been paid, we issued refunds totaling $1.4 million to customers in the twelve months ending December 31, 2021 due to cancelled launches for 2021 in order to foster future business relationships and customer goodwill.
Because our technologies have not yet been fully tested, our service offering to our customers on our inaugural mission will be limited. To reflect this, we expect to provide discounts to customers on this mission relative to the price we intend to eventually charge for our transportation services. During our inaugural mission, we plan to demonstrate Vigoride’s ability to deploy satellites at the point at which it is dropped off by the launch vehicle, rather than independently maneuver customer satellites to custom orbits. Once all customer payloads have been released, we plan to perform certain maneuvers and technology demonstrations to validate our technology and establish the potential commercial viability of our strategy. This approach limits risk for us as well as for our customers.
We have signed contracts for approximately $67 million in backlog (potential revenue), as of January 31, 2022. These agreements contain firm orders as well as options, allowing customers to opt-in to launches on shorter notice without requiring a separate agreement. The breadth of these signed contracts spans across 24 companies in 15 countries. In general, our customers have the right to cancel their contracts with the understanding that they will forgo their deposits. If a customer cancels a contract before it is required to pay non-refundable deposits, we may not receive revenue from these orders, except for an initial deposit which is paid at the time the contract is signed. In the year ended December 31, 2021, we recognized $0.3 million of revenue related to customer contracts, cancelled by the customers for convenience, that were not refundable.
In addition, backlog is typically subject to large variations from quarter to quarter and comparisons of backlog from period to period are not necessarily indicative of future revenues. Furthermore, some contracts comprising the backlog are for services scheduled many years in the future, and the economic viability of customers with whom we have contracted is not guaranteed over time. As a result, the contracts comprising our backlog may not result in actual revenue in any particular period, or at all, and the actual revenue from such contracts may differ from our backlog estimates. The timing of receipt of revenues, if any, on projects included in the backlog could change because many factors affect the scheduling of missions and adjustments to contracts may also occur. The failure to realize some portion of our backlog could adversely affect our revenues and gross margins.
COVID-19 Impact
While the COVID-19 pandemic has affected our business and our timeline for our formerly planned launch in April 2020, to date, it has not impacted us in a way that we believe will materially affect our future growth outlook.
We are currently planning for our first commercial launch as early as June 2022, subject to receipt of licenses and government approvals, and successful completion of our current efforts to get the system ready for flight. We do not foresee any delays due to COVID-19. The same applies to launches scheduled for the remainder of 2022 and beyond.
We do not anticipate that the COVID-19 pandemic will materially affect our customer backlog and ability to secure new contracts going forward.
Our non-operations personnel began working from home in March 2020 as we reduced our in-person operations to prioritize the safety of our employees. We have begun to gradually bring essential personnel back to the office, while adhering to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, federal, and state protective standards. Subject to local regulations and the effectiveness of vaccination initiatives, we intend to gradually bring all employees back to the office; until then, we will continue to support working from home. While remote working arrangements have
affected our manufacturing and development timelines, the overall impact of this arrangement has not materially adversely affected the timeline of future launches.
In May 2020, to strengthen our liquidity position, we received a Paycheck Protection Program loan (“PPP Loan”) in the amount of $1.0 million under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“the CARES Act”); however, in September 2020, we repaid the PPP Loan in full.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the Company’s business, results of operations and overall financial performance will ultimately depend on future developments, including the duration of the pandemic, possible recurrent outbreaks, the appearance of variants and the effectiveness of vaccines and other mitigation measures against variants, all of which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. See “Risk Factors” for additional discussion of the potential impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Recent Developments
Consummation of Business Combination
On August 12, 2021, the Company consummated a merger pursuant to certain Agreement and Plan of Merger, dated October 7, 2020, and as amended on March 5, 2021, April 6, 2021, and June 29, 2021 (the “Merger Agreement”), by and among Stable Road Acquisition Corp (“SRAC”), Project Marvel First Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of SRAC (“First Merger Sub”), and Project Marvel Second Merger Sub, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company and a direct, wholly owned subsidiary of SRAC (“Second Merger Sub”), pursuant to which First Merger Sub merged with and into Momentus Inc., a Delaware corporation (“Legacy Momentus”) with Legacy Momentus as the surviving corporation of the First Merger Sub, and immediately following which Legacy Momentus merged with and into the Second Merger Sub, with the Second Merger Sub as the surviving entity (the “Business Combination”). In connection with the closing of the Business Combination (the “Closing”), the Company changed its name from Stable Road Acquisition Corp. to Momentus Inc., and Legacy Momentus changed its name to Momentus Space, LLC.
The Business Combination is accounted for as a reverse recapitalization in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, SRAC is treated as the “acquired” company for financial reporting purposes. We are deemed the accounting predecessor of the combined business, and Momentus Inc., as the parent company of the combined business, is the successor SEC registrant, meaning that our consolidated financial statements for previous periods are disclosed in the registrant’s future periodic reports filed with the SEC.
The Business Combination will have a significant impact on our future reported financial position and results as a consequence of the reverse recapitalization. The most significant changes in Momentus’s future reported financial position and results are an increase in cash of $238.4 million, offset by additional transaction costs for the Business Combination. See Note 3 “Reverse Recapitalization” for more information.
As a result of the Business Combination, we became the successor to an SEC-registered and Nasdaq-listed company, which will require us to hire additional personnel and implement procedures and processes to address public company regulatory requirements and customary practices. We have begun to incur additional recurring expenses as a public company for, among other things, directors’ and officers’ liability insurance, director fees, and additional internal and external accounting, legal and administrative resources.
Term Loan and Security Agreement
On February 22, 2021, the Company entered into a Term Loan and Security Agreement (the “Term Loan”) which provided the Company with up to $40.0 million in borrowing capacity at an annual interest rate of 12%. $25.0 million of the Term Loan was immediately available for borrowing by the Company at the inception of the agreement, the Company borrowed this amount on March 1, 2021. The remaining $15.0 million of borrowing capacity is no longer available as the Company did not achieve certain milestones needed by the June 30, 2021 deadline. Under the terms of the loan, if certain operating cash ratios are not met, the lender is granted a lien on the Company’s intellectual property while the loan is outstanding. Prior to the Business Combination, the lien was granted and remains in place. The repayment terms of the Term Loan provide for interest-only payments beginning March 1, 2021 through February 28, 2022. The principal amount is due and payable on March 1, 2022, however, as a subsequent event, on January 29, 2022, the Company exercised its option to pay back the Term Loan over 24 months. See Note 15.
In conjunction with the Term Loan, warrants to purchase preferred stock up to 1% of the fully diluted capitalization (including allowance for conversion of all outstanding convertible notes, SAFE notes and such warrants) of the Company were granted to the lender exercisable at the lender’s option. 80% of the 1% of the warrants were earned
by the lender upon execution of the agreement. The additional 20% of the warrants was forfeited as of June 30, 2021. On August 12, 2021 the lender exercised the warrant; see Note 11 for discussion on the valuation and conversion of the warrants as of December 31, 2021.
In addition, the lender will have certain rights to participate in future private equity offerings (including convertible notes or bridge financings) of Momentus.
SEC Settlement and CFIUS Review
We have incurred significant expenses in connection with the CFIUS review described below and have incurred and expect to incur significant expenses in connection with the implementation of the NSA described below. During 2021 we also incurred significant expenses related to the SEC settlement discussed below. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had incurred legal expenses of approximately $7.5 million related to these matters.
SEC Settlement
On July 13, 2021, the Company agreed to a settlement with the SEC on a “neither admit nor deny” basis, in anticipation of cease-and-desist proceedings relating to certain violations of antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws alleged by the SEC. As a result of the settlement, the Company agreed to a civil penalty of $7.0 million, $2.0 million of which was paid immediately and $5.0 million of which is payable within one year of the settlement order, and outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
CFIUS Review and NSA
In February 2021, Momentus and its co-founder Mikhail Kokorich, with support from Stable Road, submitted a joint notice to CFIUS for review of the historical acquisitions of interests in Momentus by Mr. Kokorich, his wife, and entities that they control in response to concerns of the U.S. Department of Defense (“DoD”) regarding Momentus’ foreign ownership and control. On June 8, 2021, the Company entered into a National Security Agreement with Mr. Kokorich, on behalf of himself and Nortrone Finance S.A. (an entity controlled by Mr. Kokorich), Lev Khasis and Olga Khasis, each in their respective individual capacities and on behalf of Brainyspace LLC (an entity controlled by Olga Khasis), and the U.S. government, represented by the U.S. Departments of Defense and the Treasury (the “NSA”). In accordance with the NSA, Mr. Kokorich, Nortrone Finance S.A., Lev Khasis and his wife Olga Khasis, and Brainyspace LLC divested all the equity interests in Momentus owned or beneficially owned by them by selling such equity interests to the Company on June 8, 2021. Pursuant to the NSA, a portion of those divestment proceeds were placed in escrow accounts, and may not be released to the divested investors until after completion of audit by a third party auditor of the investors compliance with the NSA and the lapse of a 15 day period without an objection from the CFIUS Monitoring Agencies. As a subsequent event, the remaining proceeds were released from escrow to the divested investors, see Note 15 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. The NSA also establishes various requirements and restrictions on the Company in order to protect national security, certain of which may materially and adversely affect our operating results due to uncertainty associated with and the cost of compliance with security measures, and limitations on our control over certain U.S. facilities, contracts, personnel, vendor selection and operations.
Co-Founder Divestment
On June 8, 2021, former co-founders and shareholders of the Company, Mikhail Kokorich and Lev Khasis, signed a Stock Repurchase Agreement ("SRA") whereby they agreed to divest their interests in the Company in exchange for a cash payment and other considerations. In accordance with the NSA and pursuant to the SRA, effective as of June 8, 2021, Messrs. Kokorich and Khasis sold 100% of their respective equity interests in the Company. The Company paid the Co-Founders $40.0 million for the equity interest purchased. Pursuant to the NSA, a portion of those divestment proceeds were placed in escrow accounts, and may not be released to the divested investors until after completion of audit by a third party auditor of the investors compliance with the NSA and the lapse of a 15 day period without an objection from the CFIUS Monitoring Agencies. As a subsequent event, the remaining proceeds were released from escrow to the divested investors, see Note 15 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
The payment came from proceeds of the Business Combination and PIPE Investment and therefore reduce the proceeds available to Momentus to fund its operations and capital expenditures going forward.
As part of the SRA, both Kokorich and Khasis agreed to a broad waiver and release of all claims (broadly defined) against the Company. The Company has maintained that this release is effective as to various advancement or indemnification claims either individual may have against the Company. Both Messrs. Kokorich and Khasis have,
through counsel, disagreed with the Company's position. Absent a negotiated resolution, there is a chance that the parties may litigate the matter. The total cumulative potential exposure for the disputes with both Messrs. Kokorich and Khasis is presently unknown but exceeds $1 million. We express no opinion on the probable outcome of these matters.
See “Risk Factors - We may require substantial additional funding to finance our operations, but adequate additional financing may not be available when we need it, on acceptable terms or at all.”
Components of Results of Operations
Service Revenue
We enter into contracts for ‘last-mile’ satellite and cargo delivery, payload hosting and in-orbit servicing options with customers that are primarily in the aerospace industry. From inception to December 31, 2021, we have not yet completed a commercial launch of customer cargo. However, as of December 31, 2021 we have signed contracts with customers and have collected approximately $1.6 million in customer deposits, which are recorded as non-current contract liabilities in our consolidated balance sheets, and are related to performance obligations not expected to be completed for at least one year.
The Company will recognize revenue (along with any other fees that have been paid) upon the earlier of the satisfaction of our performance obligation or when the customer cancels the contract. While the Company’s standard contracts do not contain refund or recourse provisions that enable its customers to recover any non-refundable fees that have been paid, the Company may issue full or partial refunds to customers on a case-by-case basis as necessary to preserve and foster future business relationships and customer goodwill. As a result of the Company’s inability to complete any launches in 2021 (refer to Note 4 for additional information), the Company issued customer refunds of $1.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Cost of Revenue
Cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the cost of the orbital transfer vehicle and third-party launch costs. Until the orbital transfer vehicle design is completed and released for production, the cost of these orbital transfer vehicles is being expensed as research and development costs as materials and services are received. The current design and technology allow for a single use of the orbital transfer vehicle.
Research and Development
Research and development expenditures consist primarily of the cost for the following activities for developing existing and future technologies for our vehicles. Research and development activities include basic research, applied research, design, development, and related test program activities. Costs incurred for developing our vehicles primarily include equipment, material, and labor hours (both internal and subcontractors).
As of December 31, 2021, we have expensed all research and development costs associated with developing and building our vehicles. Once we have achieved technological feasibility and released the design for volume production, we will capitalize the costs to construct any additional components for the vehicles. We expect to continue to see an increase in our research and development expenses as we develop our next generation of vehicles.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses consist of human capital related expenses for employees involved in general corporate functions, including executive management and administration, accounting, finance, tax, legal, information technology, security, sales, marketing, and human resources; depreciation expense and rent relating to facilities, and equipment; professional fees; and other general corporate costs. Headcount-related expenses primarily include salaries, bonuses, equity compensation expense and benefits. As we continue to grow as a company, we expect that our selling, general and administrative costs will increase on an absolute dollar basis.
We also have begun to incur additional expenses as a result of operating as a public company, including expenses necessary to comply with the rules and regulations applicable to companies listed on a national securities exchange and related to compliance and reporting obligations pursuant to the rules and regulations of the SEC as well as to comply with the NSA.
Interest Income
Interest income consists of interest earned on investment holdings in interest bearing bank accounts.
Interest Expense
Interest expense includes interest incurred related to our loan payables as well as the amortization of warrant discount and debt issuance costs.
Other Income/Expense
Other income/expense primarily relates to the change in the estimated fair value of our SAFE notes and warrants, and non-recurring fees incurred in conjunction with the SAFE and Term Loan financing, SEC settlement cost, and the Business Combination.
Income Tax Provision
We are subject to income taxes in the United States. Our income tax provision consists of an estimate of federal and state income taxes based on enacted federal and state tax rates, as adjusted for allowable credits, deductions, uncertain tax positions, changes in the valuation of our deferred tax assets and liabilities, and changes in tax laws.
The effective tax rate may vary significantly from period to period and can be influenced by many factors. These factors include, but are not limited to, changes to the statutory rates in the jurisdictions where the Company has operations and changes in the valuation of deferred tax assets and liabilities. The difference between the effective tax rate and the federal statutory rate of 21% primarily relates to certain nondeductible items, state and local income taxes and a full valuation allowance for deferred tax assets.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented. The period-to-period comparisons of financial results is not necessarily indicative of future results.
Comparison of Financial Results for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Service revenue
The Company recognized $0.3 million and $0.4 million of service revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, due to cancelled customer contracts, resulting in the forfeiture of the related customer deposits.
(Reversal of) Cost of revenue
The Company recorded $0.4 million of cost of revenue during the year ended December 31, 2020. Half of this amount was for launch costs impaired for cancelled launch at the end of 2020, while the other half was a contingency recorded for free launch slots offered to customer impacted by the cancelled launch. During the year
ended December 31, 2021, the Company reversed that contingency as a result of signing amendments and terminations which released the Company from the free slot obligations. The reversal of $(0.2) million was recorded as a reduction in cost of revenue, offset by costs incurred related to one of the cancelled contracts during the period.
Research and development expenses
Research and development expenses increased from $22.7 million to $51.3 million. The increase was primarily due to the impairment of prepaid launch deposits of $9.5 million, which was $8.1 million higher than in the prior year due to the FAA application as discussed in Note 4, and increased costs incurred to develop our vehicles (including prototype and research material inputs, research and development subcontractors) and payroll expenses. Headcount related costs increased by $10.6 million (including $2.2 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense), as we increased our full time research and development employees from 68 to 80, as of December 31, 2020 and 2021, respectively, to support the ramp up of research and development efforts. The ramp up was also supported by increased subcontractor spending of $4.3 million, increased product and material spending of $3.0 million, as well as increased overhead costs of $2.7 million driven by costs associated with our new facility, which we began leasing on January 1, 2021.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased from $11.9 million to $48.9 million, driven by legal expenses, stock-based compensation, and increased corporate spending. Legal expenses increased by $10.6 million, primarily related to the SEC settlement and CFIUS review discussed above. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company signed an agreement with counsel which reduced the amount due for expenses incurred during the year by $2.6 million, which was recorded as a reduction to legal expenses. Stock-based compensation increased by $13.6 million. These non-cash expenses were driven by equity modifications and newly granted awards, described in Note 11. We incurred higher corporate expenses as we continued to build out our corporate functions in relation to becoming a public company and the anticipated start of commercial operations. Non-stock based compensation headcount related costs increased by $4.3 million as we increased our corporate headcount from 29 to 38 full time employees, as of December 31, 2020 and 2021,respectively. Costs related to non-legal consulting and professional services also increased by $4.8 million driven primarily by security compliance and recruiting expenses.
Decrease (increase) in fair value of SAFE notes
The decrease in the calculated fair value of SAFE notes during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in the estimated fair value of the Company’s stock during the period, which had a larger fair value impact due to additional SAFE funding received of $30.9 million during 2021. All outstanding SAFE notes were converted to common stock upon completion of the Business Combination (see Note 9). Prior to conversion, our SAFE notes were classified as marked-to-market liabilities pursuant to ASC 480 and gains or losses were recorded as other income or expense.
Decrease (increase) in fair value of warrants
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the calculated fair value of the Company’s warrants, which are accounted for as a derivative liability, decreased primarily due to the decrease in the value of the Company’s common stock, which was a key input into the valuation of the liabilities. This decrease in fair value had a significantly larger impact in 2021 than in 2020 due to the addition of the Term Loan warrant and the private warrants assumed in connection with the Business Combination. The Equipment Loan warrant, which was outstanding as of December 31, 2020, as well as the Term Loan warrant, were exercised and converted to equity in connection with the Business Combination (see Note 11).
Interest income
Interest income was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Interest expense
Interest expense of $14.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to interest incurred the Term Loan entered into in February 2021, and the related debt discount amortization. Interest expense of $0.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 relates to interest incurred under an equipment financing agreement to fund the acquisition of specific and eligible equipment (the “Equipment Loan”) entered into in March 2020, and interest expense related to debt discount amortization. Refer to Note 10.
SEC Settlement
SEC settlement expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 relates to a civil penalty of $7.0 million, $2.0 million of which was paid to the SEC immediately and $5.0 million of which is payable within one year of the settlement order, in July 2022.
Other income (expense)
Other expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to $4.8 million of transaction costs allocated to the liability-classified warrant assumed in connection with the Business Combination, and $0.2 million for banking fees related to SAFE financing raised during the period. Other expense in the year ended December 31, 2020 was also due to banking fees related to SAFE financing during 2020.
Income tax expense
Income tax expense was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We have accumulated net operating losses at the federal and state level as we have not yet started commercial operations. We maintain a substantially full valuation allowance against our net deferred tax assets. The income tax expenses incurred were primarily related to minimum state filing fees in the states where we have operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have financed our operations primarily by issuing equity and debt, including the proceeds of the Business Combination and PIPE investment. As of December 31, 2021, our principal sources of liquidity were our cash and cash equivalents in the amount of $160.0 million, which are primarily invested in money market funds.
Historical Cash Flows
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $86.7 million, driven primarily by headcount costs, research and development activities, and legal expenses related to the SEC settlement and CFIUS review (refer to Note 12), as well as non-recurring costs related to fundraising and licensing delays. Headcount related payroll costs, excluding non-cash stock-based compensation and accruals, were $21.7 million. Research and development activity expenses, including materials, components, and subcontractor costs were $19.6 million. Legal expenses, as described in Note 12, were $11.4 million, with an additional $2.0 million paid for the SEC settlement. Office overheads, excluding non-cash depreciation, were $4.5 million and selling, general and administrative professional costs were $7.2 million. The remaining operating costs, including insurance and subscriptions, were $3.5 million. The Company also paid $9.5 million for launch costs which were impaired in the period, $4.8 million for issuance costs related to the Business Combination which were allocated to operations, and $2.5 million for interest payments.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $32.5 million, driven primarily by headcount costs, research and development activities, and selling, general, and administrative costs. Headcount related payroll costs, excluding non-cash stock-based compensation and accruals, were $10.1 million. Research and development activity expenses, including materials, components, and subcontractor costs were $12.3 million. Office overheads, excluding non-cash depreciation, were $1.2 million, selling, general and administrative professional costs were $2.4 million, and legal fees were $0.9 million. The remaining operating costs, including insurance and subscriptions, were $1.6 million. The Company also paid $1.0 million in investment banking fees related to SAFE notes issued in 2020, and $0.4 million for interest payments. The remaining cash used in operating activities was $2.6 million invested in net working capital.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $3.1 million and $1.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020, respectively, which primarily consisted of purchases of fixed assets and intangible assets.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $226.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, consisting of proceeds from SAFE notes, borrowing under the Term Loan, and the Business Combination and PIPE.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $44.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily consisting of proceeds from the issuance of SAFE notes.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue to advance the development of our vehicles, expand our manufacturing footprint, and build corporate infrastructure.
Specifically, our operating expenses will increase as we:
•pursue further research and development related to developing our next generation vehicles;
•enhance and scale our sales and marketing function;
•scale up our manufacturing capabilities increasing facility footprint, purchasing additional manufacturing equipment;
•scale up our corporate infrastructure, people, processes and systems;
•seek regulatory approvals for changes or updates to our vehicles;
•hire additional key and supporting personnel, and incentivize/retain workforce with equity compensation
•implement measures required under the NSA and seek to comply with the NSA’s requirements;
•Implement measure required under the SEC settlement and seek to comply with SEC settlement requirements
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•comply with public company reporting requirements
We expect that our current cash and cash equivalents and our projected gross profit (revenue less cost of revenue), will enable us to fund operating expenses, research and development expenses and capital expenditures over the next 12 months. Additionally, we believe that the payments in the form of non-refundable deposits we receive from our customers prior to launch will provide sufficient funding and liquidity to support costs incurred related to that mission.
We have based these estimates on assumptions that may prove to be inaccurate, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we expect. For example, the research and development, volume production, launch and in orbit operation of our vehicles have unpredictable costs and are subject to significant risks, uncertainties and contingencies, many of which are beyond our control, that may affect the timing and magnitude of these anticipated expenditures. Refer to related risks and uncertainties in “Risk Factors.”
Although we believe that our current capital is adequate to sustain our operations for a period of time, changing circumstances may cause us to expend capital significantly faster than we currently anticipate, or we may need to spend more money than currently expected because of circumstances beyond our control. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us, or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital when desired, our business, results of operations, and financial condition would be adversely affected.
Commitments and Contingencies
We are a party to operating leases primarily for facilities (e.g., office buildings, warehouses and spaceport) under non-cancellable operating leases which commit us to future lease payments of $10.1 million. These leases expire at various dates through 2028. Refer to Note 7.
We have $25.0 million of principal outstanding and $0.5 million of related future minimum interest payments under the Term Loan as of December 31, 2021. Refer to Note 10. As a subsequent event, on January 29, 2022, the Company exercised its option to pay back the Term Loan over 24 months, which resulted in higher expected future interest payments but did not impact the future minimum interest payments. Refer to Note 15.
We enter into purchase obligations in the normal course of business. These obligations include purchase orders and agreements to purchase goods or services that are enforceable, legally binding, and have significant terms and minimum purchases stipulated. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s future unconditional purchase obligations are $21.5 million. Refer to Note 12.
Per the SEC settlement, we are obligated to pay the remaining civil penalty of $5.0 million one year after the settlement, in July 2022. Refer to Note 12.
In addition, we enter into agreements in the normal course of business with vendors for research and development services and outsourced services, which are generally cancellable upon written notice.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We do not engage in any off-balance sheet activities or have any arrangements or relationships with unconsolidated entities, such as variable interest, special purpose, and structured finance entities.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements and related disclosures requires us to make estimates, assumptions and judgments as of the balance sheet date that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, costs and expenses and related disclosures. We believe that the estimates, assumptions and judgments involved in the accounting policies described below have the greatest potential impact on our consolidated financial statements and, therefore, we consider these to be our critical accounting policies. Accordingly, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions on an ongoing basis. Our actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions and conditions.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into short-term contracts for ‘last-mile’ satellite and cargo delivery, payload hosting and in-orbit servicing options with customers that are primarily in the aerospace industry. From inception to December 31, 2021, we have not completed a commercial launch of customer cargo and as a result, have not recognized revenue related to performance obligations to date. However, as of December 31, 2021 we have signed contracts with customers and have collected approximately $1.6 million in customer deposits, which are recorded as non-current contract liabilities in our consolidated balance sheet and will be recognized as revenue (along with any other fess that have been paid) upon the earlier of the satisfaction of our performance obligation or when the customer cancels the contract.
We account for customer contracts in accordance with ASC Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which includes the following five-step model:
•Identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer.
•Identification of the performance obligations in the contract.
•Determination of the transaction price.
•Allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract.
•Recognition of revenue when, or as, the Company satisfies a performance obligation.
Our contracts are cancellable for convenience by the customer and typically do not contain variable consideration. However, the full transaction price is collected in advance of the scheduled launch and all fees that are paid are non-refundable (and are not limited to deposits), regardless if the contract is cancelled by the customer or in the event a
performance obligation is not satisfied by us. While the Company’s standard contracts do not contain refund or recourse provisions, the Company may issue full or partial refunds to customers on a case-by-case basis as necessary to preserve and foster future business relationships and customer goodwill. As a result of the Company’s inability to complete any launches in 2021, we issued customer refunds of approximately $1.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our services are considered a single performance obligation, to transport the customers’ payload to a specified orbit in space. We recognize revenue at a point in time when control is transferred, which is considered to be upon the release of the customers’ payload into its specified orbit. We will calculate the weight distribution of each transfer vehicle at the customer level, and we will estimate the delivery date for each customer’s payload based on the relative weight of payloads released to determine the point in time to recognize revenue for each payload release.
In periods in which we recognize revenue, we will disclose the amounts of revenue recognized that was included as a contract liability balance at the beginning of the reporting period in accordance with ASC 606-10-50-8(b).
Loss Contingencies
We are subject to the possibility of various loss contingencies arising in the ordinary course of business, including product-related and other litigation. We consider the likelihood of loss or impairment of an asset or the incurrence of a liability, as well as our ability to reasonably estimate the amount of loss in determining loss contingencies. An estimated loss contingency is accrued when it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred and the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. We regularly evaluate current information available to us to determine whether such accruals should be adjusted and whether new accruals are required. Refer to Note 12 of our consolidated financial statements within this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes in accordance with authoritative guidance, which requires the use of the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are determined based upon the difference between the financial statement carrying amounts and the tax basis of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rate expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which the differences are expected to be reversed.
Significant judgment is required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence, including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income, and the feasibility of tax planning strategies.
In the event that management changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust our valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to the provision for income taxes in the period in which such determination is made.
We are required to evaluate the tax positions taken in the course of preparing its tax returns to determine whether tax positions are “more likely than not” of being sustained by the applicable tax authority. Tax benefits of positions not deemed to meet the “more likely than not” threshold would be recorded as a tax expense in the current year. The amount recognized is subject to estimate and management judgment with respect to the likely outcome of each uncertain tax position. The amount that is ultimately sustained for an individual uncertain tax position or for all uncertain tax positions in the aggregate could differ from the amount that is initially recognized.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
From time to time, new accounting pronouncements are issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) or other standard setting bodies that are adopted by us as of the specified effective date. Unless otherwise discussed, we believe that the impact of recently issued standards that are not yet effective will not have a material impact on our financial position or results of operations under adoption.
Please refer to Note 2 in our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a description of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted, the timing of their adoptions and our assessment, to the extent we have made one, of their potential impact on our financial condition and results of operations.