Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. As discussed in the section titled “Forward-Looking Statements,”, the following discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part I, Item 1A in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We were founded under the name “SurveyMonkey” in 1999 and are a leader in an agile experience management, providing SaaS solutions that help businesses shape what’s next for their stakeholders. Our software enables our customers to collect, analyze, and act on feedback from their existing customers, prospective customers, and employees. More than 345,000 organizations rely on us to help deliver better customer and product experiences, increase employee engagement and retention, and unlock growth and innovation.
We are transforming from our roots as a provider of digital survey tools sold through the Internet to an enterprise SaaS company that leverages both product-led and sales-led go-to-market motions. To help us engage more deeply with enterprise sales customers, we rebranded ourselves as “Momentive” in June 2021, and changed our legal name from “SVMK Inc.” to “Momentive Global Inc.” While Momentive is our new corporate name, we continue to use the “SurveyMonkey” and “GetFeedback” product brands. We offer artificial intelligence powered solutions that help our customers reshape their businesses across five major categories of use cases: 1) Market Insights; 2) Brand Insights; 3) Customer Experience; 4) Employee Experience; and 5) Product Experience. We deliver these solutions through three major product categories-Surveys (SurveyMonkey), Customer Experience (GetFeedback CX), and Market Research (Momentive).
We are executing on a two-part growth strategy. First, we are delivering new features and product tiers that capitalize on the virality of our platform and the scale of business to drive overall platform usage and increase the conversion of free users to paid subscribers in our self-serve channel. Second, we are investing further in product innovation and go-to-market initiatives to expand the percentage of our revenue generated through our enterprise sales channel. Specifically, our enterprise sales motion focuses on converting existing self-serve subscribers to enterprise sales customers, selling directly to new customers, and expanding our relationships with existing customers. As we execute on this strategy and sell more of our products into enterprises directly, we believe we can accelerate our revenue growth profile and increase our customer retention rates over time. We believe our existing user base represents a significant opportunity to expand our business and increase our revenue. In 2021, approximately 32% of our total revenue was generated from customers who purchased software through our enterprise sales force, up from 29% in 2020.
Our survey platform is inherently viral, as existing users send surveys and share survey results that introduce potential new users and customers to our products. This virality, combined with the ease-of-use and price-disruptive nature of our products and the strength of our brands, has enabled us to build an efficient, online self-serve channel for selling versions of our survey products, which we are enhancing with our enterprise sales motion. We have a broad and diverse customer base and no customer represented more than 10% of our revenue in any of the periods presented.
We operate as a single operating segment. Our chief operating decision maker (“CODM”) is our Chief Executive Officer, who reviews our operating results on a consolidated basis in order to make decisions about allocating resources and assessing performance for the entire company. Our CODM uses one measure of profitability and does not segment our business for internal reporting.
Proposed Merger with Zendesk
On October 28, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Zendesk and Milky Way Acquisition Corp., a Delaware corporation and a wholly owned subsidiary of Zendesk (“Merger Sub”). Pursuant to the Merger Agreement, and upon the terms and subject to the conditions therein, Merger Sub will merge with and into us (the “Merger”), with our company surviving the merger as a wholly owned subsidiary of Zendesk. Our board of directors and the board of directors of Zendesk each have approved the Merger Agreement and the Merger.
Subject to the terms and conditions of the Merger Agreement, at the effective time of the Merger (the “Effective Time”), the Momentive Shares (subject to certain exceptions set forth in the Merger Agreement) will be converted in the Merger into the right to receive 0.225 (the “Exchange Ratio”) of Zendesk Shares, with a cash payment for any fractional shares resulting from the calculation. The Merger is intended to qualify as a reorganization for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
The completion of the Merger is subject to customary closing conditions, including the approval of each of our stockholders and the Zendesk stockholders. For further information on the Merger and the Merger Agreement, see Note 1 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, as well as the definitive proxy statement filed by us on January 7, 2022 and first mailed to our stockholders on January 10, 2022.
Impact of COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the United States and the world. As a result, we have modified certain aspects of our business, including restricting employee travel, requiring employees to work from home, transitioning our employee onboarding and training processes to remote or online programs, and canceling certain events and meetings, among other modifications. We continue to actively monitor and evaluate the situation and may take further actions that alter our business operations as may be required by federal, state, or local authorities or that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, partners, and stockholders. The effects of these operational modifications are unknown and may not be realized until further reporting periods. We continue to evaluate and refine our return to office strategy and real estate needs. Specifically, when we reopen our offices, we will offer most of our employees the flexibility to determine the amount of time they work in our offices, subject to vaccination status.
Although many jurisdictions have relaxed their guidelines and restrictions, in some cases, these have been, or may in the future be, reinstated. The full impact of the rapidly changing market and economic conditions due to the COVID-19 pandemic is uncertain as the businesses of our customers and partners have been, and in some cases continue to be, disrupted. We have experienced a more challenging enterprise sales environment, longer sales cycles, and an increase in attrition rates, particularly among customers in segments and industries more severely impacted by the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as travel and hospitality. In addition, some of our existing and potential customers are financially constrained in their ability to purchase our products, which we expect may negatively impact our ability to collect payments, acquire new customers, or renew subscriptions with or sell additional subscriptions to our existing customers. We expect such impacts on our revenue and costs to continue through the duration of this crisis and our business, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition could also be impacted. While we have not experienced significant disruptions from the COVID-19 pandemic thus far, we are unable to accurately predict the full impact that the COVID-19 pandemic will have due to numerous uncertainties, including the severity and spread of new or existing variants of the virus between regions, changes in infection and vaccination rates in each region, the duration of the pandemic globally and regionally, additional actions that may be taken by governmental authorities, the impact to the businesses of our customers and partners, individuals’ and companies’ risk tolerance regarding health matters going forward, and other factors identified in Part I, Item 1A “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may materially impact our financial condition, liquidity, or results of operations is uncertain, and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic may not be fully reflected in our results of operations until future periods, even after the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided. We are continuously evaluating the nature and extent of the impact to our business, including our reopening plans, consolidated results of operations, and financial condition.
Our Products
Our products address business use cases across five major categories: 1) Market Insights; 2) Brand Insights; 3) Customer Experience; 4) Employee Experience; and 5) Product Experience.
We generate revenue either on a subscription or transactional basis, depending on the product. We offer three experience management product categories-Surveys, Customer Experience, and Market Research.
•Surveys: Our leading survey software products, branded under SurveyMonkey, enable our customers to listen and take action on stakeholder feedback. We have designed products that optimize the quality of stakeholder feedback and maximize response rates to help our customers improve customer experiences, develop a diverse and high performing workforce, and grow their business. We offer our basic survey plan
to individuals at no charge. We also offer multiple tiers of subscriptions to individual paying users, with pricing based on functionality, including advanced survey logic; branding and customization tools; analysis features; and support options. We offer SurveyMonkey team plans for small teams and departments that need to collaborate on survey projects. In addition to the features available in paid plans for individuals, SurveyMonkey team plans provide advanced collaboration features for survey creation and analysis, centralized team administration, and a team library for survey themes, templates, and brand assets. Team plans start at three users per team, billed annually on a subscription basis, and include flexible roles and pricing for survey creators and analysts. For organizations, we offer SurveyMonkey Enterprise, which extends our survey platform with enterprise-grade security and an enhanced set of capabilities (including managed user accounts, customized company branding, collaboration capabilities, and deep integrations with a broad set of leading software applications) that enable users to support multiple, advanced feedback use cases across the organization. Revenue from Surveys is generated primarily on a subscription basis.
•Customer Experience: Our Customer Experience offering, the GetFeedback CX platform (“GetFeedback CX”), enables companies to leverage in-the-moment customer feedback to deliver exceptional experiences that engage and retain their customers. GetFeedback CX simplifies customer feedback collection and analysis through its integration with customer relationship management (“CRM”) data to help companies better understand key customer segments, and its accessibility within the systems companies already use to help them take action quickly in service of their customers. GetFeedback CX captures a company’s customer feedback from across key digital channels and within offline or proprietary business systems, combines this feedback with operational customer data to build a deeper understanding of their customers and their preferences, and automates feedback-based actions through integrations with that company’s existing system of record and other key business systems. We differentiate our Customer Experience offering in the market based on our software’s ease-of-implementation and use, time-to-value relative to alternative solutions, and rich integration across the Salesforce ecosystem. Our Customer Experience offering is sold through our enterprise sales team. Revenue from Customer Experience is generated primarily on a subscription basis.
•Market Research: Our Market Research solutions bear the Momentive brand and are the underlying software products powering the Momentive Market Insights, Brand Insights, and Product Experience categories of solutions. Our market research offerings enable customers to quickly collect and analyze actionable insights from a targeted audience on a number of market research needs, including analyzing market opportunities, measuring brand and campaign effectiveness, and gaining insights on existing and future product lines. Our Market Research solutions are sold through our enterprise sales team. Revenue from Market Research is generated primarily on a transactional basis, with our customers having the option to preload Market Research Credits that can be used to pay for projects, solutions, and services throughout a 12-month term.
•Professional Services: For customers who need assistance with implementing and optimizing the use of our products, we offer the following categories of professional services, including:
oSurvey: survey design, programming, language translation, and results analysis;
oCustomer Experience: customer journey mapping, customer experience key metrics, measurement and planning, return-on-investment (“ROI”) impact of CSAT and NPS programs, analytics and customer experience related workshops; and
oMarket Research: program methodology consulting, survey programming and language translation, brand tracking program development and execution, product concept testing, due diligence analysis, and custom reporting and analytics.
Revenue from professional services engagements is generated primarily on a transactional basis.
•Other Purpose-Built Solutions: In addition to our three major product categories, we offer other products such as:
oCustomer Advocacy: TechValidate is our marketing content automation solution. TechValidate collects customer feedback at scale, automatically converting it into validated marketing content, including statistics, charts, testimonials, and case studies;
oGrant Application Management: SurveyMonkey Apply is our application management solution that is primarily used by educational institutions and non-profits seeking to allocate scholarships and grants; and
oForms: Wufoo is our easy-to-use form builder that helps users create web and mobile forms, collect file uploads and receive online payments.
We offer certain tiers of our Survey and Market Research product categories on a self-serve basis through our website, and we offer a suite of enterprise-grade experience management solutions from all three primary product categories through our direct sales force.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had over 17 million and 20 million active users, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately 888,700 and 820,300 paying users, respectively, which we define as an individual customer of our survey platform or form-based application, a seat within a SurveyMonkey Enterprise deployment or a subscription to one of our purpose-built solutions. Of our paying users as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had approximately 11,900 and 8,200 customers, respectively, who purchased our software through our enterprise sales channel. Our average revenue per paying user (“ARPU”) was $519 and $487 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We calculate ARPU as revenue during a given period divided by the average number of paying users during that period. We calculate the average number of paying users by adding the number of paying users as of the end of the prior period to the number of paying users as of the end of the current period, and then dividing by two. For interim periods, we use annualized revenue which is calculated by dividing the revenue for the period by the number of days in that period and multiplying this value by 365 days.
As of December 31, 2021, over 90% of our trailing 12-month bookings were from organizational domain-based customers, which are customers who register with us using an email account with an organizational domain name, such as @momentive.ai, but excludes customers with email addresses hosted on widely used domains such as @gmail, @outlook or @yahoo. As of December 31, 2021, our dollar-based net retention rate for organizational domain-based customers was over 100%. We calculate bookings as the sum of the monthly and annual contract values for contracts sold during a period for our monthly and annual customers, respectively. We calculate organizational dollar-based net retention rate as of a period end by starting with the trailing 12 months of bookings from the cohort of all domain-based customers as of the 12 months prior to such period end (“Prior Period Bookings”). We then calculate the trailing 12 months of bookings from these same customers as of the current period end (“Current Period Bookings”). Current Period Bookings includes any upsells and is net of contraction or attrition, but excludes bookings from new domain-based customers in the current period. We then divide the total Current Period Bookings by the total Prior Period Bookings to arrive at the organizational dollar-based net retention rate.
Key Business Metrics
We review a number of operating and financial metrics, including the following key metrics to evaluate our business, measure our performance, identify trends affecting our business, formulate our business plan and make strategic decisions. As our business continues to evolve, we may choose to report new or additional metrics that are more closely tied to key business drivers or stop reporting metrics that are no longer relevant.
Remaining Performance Obligation
We define RPO as the amount of consideration allocated to unsatisfied performance obligations related to non-cancelable contracts, which include both the deferred revenue balance and amounts that will be invoiced and recognized as revenue in future periods, as of the end of the reporting period. For subscription products, we provide customers with the option of monthly, annual or multi-year contractual terms. In general, our customers elect annual contractual terms and we generally invoice 1 year in advance. Our contracts are generally non-cancelable and without refund rights. Billed contractual amounts are reported as deferred revenue in our consolidated financial statements. Unbilled contractual amounts are part of RPO and are not included in our consolidated financial statements.
RPO is intended to provide visibility into future revenue streams. Several factors may contribute to the fluctuation of RPO including timing and frequency of invoicing, number of multi-year non-cancelable contracts, and dollar
amount of customer contracts (including changes that we may see to customer contracts as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic).
Non-GAAP Financial Measure
We believe that, in addition to our results determined in accordance with GAAP, free cash flow, a non-GAAP financial measure, is useful in evaluating our business, results of operations and financial condition.
Free cash flow
We define free cash flow as GAAP net cash provided by operating activities less purchases of property and equipment, and capitalized internal-use software. We consider free cash flow to be an important measure because it measures our liquidity after deducting capital expenditures for purchases of property and equipment and capitalized software development costs, which we believe provides a more accurate view of our cash generation and cash available to grow our business. We expect to generate positive free cash flow over the long term. Free cash flow has limitations as an analytical tool, and it should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of other GAAP financial measures, such as net cash provided by operating activities. Some of the limitations of free cash flow are that free cash flow does not reflect our future contractual commitments and may be calculated differently by other companies in our industry, limiting its usefulness as a comparative measure.
The following is a reconciliation of free cash flow to the most comparable GAAP measure, net cash provided by operating activities:
Free cash flow is presented for supplemental informational purposes only and should not be considered a substitute for financial information presented in accordance with GAAP.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenue
We derive a substantial majority of our revenue from sales of subscriptions to our software products in the survey and customer experience categories. We also generate a small portion of revenue from sales of subscriptions to our transactional market research solutions.
We recognize subscription revenue ratably over the subscription term, generally ranging from one month to one year, as long as all other revenue recognition criteria have been met. Our contracts are generally non-cancellable and do not contain refund provisions. Subscription fees are collected primarily from credit cards through our website at the beginning of the subscription period.
Cost of Revenue and Operating Expenses
We allocate shared costs, such as depreciation on equipment shared by all departments, facilities (including rent and utilities), employee benefit costs and information technology costs to all departments based on headcount. As such, allocated shared costs are reflected in each cost of revenue and operating expense category, other than restructuring.
Cost of Revenue. Our cost of revenue consists primarily of expenses associated with the delivery and distribution of our products to our users. These expenses generally consist of infrastructure costs, personnel costs and other related costs. Infrastructure costs generally include expenses related to website hosting costs, amortization of capitalized software, payment processing fees, external sample costs and charitable donations associated with SurveyMonkey Audience, our market research panel solution. Personnel costs include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, other employee benefits and travel-related expenses for employees whose primary responsibilities relate to supporting our infrastructure and delivering user support. Other related costs include amortization of acquired developed technology intangible assets and allocated overhead. We plan to continue investing in additional resources to enhance the capability and reliability of our infrastructure to support user growth and increased use of our products. We expect that cost of revenue will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period
to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term. We expect that cost of revenue will decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
Research and Development. Research and development expenses primarily include personnel costs, costs for third-party consultants, depreciation of equipment used in research and development activities and allocated overhead. Personnel costs for our research and development organization include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, other employee benefits and travel-related expenses. Our research and development efforts focus on maintaining and enhancing existing products and adding new products. Except for costs associated with the application development phase of internal-use software, research and development costs are expensed as incurred. We expect that research and development expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term. We expect that research and development expenses will remain relatively constant as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
Sales and Marketing. Sales and marketing expenses primarily include personnel costs, costs related to brand campaigns, paid marketing, amortization of acquired trade name and customer relationship intangible assets and allocated overhead. Personnel costs for our sales and marketing organization include salaries, bonuses, sales commissions, stock-based compensation, other employee benefits and travel-related expenses. Sales commissions earned by our sales personnel, including any related payroll taxes, that are considered to be incremental and recoverable costs of obtaining a customer contract are deferred and amortized over an estimated period of benefit of generally four years. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and increase as a percentage of revenue in the near term. We expect that sales and marketing expenses will vary from period to period in the long term.
General and Administrative. General and administrative expenses primarily include personnel costs for legal, finance, human resources and other administrative functions, as well as certain executives. Personnel costs for our general and administrative staff include salaries, bonuses, stock-based compensation, other employee benefits and travel-related expenses. In addition, general and administrative expenses include outside legal, accounting and other professional fees, non-income-based taxes and allocated overhead. We expect that general and administrative expenses will increase in absolute dollars in future periods and vary from period to period as a percentage of revenue in the near term. We expect that general and administrative expenses will decrease as a percentage of revenue in the long term.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest on our credit facilities. For additional information regarding our credit facilities, see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other Non-Operating (Income) Expense, Net
Other non-operating (income) expense, net consists primarily of interest income, net foreign currency exchange gains and losses, gain on sale of private company investments and other gains and losses.
Provision for (Benefit from) Income Taxes
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes consists of U.S. federal and state income taxes and income taxes in certain foreign jurisdictions in which we conduct business. We maintain a valuation allowance against deferred tax assets in the United States and certain foreign jurisdictions that we have determined are not realizable on a more likely than not basis. For additional information regarding our income taxes, see Note 13 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
The following tables set forth our results of operations for the periods presented and as a percentage of our revenue for those periods. Percentages presented in the following tables may not sum due to rounding.
Comparison of the Year Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
(1)	Includes stock-based compensation, net of amounts capitalized as follows:
(2) Includes amortization of acquisition intangible assets as follows:
Revenue and cost of revenue
Revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Paying users increased 8% from approximately 820,300 as of December 31, 2020 to approximately 888,700 as of December
31, 2021 and ARPU increased 7% from $487 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $519 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue growth was driven by an increase of $33.4 million, or 12%, in our self-serve channel, as well as an increase of $34.8 million, or 32%, in our enterprise sales channel, driven by a combination of demand arising from use cases related to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as ongoing refinement of our pricing and packaging that has driven an increase in customers upgrading to paid plans. Enterprise sales accounted for 32% and 29% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019. Paying users increased 14% from approximately 720,900 as of December 31, 2019 to approximately 820,300 as of December 31, 2020 and ARPU increased 8% from $450 for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $487 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Revenue growth was driven primarily by an increase of $42.5 million, or 65%, in our Enterprise sales channel. Enterprise sales accounted for 29% and 21% of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Revenue for the year ended December 31, 2020 also included approximately $2.1 million of non-recurring revenue from a one-time SurveyMonkey Audience customer and incremental revenue contributions from our acquisition of GetFeedback and Usabilla. In addition, revenue from our self-serve channel grew $25.7 million, or 11%, driven by a combination of demand arising from use cases related to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as ongoing refinement of our pricing and packaging that has driven an increase in customers upgrading to paid plans.
Cost of revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $3.8 million increase in personnel related costs due to headcount growth, a $1.7 million increase in external sample costs and charity donations associated with our SurveyMonkey Audience and a $1.6 million increase in website hosting costs and payment processing fees, all due to increased sales, partially offset by a $2.3 million decrease in capitalized software amortization and a $1.6 million decrease in amortization of intangible assets related to our prior acquisitions.
Cost of revenue increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $4.3 million increase in website hosting costs and payment processing fees, a $2.3 million increase in external sample costs and charitable donations associated with our SurveyMonkey Audience, all due to increased sales, and a $2.1 million increase in amortization of intangible assets due to our prior acquisitions, partially offset by a $1.4 million decrease in capitalized software amortization.
Our gross margin increased for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 relative to the respective prior year period primarily due to the increases in revenue.
Research and development
Research and development expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $23.3 million increase in personnel related costs due to headcount growth. In addition, there were increases in professional services and IT costs.
Research and development expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $20.0 million increase in personnel related costs due to headcount growth and a decrease in the software development costs that qualified for capitalization of $3.9 million, offset by decreases in travel expenses due to suspension of all business-related travel in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Sales and marketing
Sales and marketing expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $25.7 million increase in personnel-related costs due to headcount growth, an increase of $23.4 million in costs related to brand campaigns and paid marketing.
Sales and marketing expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $28.5 million increase in personnel-related costs due to headcount growth, an increase of $14.2 million in costs related to brand campaigns and paid marketing and a $1.5 million increase in amortization of intangible assets due to our prior acquisitions. In addition, there were increases in our facilities, IT costs and other expenses, offset by decreases in travel expenses due to suspension of all business-related travel in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
General and administrative
General and administrative expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $9.3 million increase in personnel related costs, a $5.0 million increase in office expense, a $2.5 million increase in outside legal, accounting and other professional fees, and a $2.2 million increase in IT costs.
General and administrative expenses increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to a $5.8 million increase in personnel related costs, offset by a $1.0 million decrease in travel expenses due to suspension of all business-related travel in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and decreases in outside legal, accounting and other professional fees.
Interest expense
Interest expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to lower interest rates and lower average debt balances from our repayment of principal. For additional information regarding our credit facilities, see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Interest expense decreased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to lower interest rates and lower average debt balances from our repayment of principal. For additional information regarding our credit facilities, see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Other non-operating (income) expense, net
Other non-operating expense, net for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 (where the amounts resulted in other non-operating income), primarily due to a $1.0 million gain on sale of a private company investment in the prior year and fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates.
Other non-operating income, net for the year ended December 31, 2020 decreased compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to a decrease in interest income of $2.2 million resulting from lower interest rates.
Provision for (benefit from) income taxes
*	less than 1%
The provision for income taxes decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to larger tax benefits related to increased tax research credits and taxes incurred in connection with a taxable sale of intangible assets in the prior year.
The provision for income taxes increased for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily due to taxes incurred in connection with a taxable sale of intangible assets and the partial release of the valuation allowance in 2019 as a result of our prior acquisitions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, our principal sources of liquidity were cash and cash equivalents totaling $305.5 million and $224.4 million, respectively, all of which were bank deposits as well as cash to be received from customers and cash available under our credit facilities.
Since our inception, we have financed our operations primarily through payments received from our customers, borrowings under credit facilities and lines of credit, and our initial public offering in 2018.
We believe our existing cash and cash equivalents, our credit facilities and cash provided by sales of our products will be sufficient to meet our working capital and capital expenditure needs for at least the next 12 months. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including the timing and amount of cash received from customers, the timing and extent of spending to support research and development efforts, the expansion of sales and marketing activities, the introduction of new and enhanced product offerings and the continuing market adoption of our products. We may in the future enter into arrangements to acquire or invest in complementary businesses, services and technologies, including intellectual property rights. We may be required to seek additional equity or debt financing. In the event that additional financing is required from outside sources, we may not be able to raise it on terms acceptable to us or at all. If we are unable to raise additional capital or generate cash flows necessary to expand our operations and invest in new technologies, this could reduce our ability to compete successfully and harm our results of operations. Additionally, we believe that our financial resources will allow us to manage the potential impacts of COVID-19 on our business operations for the foreseeable future, which could include reductions in revenue and delays in payments from customers and partners. We will continue to assess our liquidity needs as the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and our operations continues to evolve. Ongoing worldwide business and economic disruptions could materially affect our future access to our sources of liquidity, particularly our cash flows from operations, financial condition, capitalization, and capital investments. In the event of a sustained market deterioration, we may need additional liquidity, which would require us to evaluate available alternatives and take appropriate actions.
A significant majority of our customers pay in advance for annual subscriptions, which is a substantial source of cash. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of billed fees for our subscriptions, which we recognized as revenue in accordance with our revenue recognition policy. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had deferred revenue of $201.8 million and $170.6 million, respectively, a substantial majority of which we expect to record as revenue in the next 12 months, provided all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
Under the terms of the Merger Agreement, we have agreed to various covenants and agreements, including, among others, agreements to conduct our business in the ordinary course during the period between the execution of the Merger Agreement and the Effective Time of the Merger or the valid termination of the Merger Agreement pursuant to its terms. Outside of certain limited exceptions, we may not take or agree to take certain actions without Zendesk’s consent, including: acquiring businesses, entering into certain specified contracts, making capital expenditures in excess of those as set forth in a capital budget provided to Zendesk in connection with the execution of the Merger Agreement or in excess of certain specified amounts, issuing additional capital stock or securities convertible into capital stock, or incurring additional indebtedness. We do not believe these restrictions will prevent us from meeting our ongoing operating expenses, working capital needs, or capital expenditure requirements.
Cash Flows
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated:
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Our largest source of operating cash is cash collections from our customers for subscriptions to our products. Our primary uses of cash in operating activities are for employee-related expenditures, marketing expenses and third-party hosting costs. Historically, we have generated positive cash flows from operating activities. Net cash provided by operating activities is impacted by our net loss adjusted for certain non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization expenses, stock-based compensation, non-cash lease expense, bad debt expense and deferred income taxes, as well as the effect of changes in operating assets and liabilities.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by operating activities was $57.8 million, primarily due to our net loss of $123.2 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $157.3 million and net cash inflows of $23.7 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, non-cash lease expense, bad debt expense and deferred income taxes. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities related to cash provided by an $31.2 million increase in deferred revenue, a $17.5 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and a $14.0 million increase in accrued compensation, partially offset by cash used for prepaid expenses and other assets of $14.2 million and operating lease liabilities of $15.0 million, and an increase in accounts receivable of $9.8 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by operating activities was $55.6 million, primarily due to our net loss of $91.6 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $142.8 million and net cash inflows of $4.4 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, non-cash lease expense, bad debt expense and deferred income taxes. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities related to cash provided by an $29.7 million increase in deferred revenue, a $1.1 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and a $7.9 million increase in accrued compensation, partially offset by cash used for prepaid expenses and other assets of $12.1 million and operating lease liabilities of $14.6 million, and an increase in accounts receivable of $7.6 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2019, cash provided by operating activities was $54.7 million, primarily due to our net loss of $73.9 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $113.5 million and net cash inflows of $15.0 million provided by changes in our operating assets and liabilities. Non-cash charges primarily consisted of depreciation and amortization, stock-based compensation, non-cash lease expense, bad debt expense and deferred income taxes. The primary drivers of the changes in operating assets and liabilities related to cash provided by an $31.2 million increase in deferred revenue, a $8.3 million increase in accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and a $2.2 million increase in accrued compensation, partially offset by cash used for prepaid expenses and other assets of $5.1 million and operating lease liabilities of $13.9 million, and an increase in accounts receivable of $7.7 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Our primary investing activities have consisted of capital expenditures to purchase equipment necessary to support our network and other operations and capitalization of internal-use software necessary to deliver significant new features and functionality in our survey platform which provides value to our customers. As our business grows, we expect our capital expenditures to continue to increase.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $9.0 million was primarily attributable to cash used for the development of internal-use software of $8.4 million that is capitalized and purchases of property and equipment of $0.7 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of property and equipment of $0.2 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $8.9 million was primarily attributable to cash used for the development of internal-use software of $9.2 million that is capitalized and purchases of property and equipment of $0.8 million, partially offset by proceeds from the sale of investment in privately-held company and other property of $1.1 million.
Net cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $128.1 million was primarily attributable to the net cash paid for the acquisitions of $114.6 million, purchases of property and equipment of $2.5 million to support additional office space and headcount, and cash used for the development of internal-use software of $12.0 million that is capitalized, which was partially offset by proceeds from the sale of a private company investment of $1.0 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 of $33.2 million was primarily attributable to proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $27.9 million and shares purchased under our employee stock purchase plan of $7.5 million, partially offset by the principal payments on our credit facilities of $2.2 million.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 of $46.7 million was primarily attributable to proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $42.2 million and shares purchased under our employee stock purchase plan of $6.7 million, partially offset by the principal payments on our credit facilities of $2.2 million.
Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 of $50.8 million was primarily attributable to proceeds from the exercise of stock options of $47.7 million and proceeds from our employee stock purchase plan of $5.3 million, partially offset by the principal payments on our credit facilities of $2.2 million.
Contractual Obligations
Our principal commitments consist of obligations under our credit facilities and leases for office space. As of December 31, 2021, the future non-cancelable minimum payments under these commitments were as follows:
(1)Represents the principal balances and related interest payments to be paid in connection with our 2018 Credit Facility. Interest payments on our 2018 Credit Facility are based upon the applicable interest rates as of December 31, 2021 and are subject to change in future periods. For additional information regarding our credit facilities, see Note 12 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(2)Primarily consists of future non-cancelable minimum rental payments under operating leases for our corporate headquarters and our other facilities. The amounts above exclude expected sublease payments to be received of approximately $2.6 million. For additional information regarding our operating lease obligations, see Note 10 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
(3)Primarily consists of open non-cancellable purchase orders for data center hosting services and the procurement of goods and services in the ordinary course of business.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any relationships with unconsolidated organizations or financial partnerships, such as structured finance or special purpose entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements or other contractually narrow or limited purposes.
Critical Accounting Policies
We prepare our consolidated financial statements in accordance with GAAP. In the preparation of these consolidated financial statements, we are required to make judgements, estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs and expenses and related disclosures. To the extent that there are material differences between these judgements, estimates and actual results, our financial condition or results of operations would be affected. We base our judgements and estimates on past experience and other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, and we evaluate these estimates on an ongoing basis. We refer to accounting judgements and estimates of this type as critical accounting policies and estimates, which we discuss below.
Revenue Recognition
We generate a substantial majority of our revenue from the sale of subscriptions to our software products for survey feedback and customer experience. The revenue we generate from transactional market research solutions services is not significant. We normally sell each of these products in separate contracts to our customers and each product is distinct. The most critical judgments required in applying Topic 606 and our revenue recognition policy relate to the determination of distinct performance obligations. Our policy is to exclude sales and other indirect taxes when measuring the transaction price of our subscription agreements. We account for revenue contracts with customers through the following steps:
•identification of the contract, or contracts, with a customer;
•identification of the performance obligations in the contract;
•determination of the transaction price;
•allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and
•recognition of revenue when, or as, we satisfy a performance obligation.
For subscription products, we provide customers the option of monthly, annual or multi-year contractual terms. In general, our customers elect contractual terms of one year or less. Subscription revenue is recognized on a straight-line basis over the related subscription term beginning on the date we provide access. Access to our subscription product is an obligation representing a series of distinct services (and which comprise a single performance obligation) that we provide to our end customer over the contractual term. We recognize our subscription revenue on a straight-line basis because the customer benefits from access to our products throughout the contractual term.
The transactional market research solution services are billed in advance and revenue is recognized after the services have been delivered.
Our contracts are generally non-cancellable and do not contain refund-type provisions and are billed in advance. Amounts that have been invoiced are recorded in accounts receivable and in deferred revenue or revenue, depending on whether transfer of control to customers has occurred. We record contract liabilities to deferred revenue when cash payments are received or due. Deferred revenue consists of the unearned portion of customer billings.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize stock-based compensation expense for all share-based payments to employees, including restricted stock units, stock options, restricted stock awards, and shares issuable under our employee stock purchase plan (the “ESPP”), based on the grant-date fair value of our common stock estimated in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718, Compensation-Stock Compensation. For time-based equity awards, stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the award’s requisite service period, which is generally four years for new hires and generally three years for subsequent grants to existing employees. For shares issuable under the ESPP, stock-based compensation expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the award’s requisite service period, which is an offering period. We recognize excess tax benefits from stock-based compensation expense in earnings, which are substantially offset by a valuation allowance. We also made a policy election to account for forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair values of restricted stock units and restricted stock awards based on the fair value of our common stock on the grant date. We estimate the fair values of our stock options and shares issuable under the ESPP using the Black-Scholes-Merton option-pricing model.
Determining the grant date fair value of stock options and shares issuable under the ESPP requires management to make assumptions and judgments. If any of the assumptions used in the valuation models change significantly, stock-based compensation expense for future awards may differ materially compared with the awards granted previously. The assumptions and estimates are as follows:
•Expected Term: As we do not have sufficient historical information to develop reasonable expectations about future exercise patterns and post-vesting employment termination behavior, we determine the expected term based on the average period the stock options or ESPP are expected to remain outstanding. For stock options, expected term is calculated as the midpoint of the stock options vesting term and contractual expiration period.
•Expected Volatility: As we do not have sufficient trading history of our common stock, stock price volatility is estimated at the applicable grant date by taking the weighted-average historical volatility of a group of comparable publicly-traded companies over a period equal to the expected life of the options or ESPP.
•Expected Dividend Rate: We have not paid and do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our shares of common stock in the foreseeable future; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero.
•Risk-Free Interest Rate: We determined the risk-free interest rate by using a weighted average assumption equivalent to the expected term based on the U.S. Treasury constant maturity rate as of the date of grant.
Our board of directors determines the fair value of each share of underlying common stock based on the closing price of our common stock as reported on the date of the grant, for which there are no estimates or judgements.
Changes in the input assumptions outlined above can affect the fair value estimates used to measure stock-based compensation expense to be recognized.
Business Combinations
When we acquire a business, the purchase consideration is allocated to the tangible assets acquired, liabilities assumed and intangible assets acquired based on their estimated respective fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Such valuations require us to make significant estimates and assumptions, especially with respect to intangible assets. Significant estimates in valuing certain intangible assets include, but are not limited to, future expected cash flows from acquired users including related attrition rates, acquired developed technology including the estimated obsolescence of the technology, and trade names from a market participant perspective, future expected cash flows for operating expenses, useful lives and discount rates. Our estimates of fair value are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. During the measurement period, which is one year from the acquisition date, we may record adjustments to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed, with the corresponding offset to goodwill. Upon the conclusion of the measurement period, any subsequent adjustments are recorded to non-operating (income) expense in the consolidated statements of operations.
Impairment of Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets
Goodwill is not amortized but rather tested for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if events or changes in circumstances indicate that goodwill may be impaired. Goodwill impairment is recognized when the carrying value of goodwill exceeds our implied fair value. Goodwill is evaluated for impairment annually on October 1, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable.
Acquisition intangible assets consist primarily of technology, customer relationships and trade names. Purchased intangible assets are recorded at fair value on the date of acquisition and amortized over their estimated useful lives following the pattern in which the economic benefits of the assets will be consumed, generally straight-line. We continually evaluate whether events and circumstances have occurred that indicate the remaining estimated useful life of amortizable long-lived assets may warrant revision or that the remaining balance may not be recoverable. When factors indicate that acquisition intangible assets should be evaluated for possible impairment, we use an estimate of the related undiscounted future cash flows over the remaining life of the amortizable long-lived assets in measuring whether they are recoverable. If the estimated undiscounted future cash flows do not exceed the carrying value of the asset, a loss is recorded as the excess of the asset’s carrying value over its fair value.
Determining if an impairment triggering event has occurred (which may include, but is not limited to, a significant adverse change in customer demand or business climate or a significant decrease in expected cash flows) requires significant management judgement. We did not recognize any impairment of goodwill or intangible assets during each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 2 of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and recently issued accounting pronouncements not yet adopted as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.