ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Recent Developments
Impact of COVID-19
During 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic significantly impacted demand for the Company’s products. While these impacts subsided in 2021, the Company experienced, and is still experiencing, supply chain and logistic constraints that negatively impacted its ability to manufacture and ship products.
Business Overview
The following management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of continuing operations should be read in conjunction with the Company’s financial statements and notes, and other information included elsewhere in this Report.
When reading this section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, it is important that you also read the financial statements and related notes thereto. This Annual Report on Form 10-K and certain information incorporated herein by reference contain forward-looking statements within the “safe harbor” provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. See “Forward-Looking Statements”.
The following table sets forth certain financial data for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020:
Results of Consolidated Operations
MANITEX INTERNATIONAL, INC.
(In thousands)
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Continuing Operations Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Net income (loss) from continuing operations
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net loss was $4.6 million, compared to net loss of $12.7 million for 2020.
Net revenue and gross profit -For the year ended December 31, 2021, net revenue and gross profit were $211.5 million and $32.9 million, respectively. Gross profit as a percent of net revenues was 15.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net revenue and gross profit were $167.5 million and $30.9 million, respectively. Gross profit as a percent of net revenues was 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For 2021, revenues increased $44.0 million or 26.3% from $167.5 million for 2020. The increase in revenues is primarily due to increases in sales of straight mast cranes from the Company’s United States subsidiaries and knuckle boom cranes and aerial platforms from the Company’s foreign subsidiaries, which was largely driven by the partial recovery in the global market from the COVID-19 pandemic and market demand.
Gross profit as a percent of net revenues was 15.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021, which decreased from 18.4% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in gross profit is attributable to increases in revenues partially offset by the inventory write-down of $3.2 million at Badger, which was driven by the closure of the Badger facility and higher material costs due to steel surcharges. The decrease in gross profit percentage is primarily driven by the inventory write-down at Badger driven by the closure of the Badger facility, product mix as lower margin products were sold and material cost inflation due to disruptions in the supply chain.
Research and development -Research and development for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $3.3 million compared to $3.2 million for the comparable period in 2020. The Company’s research and development spending continues to reflect our commitment to develop and introduce new products that give the Company a competitive advantage.
Selling, general and administrative expense - Selling, general and administrative expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $31.9 million compared to $28.7 million for the comparable period in 2020, an increase of $3.2 million. The increases are primarily related to higher salaries and wages, professional fees, advertising expenses, and negative impacts in foreign exchange rates offset by lower trade show expenses.
Impairment of intangibles and fixed assets - Impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $2.1 million. Valla recorded a full impairment of goodwill and intangible assets of $1.7 million driven by net losses in the business. In addition, the restructuring plan that resulted in the closure of the Badger facility drove an impairment to its intangible and fixed assets of $0.4 million. Impairment expense for the year ended December 31, 2020, was $6.7 million. The impairment was driven by the COVID-19 pandemic which caused a decrease in the Company’s market capitalization causing a triggering event which resulted in a $6.6 million goodwill impairment charge and a $0.1 million tradename impairment charge during 2020.
Interest expense -Interest expense was $2.1 million and $3.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in interest expense is due to lower debt driven by the pay-off of the convertible notes in December 2020 and principal payments made on the term debt in 2020.
Gain on extinguishment of debt- For 2020, the Company paid off a portion of the PM term loan and unsecured debt at a 15% discount to its face value which resulted in a gain of $0.6 million.
Gain on Paycheck Protection Program loan forgiveness -Gain on loan forgiveness was $3.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 due to the forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program loan by the SBA. The gain on loan forgiveness is not subject to U.S. taxation. This deductible permanent difference is offset by a change in the U.S. valuation allowance and therefore has no impact on the effective tax rate.
Foreign currency transaction loss -The Company had a foreign currency loss of $0.5 million and $0.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. A substantial portion of the losses relate to changes in the Chilean Peso.
Other income (expense)- For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company had other expenses of $0.1 million compared to other expenses of $0.5 million for the comparable period in 2020, a decrease of $0.4 million. The decreases are primarily related to a legal settlement and a facility closure recorded in 2020.
Discontinued operations- For the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company had a net loss from discontinued operations of $0.9 million related to the Sabre operations.
Income tax - On March 27, 2020, the “Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act” was enacted. The CARES Act, among other things, includes provisions relating to net operating loss carrybacks, alternative minimum tax credit refunds, a modification to the net interest deduction limitations and a technical correction to tax depreciation methods for qualified improvement property. The CARES Act did not have a material impact on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.
The calculation of the overall income tax provision for the 12 months ended December 31, 2021 primarily consists of a domestic income tax provision resulting from state and local taxes, foreign income taxes, the change in unrecognized tax benefits and valuation allowance.
The Company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations was an income tax provision of 36.3% on a pretax loss of $3.4 million compared to an income tax provision of 5.6% on a pretax loss of $12.0 million from the prior year. The effective tax rate for the year ended December 31, 2021 differs from the U.S. statutory rate of 21% primarily due to the tax effects related to the mix of domestic and foreign earnings, nondeductible permanent differences, domestic and foreign losses for which the Company is not recognizing an income tax benefit, the change in unrecognized tax benefits and valuation allowance.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The ultimate duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic remains highly uncertain at this time. Accordingly, its impact on the global economy generally and our customers and suppliers specifically, as well as the ultimate potential negative financial impact to our results of operations and liquidity position cannot be reasonably estimated at this time, but have been and could continue to be material. In the context of these uncertain conditions, we are actively managing the business to maintain cash flow and ensure that we have sufficient liquidity for a variety of scenarios. We believe that such strategy will allow us to meet our anticipated funding requirements.
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash were $21.6 million and $17.4 million at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. In addition, the Company has a U.S. revolving credit facility with a maturity date of July 20, 2023. At December 31, 2021 the Company had $11.2 million available to borrow under its U.S. revolving credit facility.
At December 31, 2021, the PM Group had established working capital facilities with five Italian, one Spanish and twelve South American banks. Under these facilities, the PM Group can borrow $21.4 million against orders, invoices and letters of credit. At December 31, 2021, the PM Group had availability under these facilities of $4.8 million. Future advances are dependent on having available collateral.
Cash Flows for 2021 and 2020
Operating Activities
For 2021, operating activities provided $7.5 million in cash compared to $12.0 million cash provided during 2020. Cash provided by working capital was $1.1 million for 2021 compared to $10.9 million for 2020. Working capital decreases were primarily from less cash generated from accounts receivable and higher inventory purchases. During April 2020, the Company was granted $3.7 million from a bank under the Paycheck Protection Program. During June 2021, the entire $3.7 million balance of the Company’s loan was forgiven.
Investing Activities
Cash used by investing activities was $1.1 million in 2021 which included $0.2 million investment in intangible assets. Cash provided from investing activities was $0.8 million in 2020 which included $1.6 million in proceeds from the sale of the Sabre business unit. Cash payments for plant, property and equipment were $0.9 million in 2021 compared to payments of $0.7 million in 2020.
Financing Activities
Cash flows from financing activities was an inflow of less than $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 which included an increase in working capital borrowings of $3.1 million and insurance premium financings of $1.1 million offset by the principal loan payments of $3.7 million and payments under finance leases of $0.3 million. Cash flows from financing activities was an outflow of
$20.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 which included the payoff of the convertible notes for $22.5 million, principal loan payments of $8.3 million, a reduction in working capital borrowings of $2.3 million and payments under finance leases of $0.5 million. These were partially offset by net borrowings under the revolving credit facility of $12.8 million.
Contingencies
The Company is involved in various legal proceedings, including product liability and workers’ compensation matters which have arisen in the normal course of operations. Certain cases are at a preliminary stage, and it is not possible to estimate the amount or timing of any cost to the Company.
The Company does not believe that these contingencies in aggregate will have a material adverse effect on the Company.
Additionally, the Company has been named as a defendant in several multi-defendant asbestos related product liability lawsuits. In certain instances, the Company is indemnified by a former owner of the product line in question. In the remaining cases the plaintiff has, to date, not been able to establish any exposure by the plaintiff to the Company’s products. The Company is uninsured with respect to these claims but believes that it will not incur any material liability with respect to these to claims.
When it is probable that a loss has been incurred and possible to make a reasonable estimate of the Company’s liability with respect to such matters, a provision is recorded for the amount of such estimate or the minimum amount of a range of estimates when it is not possible to estimate the amount within the range that is most likely to occur.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
CIBC Bank USA (“CIBC”) issued 2 standby letters of credit during 2021. The first standby letter of credit was for $0.2 million in favor of an insurance carrier to secure obligations which may have arisen in connection with future deductible payments that may have incurred under the Company’s worker’s compensation insurance policies. The second standby letter of credit was for less than $0.1 million in favor of a governmental agency to secure obligations which may have arisen in connection with worker’s compensation claims. As of December 31, 2021, the standby letters of credit were released.
See Note 21 - “Legal Proceedings and Other Contingencies.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of our financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect our reported amounts of assets and liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates and assumptions based upon historical experience and various other factors and circumstances. Management believes that our estimates and assumptions are reasonable under the circumstances; however, actual results may vary from these estimates and assumptions under different future circumstances. We have identified the following critical accounting policies that affect the more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements.
Revenue Recognition. Revenue is recognized when obligations under the terms of the contract with our customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of our equipment, parts or installation services (typically completed within one day), which occurs at a point in time. Equipment can be redirected during the manufacturing phase such that over time revenue recognition is not appropriate. Revenue is measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods or providing services. Our contracts are non-cancellable, and returns are only allowed in limited instances. Value added tax and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. The expected costs associated with our base warranties continue to be recognized as expense when the products are sold and do not constitute a separate performance obligation.
For instances where equipment and installation services are sold together, the Company accounts for the equipment and installation services separately. The consideration (including any discounts) is allocated between the equipment and installation services based on their stand-alone selling prices. The stand-alone selling prices are determined based on the prices at which the Company separately sells the equipment.
In some instances, the Company fulfills its obligations and bills the customer for the work performed but does not ship the goods until a later date. These arrangements are considered bill-and-hold transactions. In order to recognize revenue on the bill-and-hold transactions, the Company ensures the customer has requested the arrangement, the product is identified separately as belonging to the customer, the product is ready for shipment to the customer in its current form, and the Company does not have the ability to direct the
product to a different customer. A portion of the transaction price is not allocated to the custodial services due to the immaterial value assigned to that performance obligation.
Payment terms offered to customers are defined in contracts and purchase orders and do not include a significant financing component. At times, the Company may offer discounts which are considered variable consideration however, the Company applies the constraint guidance when determining the transaction price to be allocated to the performance obligations.
Assets and Liabilities Classified as Held for Sale. The Company classifies assets (or disposal groups comprised of assets and liabilities) as held for sale when they are expected to be recovered primarily through sale rather than through continuing use. They are stated at the lower of carrying amount or fair value less costs to sell. Upon reclassification, we cease to depreciate or amortize non-current assets classified as held for sale. A discontinued operation is a component of our business that represents a separate major line of business or geographical area of operation that has been disposed of or is held for sale and a strategic shift that will have a major effect on our operations and financial results. Classification as a discontinued operation occurs upon disposal or when the operation meets the criteria to be classified as held for sale, if earlier. When an operation is classified as a discontinued operation, the comparative statement of comprehensive income (loss) is revised as if the operation had been discontinued from the start of the comparative period. We have elected to not revise consolidated statements of cash flows to split operating, investing and financing activities between continuing and discontinued operations, but instead provide certain required cash flow information. The Company will account for the contingent consideration as a gain in accordance with ASC 450. Under this approach, we will recognize the contingent consideration in earnings after the contingency is resolved. As part of the discontinued operations classification, we review the allocation of corporate expenses, interest expense and entity-wide goodwill and intangible assets. In addition, income taxes are calculated on a stand-alone basis for both continuing and discontinued operations.
Inventories and Related Reserve for Obsolete and Excess Inventory. Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or net realizable value and are reduced by a reserve for excess and obsolete inventories. The estimated reserve is based upon historical experiences and/or specific identification of excess or obsolete inventories.
Goodwill. Goodwill, representing the difference between the total purchase price and the fair value of assets (tangible and intangible) and liabilities at the date of acquisition, is reviewed for impairment annually, and more frequently as circumstances warrant, and written down only in the period in which the recorded value of such assets exceed their fair value. The Company does not amortize goodwill in accordance with Financial Accounting Standards Board (the “FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 350, “Intangibles-Goodwill and Other” (“ASC 350”).
Under ASC 350, entities are provided with the option of first performing a qualitative assessment on none, some, or all of its reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value. If after completing a qualitative analysis, it is determined that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value a quantitative analysis is required.
Goodwill is tested for impairment at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or a component of an operating segment that constitutes a business for which discrete financial information with similar economic characteristics is available and operating results are regularly reviewed by our chief operating decision maker.
The Company evaluates its consolidated goodwill using the quantitative two step approach. The first step used to identify potential impairment involves comparing the reporting unit’s estimated fair value to its carrying value, including goodwill. During the first step testing, the Company evaluates goodwill for impairment using a business valuation method, which is calculated as of a measurement date by determining the present value of debt-free, after-tax projected future cash flows, discounted at the weighted average cost of capital of a hypothetical third-party buyer. The market approach was also considered in evaluating the potential for impairment by calculating fair value based on multiples of earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (“EBITDA”) of comparable, publicly traded companies. The Company also observed implied EBITDA multiples from relatively recent merger and acquisition activity in the industry, which was used to test the reasonableness of the results.
The second step of the process involves the calculation of an implied fair value of goodwill for each reporting unit for which step one indicated impairment. The implied fair value of goodwill is determined by measuring the excess of the estimated fair value of the reporting unit over the estimated fair values of the individual assets, liabilities and identifiable intangibles as if the reporting unit was being acquired in a business combination. If the implied fair value of goodwill exceeds the carrying value of goodwill assigned to the reporting unit, there is no impairment. If the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit exceeds the implied fair value of the goodwill, an impairment charge is recorded for the excess. An impairment loss cannot exceed the carrying value of goodwill assigned to a reporting unit and the subsequent reversal of goodwill impairment losses is not permitted.
The determination of fair value requires the Company to make significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions primarily include, but are not limited to, revenue growth and operating earnings projections, discount rates, terminal growth rates, and required capital expenditure projections. In the event the Company determines that goodwill is impaired in the future the Company would need to recognize a non-cash impairment charge.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets. The Company’s policy is to assess the realizability of its long-lived assets, including intangible assets, and to evaluate such assets for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of such assets (or group of assets) may not be recoverable. Impairment is determined to exist if the estimated future undiscounted cash flows are less than the carrying value. Future cash flow projections include assumptions for future sales levels, the impact of cost reduction programs, and the level of working capital needed to support each business. The amount of any impairment then recognized would be calculated as the difference between the estimated fair value and the carrying value of the asset.
Litigation Claims. In determining whether liabilities should be recorded for pending litigation claims, the Company must assess the allegations and the likelihood that it will successfully defend itself. When the Company believes it is probable that it will not prevail in a particular matter, it will then make an estimate of the amount of liability based, in part, on the advice of legal counsel.
Income Taxes.
The Company accounts for income taxes under the provisions of ASC 740 “Income Taxes,” which requires recognition of income taxes based on amounts payable with respect to the current year and the effects of deferred taxes for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the Company’s financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial accounting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, as well as for operating losses and tax credit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are recorded to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more-likely-than-not a tax benefit will not be realized. In assessing the realizability of deferred tax assets, management considers whether it is more likely than not that some portion or all of the deferred tax assets will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income prior to the expiration of any net operating loss carryforwards.
The Jobs Act also establishes global intangible low-taxed income (“GILTI”) provisions that impose a tax on foreign income in excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of foreign corporations. The Company has elected to recognize GILTI as a period cost as incurred, therefore there are no deferred taxes recognized for basis differences that are expected to impact the amount of the GILTI inclusion upon reversal.
ASC 740 also prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return, as well as guidance on derecognition, classification, interest and penalties, accounting in interim periods, disclosure and transition. The Company records interest and penalties related to income tax matters in the provision for income taxes.
Recently Issued Pronouncements - Not Yet Adopted
In March 2020, the FASB issued guidance under ASC 848, Reference Rate Reform. This guidance provides optional expedients and exceptions to account for debt, leases, contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR or another reference rate if certain criteria are met. The guidance is effective immediately and may be applied prospectively to contract modifications made and hedging relationships entered into or evaluated on or before December 31, 2022. The Company determined there was no material effect on the Company’s financial statements related to Reference Rate Reform guidance.
In January 2021, the FASB issued ASU 2021-01, which refines the scope of ASC 848 and clarifies some of its guidance as part of the FASB’s monitoring of global reference rate reform activities. The ASU permits entities to elect certain optional expedients and exceptions when accounting for derivative contracts and certain hedging relationships affected by changes in the interest rates used for discounting cash flows, for computing variation margin settlements, and for calculating price alignment interest (PAI) in connection with reference rate reform activities under way in global financial markets (the “discounting transition”). We are currently evaluating the potential effects of the adoption of this guidance on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
There have been no other accounting pronouncements issued, but not yet adopted by us, which are expected to have a material impact on our Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
In December 2019, the FASB issued ASU 2019-12, “Income Taxes Topic 740-Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes” (“ASU 2019-12”), which intended to simplify various aspects related to accounting for income taxes. ASU 2019-12 removes certain exceptions to the general principles in Topic 740 and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistent application of Topic 740. The effective date for ASU 2019-12 was the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 and the Company adopted this guidance as of January 1, 2021. The adoption of this guidance did not have a significant impact on our operating results.
Except as noted above, the guidance issued by the FASB is not expected to have a material effect on the Company’s consolidated financial statements.