Item 7. Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere in this Form 10-K. All statements contained herein that are not historical facts, including, but not limited to, statements regarding anticipated future capital requirements, our future plan of operations, our ability to obtain debt, equity or other financing, and our ability to generate cash from operations, are based on current expectations. These statements are forward-looking in nature and involve a number of risks and uncertainties that may cause the Company's actual results in future periods to differ materially from forecasted results.
Company Overview
Mobiquity Technologies, Inc. is a next-generation marketing and advertising technology and data intelligence company which operates through our proprietary software platforms in the programmatic advertising space.
Our product solutions are comprised of two proprietary software platforms:
· Our advertising technology operating system (or ATOS) platform; and
· Our data intelligence platform.
Our ATOS platform blends artificial intelligence (or AI) and machine learning (ML) based optimization technology for automatic ad serving that manages digital advertising inventory and campaigns. Our data intelligence platform provides precise data and insights on consumer’s real-world behavior and trends for use in marketing and research.
We operate our business through two wholly-owned subsidiaries. Advangelists LLC operates our ATOS platform business, and Mobiquity Networks, Inc. operates our data intelligence platform business.
Critical Accounting Policies
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States. The preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and disclosures on the date of the financial statements. On an on-going basis, we evaluate our estimates including, but not limited to, those related to revenue recognition. We use authoritative pronouncements, historical experience and other assumptions as the basis for making judgments. Actual results could differ from those estimates. We believe that the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates in the preparation of our financial statements.
Revenue Recognition -On May 28, 2014, the FASB issued ASU No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606”), to update the financial reporting requirements for revenue recognition. Topic 606 outlines a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. The guidance is based on the principle that an entity should recognize revenue to depict the transfer of goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance also requires additional disclosure about the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from customer contracts, including significant judgments and changes in judgments and assets recognized from costs incurred to fulfill a contract. This guidance became effective for the Company beginning on January 1, 2018, and entities have the option of using either a full retrospective or a modified retrospective approach for the adoption of the new standard. The Company adopted this standard using the modified retrospective approach on January 1, 2018.
In preparation for adoption of the standard, the Company evaluated each of the five steps in Topic 606, which are as follows: (1) Identify the contract with the customer; (2) Identify the performance obligations in the contract; (3) Determine the transaction price; (4) Allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (5) Recognize revenue when (or as) performance obligations are satisfied.
Reported revenue will not be affected materially in any period due to the adoption of ASC Topic 606 because: (1) the Company expects to identify similar performance obligations under Topic 606 as compared with deliverables and separate units of account previously identified; (2) the Company has determined the transaction price to be consistent; and (3) the Company records revenue at the same point in time, upon delivery of services, under both ASC Topic 605 and Topic 606, as applicable under the terms of the contract with the customer. Additionally, the Company does not expect the accounting for fulfillment costs or costs incurred to obtain a contract to be affected materially in any period due to the adoption of Topic 606.
There are also certain considerations related to accounting policies, business processes and internal control over financial reporting that are associated with implementing Topic 606. The Company has evaluated its policies, processes, and control framework for revenue recognition, and identified and implemented the changes needed in response to the new guidance.
Lastly, disclosure requirements under the new guidance in Topic 606 have been significantly expanded in comparison to the disclosure requirements under the current guidance, including disclosures related to disaggregation of revenue into appropriate categories, performance obligations, the judgments made in revenue recognition determinations, adjustments to revenue which relate to activities from previous quarters or years, any significant reversals of revenue, and costs to obtain or fulfill contract.
The Company generates revenue from service contracts with certain customers. These contracts are accounted for under the proportional performance method. Under this method, revenue is recognized in proportion to the value provided to the customer for each project as of each reporting date. We recognize revenues in the period in which the data transmission is provided to the licensee.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We are required to make judgments as to the realizability of our accounts receivable. We make these assessments based on the following factors: (a) historical experience, (b) customer concentrations, (c) customer credit worthiness, (d) current economic conditions, and (e) changes in customer payment terms.
Accounting for Stock Based Compensation
Stock based compensation cost is measured at the grant date fair value of the award and is recognized as expense over the requisite service period. The Company uses the Black-Sholes option-pricing model to determine fair value of the awards, which involves certain subjective assumptions. These assumptions include estimating the length of time employees will retain their vested stock options before exercising them (“expected term”), the estimated volatility of the company’s common stock price over the expected term (“volatility”) and the number of options for which vesting requirements will not be completed (“forfeitures”). Changes in the subjective assumptions can materially affect estimates of fair value stock-based compensation, and the related amount recognized on the consolidated statements of operations.
Goodwill and Intangible Assets
Goodwill represents the future economic benefit arising from other assets acquired that could not be individually identified and separately recognized. The goodwill arising from the Company’s acquisitions is attributable to the value of the potential expanded market opportunity with new customers. Intangible assets have either an identifiable or indefinite useful life. Intangible assets with identifiable useful lives are amortized on a straight-line basis over their economic or legal life, whichever is shorter. The Company’s amortizable intangible assets consist of customer relationships and non-compete agreements. Their useful lives range from 1.5 to 10 years. The Company’s indefinite-lived intangible assets consist of trade names.
Goodwill and indefinite-lived assets are not amortized but are subject to annual impairment testing unless circumstances dictate more frequent assessments. The Company performs an annual impairment assessment for goodwill during the fourth quarter of each year and more frequently whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of the asset may be less than the carrying amount. Goodwill impairment testing is a two-step process performed at the reporting unit level. Step one compares the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying amount. The fair value of the reporting unit is determined by considering both the income approach and market approaches. The fair values calculated under the income approach and market approaches are weighted based on circumstances surrounding the reporting unit. Under the income approach, the Company determines fair value based on estimated future cash flows of the reporting unit, which are discounted to the present value using discount factors that consider the timing and risk of cash flows. For the discount rate, the Company relies on the capital asset pricing model approach, which includes an assessment of the risk-free interest rate, the rate of return from publicly traded stocks, the Company’s risk relative to the overall market, the Company’s size and industry and other Company specific risks. Other significant assumptions used in the income approach include the terminal value, growth rates, future capital expenditures and changes in future working capital requirements. The market approaches use key multiples from guideline businesses that are comparable and are traded on a public market. If the fair value of the reporting unit is greater than its carrying amount, there is no impairment. If the reporting unit’s carrying amount exceeds its fair value, then the second step must be completed to measure the amount of impairment, if any. Step two calculates the implied fair value of goodwill by deducting the fair value of all tangible and intangible net assets of the reporting unit from the fair value of the reporting unit as calculated in step one. In this step, the fair value of the reporting unit is allocated to all of the reporting unit’s assets and liabilities in a hypothetical purchase price allocation as if the reporting unit had been acquired on that date. If the carrying amount of goodwill exceeds the implied fair value of goodwill, an impairment loss is recognized in an amount equal to the excess.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions, including revenue growth rates, strategic plans and future market conditions, among others. There can be no assurance that the Company’s estimates and assumptions made for purposes of the goodwill impairment testing will prove to be accurate predictions of the future. Changes in assumptions and estimates could cause the Company to perform impairment testing prior to scheduled annual impairment tests.
The Company performed its annual fair value assessment at December 31, 2021, there was a $3,600,000 impairment during the year. For the year ended December 31, 2020, there was a $4,000,000 impairment.
Plan of Operation
Mobiquity intends to hire several new sales and sales support individuals to help generate additional revenue through the use of the Advangelists platform. Mobiquity’s sales team will focus on Advertising Agencies, Brands and publishers to help increase both supply and demand across the Advangelists platform. The Advangelists platform creates three revenue streams for Mobiquity. The first is licensing the Advangelists platform as a white-label product for use by Advertising Agencies, DSP’s, Publishers and Brands. Under the White-Label scenario, the user licenses the technology and is responsible for running its own business operations and is billed a percentage of volume run through the platform. The second revenue stream is a managed services model in which the user is billed a higher percentage of revenue run through the platform, but all services are managed by the Mobiquity/Advangelists team. The third revenue model is a seat model, where the user is billed a percentage of revenue run through the platform and business operations are shared between the user and the Mobiquity/Advangelists team. The goal of the sales team is to inform potential users of the benefits in efficiency and effectiveness of utilizing the end-to-end, fully integrated ATOS created by Advangelists.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021, versus Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth certain selected condensed statement of operations data for the periods indicated in dollars. In addition, we note that the period-to-period comparison may not be indicative of future performance.
We generated revenues of $2,672,615 in 2021 as compared to $6,184,010 in the same period for 2020, a change in revenues of $3,511,395. The nationwide economic shutdown due to COVID-19 during 2021 severely reduced current operations.
Cost of revenues was $1,954,383 or 73.1% of revenues in 2021 as compared to $4,360,645 or 70.5% of revenues in the same fiscal period of fiscal 2020. Cost of revenues include web services for storage of our data and web engineers who are building and maintaining our platforms. Our ability to capture and store data for sales does not translate to increased cost of sales.
Gross Income was $718,232 or 26.9% of revenues for 2021 as compared to $1,823,365 in the same fiscal period of 2020 or 29.5% of revenues. When the country comes out of COVID-19 and the economy begins to turn around we anticipate income to increase.
Operating expenses were $16,707,231 for 2021 compared to $13,204,465 in the comparable period of the prior year, an increase of $3,502,766. Increased operating costs include cash and non-cash expense for professional fees of $1,141,848, non-cash operating costs also include option-based compensation of $2,787,648, and origination fees of $692,430.
The net loss from operations for 2021 was $15,988,999 as compared to $11,381,100 for the comparable period of the prior year. The loss from operations includes the non-cash warrant expense of $18,543,154, stock-based compensation of $4,134,696 and impairment expense of $3,600,000. The continuing operating loss is attributable to the focused effort in creating the infrastructure required to move forward with our Mobiquity and Advangelists network business.
No benefit for income taxes is provided for in the reported periods due to the full valuation allowance on the net deferred tax assets. Our ability to be profitable in the future is dependent upon the successful introduction and usage of our data collection and analysis including Advertising, Data Licensing, Footfall Reporting, Attribution Reporting, Real Estate Planning, Financial Forecasting and Custom Research services.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have a history of operating losses and our management has concluded that factors raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern and our auditor has included an explanatory paragraph relating to our ability to continue as a going concern in its audit report for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020
We had cash and cash equivalents of $5,385,245 at December 31, 2021. Cash used by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was $6,136,477. This resulted from a net loss of $34,947,699, partially offset by non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization of $808,300, stock-based compensation of $4,134,696, warrant expense of $18,794,607 and impairment expense of $3,600,000. Cash provided by financing activities of $2,037,995 was the result of issuance of notes and cash payments on notes outstanding.
We had cash and cash equivalents of $602,182 at December 31, 2020. Cash used by operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $4,750,442. This resulted from a net loss of $15,032,404, partially offset by non-cash expenses, including depreciation and amortization of $1,807,007, stock-based compensation of $1,347,048, warrant expense of $1,472,367 and impairment expense of $4,000,000. Cash provided by financing activities of $485,033 was the result of issuance of notes and cash payments on notes outstanding.
Our company commenced operations in 1998 and was initially funded by our three founders, each of whom has made demand loans to our company that have been repaid. Since 1999, we have relied on equity financing and borrowings from outside investors to supplement our cash flow from operations and expect this to continue in 2022 and beyond until cash flow from our proximity marketing operations become substantial.
Recent Financings
On October 19, 2021, the Company filed a Form S-1 Registration Statement (File no. 333-260364) with the Securities and Exchange Commission to raise over $10 million dollars in an underwritten public offering. The next day the Company filed an application to list our common stock on the NASDAQ Capital Market under the symbol “MOBQ.” This offering was completed on December 13, 2021, and the Company retired the loans of Talos Victory Fund, LLC and Blue Lake Partners LLC out of the gross proceeds it received of approximately $10.3 million. Also, Talos Victory Fund, LLC and Blue Lake Partners, LLC converted all of their warrants on a cashless basis into 24,692 common shares and 24,692 common shares, respectively.
We have completed various other financings as described under the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance-sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.