ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
This section should be read in conjunction with the following parts of this Form 10-K: Part II, Item 8 “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” Part II, Item 7A, “Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk,” and Part I, Item 1 “Business.” For a discussion on the comparison of results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, refer Item 7. “Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operation” in the Company’s Annual Form 10-K filed with the SEC on March 11, 2021.
Overview
We are headquartered in Iowa City, Iowa, and are a bank holding company under the BHCA that has elected to be a financial holding company. We are the holding company for MidWestOne Bank, an Iowa state non-member bank with its main office in Iowa City, Iowa. We also were the holding company for MidWestOne Insurance Services, Inc., until its dissolution in 2019. On May 1, 2019, the Company acquired ATBancorp, a bank holding company whose wholly-owned banking subsidiaries were ATSB and ABTW, community banks headquartered in Dubuque, Iowa, and Cuba City, Wisconsin, respectively. On November 1, 2021, the Company and IOFB, a bank holding company headquartered in Muscatine, Iowa, jointly announced the signing of a definitive agreement pursuant to which the Company will acquire IOFB and its wholly-owned banking subsidiaries, FNBM and FNBF. The acquisition will add to the Company's existing presence in Fairfield, Iowa and will expand the Company's footprint into Muscatine, Iowa. The acquisition is expected to close early in the second quarter of 2022.
The Bank operates a total of 56 banking offices, which are located throughout central and eastern Iowa, the Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area of Minnesota, southwestern Wisconsin, southwestern Florida, and Denver, Colorado. The Bank is focused on delivering relationship-based business and personal banking products and services. The Bank provides commercial loans, real estate loans, agricultural loans, credit card loans, and consumer loans. The Bank also provides deposit products including demand and interest checking accounts, savings accounts, money market accounts, and time deposits. Complementary to our loan and deposit products, the Bank also provides products and services including treasury management, Zelle, online and mobile banking, credit and debit cards, ATMs, and safe deposit boxes. The Bank also has a trust department through which it offers services including the administration of estates, personal trusts, and conservatorships and the management of real property. Finally, the Bank’s investment services department offers financial planning, investment advisory, and retail securities brokerage services (the latter of which is provided through an agreement with a third-party registered broker-dealer).
Our results of operations are significantly affected by our net interest income. Results of operations are also affected by noninterest income and expense, credit loss expense and income tax expense. Significant external factors that impact our results of operations include general economic and competitive conditions, as well as changes in market interest rates, government policies, and actions of regulatory authorities.
Financial Summary
The Company reported net income for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $69.5 million, an increase of $62.9 million, or 949.2%, compared to $6.6 million of net income for 2020, with diluted earnings per share of $4.37 and $0.41 for the respective annual periods.
The period as of December 31, 2021 and for the year then ended was also highlighted by the following results:
Balance Sheet:
•Total assets increased to $6.03 billion at December 31, 2021 from $5.56 billion at December 31, 2020.
•Total securities held for investment increased $630.7 million, from $1.7 billion at December 31, 2020, to $2.29 billion at December 31, 2021.
•Gross loans held for investment decreased $244.6 million, from $3.50 billion at December 31, 2020, to $3.25 billion at December 31, 2021.
•The allowance for credit losses was $48.7 million, or 1.50% of total loans as of December 31, 2021, compared with $55.5 million, or 1.59% of total loans, at December 31, 2020.
•Nonperforming assets declined $13.1 million, from $45.0 million at December 31, 2020, to $31.9 million at December 31, 2021.
•Total deposits increased $567.5 million from $4.55 billion at December 31, 2020, to $5.11 billion at December 31, 2021.
•Short-term debt decreased to $181.4 million at December 31, 2021 from $230.8 million at December 31, 2020, while long-term debt decreased to $154.9 million at December 31, 2021 from $208.7 million at December 31, 2020.
•The Company is well-capitalized with a total risk-based capital ratio of 13.09% at December 31, 2021.
Income Statement:
•Tax equivalent net interest income (a non-GAAP financial measure - see the "Non-GAAP Presentations" section for a reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP equivalent) increased $3.7 million, from $157.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $160.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. This increase in tax equivalent net interest income was primarily due to a decline in interest expense on interest-bearing deposits of $10.7 million as a result of lower rates paid on such deposits that more than offset the increase in the volume of deposits, coupled with an increase of $10.2 million in interest income earned from investment securities, which reflected the larger volume of securities held for investment, partially offset by a decrease in yield.
•Credit loss benefit of $7.3 million during 2021 compared with credit loss expense of $28.4 million in 2020, which reflected overall improvements in the forecasted economic conditions and improvements in the Company’s credit risk profile.
•Noninterest income increased $3.8 million, from $38.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $42.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The largest drivers of the increase were loan revenue and investment services and trust activities, partially offset by a decrease in other noninterest income.
•Noninterest expense decreased $33.3 million, from $149.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $116.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily due to a $31.5 million goodwill impairment charge recorded in the third quarter of 2020 that did not recur in 2021.
COVID-19 Update
Our response to COVID-19 continues to be focused on how we can best serve our employees, customers, and communities. The Bank has utilized a combination of digital banking, voice, in-branch, branch drive-thru and other channels in order to meet the needs of our customers. We have continued to adjust procedures and restrictions based on local conditions and generally in alignment with guidance from the Centers for Disease Control.
Loan Payment Deferral Program Update: The federal government undertook several actions designed to alleviate the economic impact of COVID-19 and related restrictions. The CARES Act and guidance from the FRB and the FDIC allowed financial institutions the option to temporarily suspend certain requirements under GAAP related to TDRs for a limited period of time during the COVID-19 pandemic and that short-term modifications made on a good faith basis in response to COVID-19 to borrowers who were current prior to any relief were not to be considered TDRs. This included short-term (e.g., six months) modifications, such as payment deferrals, fee waivers, extensions of repayment terms, or other delays in payment that were insignificant. Borrowers considered current were those that were less than 30 days past due on their contractual payments at the time a modification program was implemented. As of December 31, 2021, the outstanding balance of loans modified as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic was $2.9 million, as compared to $44.1 million as of December 31, 2020. This program ended on December 31, 2021 and no additional deferrals are being granted on loans.
PPP Loans: The Bank was a participating lender in the PPP. The PPP loans have a two-year or five-year term and earn interest at an annual rate of 1%. Loans funded through the PPP are fully guaranteed by the U.S. government if certain criteria are met. The Company believes that the majority of these loans will be forgiven by the SBA in accordance with the terms of the program. Should those circumstances change, the Company could be required to establish additional allowance for credit loss through additional credit loss expense charged to earnings.
The following table presents PPP loan measures as of the dates indicated:
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the following critical accounting policies and practices relative to the reporting of our results of operations and financial condition. These accounting policies relate to the allowance for credit losses, fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, and the annual impairment testing of goodwill and other intangible assets.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Loans Held for Investment
Under the current expected credit loss model, the allowance for credit losses is a valuation account estimated at each balance sheet date and deducted from the amortized cost basis of loans held for investment to present the net amount expected to be collected.
The Company estimates the ACL based on the underlying assets’ amortized cost basis, which is the amount at which the financing receivable is originated or acquired, adjusted for collection of cash and charge-offs, as well as applicable accretion or amortization of premium, discount, and net deferred fees or costs. In the event that collection of principal becomes uncertain, the Company has policies in place to reverse accrued interest in a timely manner. Therefore, the Company has made a policy election to exclude accrued interest from the measurement of ACL.
Expected credit losses are reflected in the allowance for credit losses through a charge to credit loss expense. When the Company deems all or a portion of a financial asset to be uncollectible, the appropriate amount is written off and the ACL is reduced by the same amount. The Company applies judgment to determine when a financial asset is deemed uncollectible; however, generally speaking, an asset will be considered uncollectible no later than when all efforts at collection have been exhausted. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the ACL when received.
The Company measures expected credit losses of financial assets on a collective (pool) basis when the financial assets share similar risk characteristics. Depending on the nature of the pool of financial assets with similar risk characteristics, the Company uses a DCF method or a loss-rate method to estimate expected credit losses.
The Company’s methodologies for estimating the ACL consider available relevant information about the collectability of cash flows, including information about past events, current conditions, and reasonable and supportable forecasts. The methodologies apply historical loss information, adjusted for asset-specific characteristics, economic conditions at the measurement date, and forecasts about future economic conditions expected to exist through the contractual lives of the financial assets that are reasonable and supportable, to the identified pools of financial assets with similar risk characteristics for which the historical loss experience was observed. Specifically, the economic forecast used by the Company is sensitive to changes in the following loss drivers: (1) Midwest unemployment, (2) year-to-year change in national retail sales, (3) year-to-year change in the CRE Index, (4) year-to-year change in U.S. GDP, (5) year-to-year change in the National Home Price Index, and (6) Rental Vacancy. General deterioration in these loss drivers, coupled with any changes to our modeling assumptions stemming from overall uncertainties in the current and future economic conditions, also impacts the Company’s estimation of the ACL. The Company’s economic forecast assumptions revert back to historical loss driver information on a straight-line basis over four quarters.
Discounted Cash Flow Method
The Company uses the DCF method to estimate expected credit losses for the agricultural, commercial and industrial, CRE - construction and development, CRE - farmland, CRE - multifamily, CRE - other, RRE - owner-occupied one-to-four family first liens, RRE - non-owner-occupied one-to-four family first liens, RRE - one-to-four family junior liens, and consumer loan pools. For each of these pools, the Company generates cash flow projections at the instrument level wherein payment expectations are adjusted for estimated prepayment speed, curtailments, time to recovery, probability of default, and loss given default. The modeling of expected prepayment speeds, curtailment rates, and time to recovery are based on historical internal data.
The Company uses regression analysis of historical internal and peer data to determine which variables are best suited to be economic variables utilized when modeling lifetime probability of default and loss given default. This analysis also determines how expected probability of default and loss given default will react to forecasted levels of the economic variables. For the loan pools utilizing the DCF method, management utilizes one or multiple of the following economic variables: Midwest unemployment, national retail sales, CRE index, US rental vacancy rate, US gross domestic product, and national home price index (“HPI”).
For all DCF models, management has determined that four quarters represents a reasonable and supportable forecast period and reverts back to a historical loss rate over four quarters on a straight-line basis. Management leverages economic projections from a reputable and independent third party to inform its loss driver forecasts over the four quarter forecast period. Other internal and external indicators of economic forecasts are also considered by management when developing the forecast metrics.
The combination of adjustments for credit expectations (default and loss) and timing expectations (prepayment, curtailment, and time to recovery) produces an expected cash flow stream at the instrument level. Instrument effective yield is calculated, net of the impacts of prepayment assumptions, and the instrument expected cash flows are then discounted at that effective yield to produce an instrument-level net present value of expected cash flows (“NPV”). An ACL is established for the difference between the instrument’s NPV and amortized cost basis. In addition, management utilizes qualitative factors to adjust the calculated ACL as appropriate. Qualitative factors are based on management's judgment of company, market, industry or business specific data, changes in underlying loan composition of specific portfolios, trends relating to credit quality, delinquency, non-performing and adversely rated loans, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions.
Loss-Rate Method
The Company uses a loss-rate method to estimate expected credit losses for the credit card and overdraft pools. For each of these pools, the Company applies an expected loss ratio based on internal and peer historical losses, adjusted as appropriate for qualitative factors. Qualitative loss factors are based on management's judgment of company, market, industry or business specific data, changes in underlying loan composition of specific portfolios, trends relating to credit quality, delinquency, non-performing and adversely rated loans, and reasonable and supportable forecasts of economic conditions.
Collateral Dependent Financial Assets
Loans that do not share risk characteristics are evaluated on an individual basis. For collateral dependent financial assets where the Company has determined that foreclosure of the collateral is probable, or where the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty and the Company expects repayment of the financial asset to be provided substantially through the operation or sale of the collateral, the ACL is measured based on the difference between the fair value of the collateral and the amortized cost basis of the asset as of the measurement date. When repayment is expected to be from the operation of the collateral, expected credit losses are calculated as the amount by which the amortized cost basis of the financial asset exceeds the present value of expected cash flows from the operation of the collateral. When repayment is expected to be from the sale of the collateral, expected credit losses are calculated as the amount by which the amortized cost basis of the financial asset exceeds the fair value of the underlying collateral less estimated cost to sell. The ACL may be zero if the fair value of the collateral at the measurement date exceeds the amortized cost basis of the financial asset.
The Company’s estimate of the ACL reflects losses expected over the remaining contractual life of the assets. The contractual term does not consider extensions, renewals or modifications unless the Company has identified an expected TDR.
A loan that has been modified or renewed is considered a TDR when two conditions are met: 1) the borrower is experiencing financial difficulty and 2) concessions are made for the borrower's benefit that would not otherwise be considered for a borrower or transaction with similar credit risk characteristics. The Company’s ACL reflects all effects of a TDR when an individual asset is specifically identified as a reasonably expected TDR. The Company has determined that a TDR is reasonably expected no later than the point when the lender concludes that modification is the best course of action and it is at least reasonably possible that the troubled borrower will accept some form of concession from the lender to avoid a default. Reasonably expected TDRs and executed non-performing TDRs are evaluated individually to determine the required ACL. TDRs performing in accordance with their modified contractual terms for a reasonable period of time may be included in the Company’s existing pools based on the underlying risk characteristics of the loan to measure the ACL.
Accounting for Business Combinations
In May 2019, we completed the acquisition of ATBancorp, which generated significant amounts of fair value adjustments to assets and liabilities. In the third quarter of 2021 we announced the pending acquisition of IOFB, which is expected to close early in the second quarter of 2022. The fair value adjustments assigned to assets and liabilities, as well as their related useful lives, are subject to judgment and estimation by our management. Valuation of intangible assets is generally based on the estimated cash flows related to those assets, while the initial value assigned to goodwill is the residual of the purchase price over the fair value of all identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed. When amounts allocated to assets acquired and liabilities assumed is greater than the purchase price, a bargain purchase gain is recognized. Useful lives are determined based on the expected future period of the benefit of the asset or liability, the assessment of which considers various characteristics of the asset or liability, including the historical cash flows. Due to the number of estimates involved, we have identified accounting for business combinations as a critical accounting policy.
Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill and intangible assets arise from business combinations. Goodwill represented $62.5 million of our $6.03 billion total assets at December 31, 2021. Under the Intangibles - Goodwill and Other topic of the FASB ASC, goodwill is tested at least annually for impairment. The Company’s annual assessment is done at the reporting unit level, which the Company has concluded is at the consolidated level. We review goodwill for impairment annually during the fourth quarter and also test for impairment between annual tests if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not reduce the fair value of our reporting unit below its carrying amount. Such events and circumstances may include among others: a significant adverse change in legal factors or in the general business climate; significant decline in our stock price and market capitalization; unanticipated competition; the testing for recoverability of a significant asset group within the reporting unit; and an adverse action or assessment by a regulator. Any adverse change in these factors could have a significant impact on the recoverability of goodwill and could have a material impact on our consolidated financial statements.
No goodwill impairment charge was recorded in 2021 as a result of the Company’s internal assessment. In the prior year, due to the continued economic impact that COVID-19 had on the Company, management concluded that factors, such as the decline in macroeconomic conditions and a sustained decrease in share price, led to the occurrence of a triggering event and therefore an interim impairment test over goodwill was performed as of September 30, 2020. As a result of the interim assessment, the Company recorded a goodwill impairment charge of $31.5 million as its estimated fair value was less than its book value on that date.
Other intangible assets represented $19.9 million of our $6.03 billion total assets at December 31, 2021. The accounting for a recognized intangible asset is based on its useful life to the Company. An intangible asset with a finite useful life is amortized over its estimated useful life to the Company; an intangible asset with an indefinite useful life is not amortized but rather is tested at least annually for impairment. The intangible assets with finite lives reflected on our financial statements relate to core deposit relationships, trade name, and customer lists. The initial and subsequent measurements of intangible assets involve the use of significant estimates and assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include, among other things, the estimated cost to service deposits acquired, discount rates, estimated attrition rates and useful lives, future economic and market conditions, comparison of our market value to book value and determination of appropriate market comparables. Periodically we evaluate the estimated useful lives of intangible assets and whether events or changes in circumstances warrant a revision to the remaining periods of amortization. We also assess these intangible assets for impairment annually or more often if conditions indicate a possible impairment. If the asset is considered to be impaired, the amount of any impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of the impaired asset. See Note 7. Goodwill and Intangible Assets to our consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our intangible assets.
Results of Operations
Summary
(1)A non-GAAP financial measure - see the "Non-GAAP Presentations" section for a reconciliation to the most comparable GAAP equivalent.
Net Interest Income
Net interest income is the difference between interest income and fees earned on interest-earning assets, less interest expense incurred on interest-bearing liabilities. Tax equivalent net interest margin is the net interest income, on a tax equivalent basis, as a percentage of average interest-earning assets.
Net Interest Income Summary
The following table shows the consolidated average balance sheets, detailing the major categories of assets and liabilities, the interest income earned on interest-earning assets, the interest expense paid for interest-bearing liabilities, and the related interest yields and costs for the periods indicated.
(1) Average balance includes nonaccrual loans.
(2) Tax equivalent.
(3) Interest income includes net loan fees, loan purchase discount accretion and tax equivalent adjustments. Net loan fees were $11.2 million, $4.4 million, and $(316) thousand for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Loan purchase discount accretion was $3.3 million, $9.1 million, and $14.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. Tax equivalent adjustments were $2.1 million, $2.1 million and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The federal statutory tax rate utilized was 21%.
(4) Interest income includes tax equivalent adjustments of $2.5 million, $2.1 million and $1.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The federal statutory tax rate utilized was 21%.
(5) Total deposits is the sum of total interest-bearing deposits and noninterest bearing deposits. The cost of total deposits is calculated as interest expense on deposits divided by average total deposits.
(6) Cost of funds is calculated as total interest expense divided by the sum of average total deposits and borrowed funds.
Changes in Net Interest Income
Net interest income is impacted by changes in volume, interest rate, and the mix of interest earning assets and interest-bearing liabilities. The following table shows changes attributable to (i) changes in volume and (ii) changes in rate. Changes attributable to both rate and volume have been allocated proportionately to the change due to volume and the change due to rate.
Our tax equivalent net interest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $160.9 million, an increase of $3.7 million, or 2%, as compared to $157.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase was due to a decline of $11.3 million, or 36%, in interest expense, partially offset by a decline of $7.6 million, or 4%, in interest income. The change in interest expense was due primarily to a decline in interest bearing deposit costs of $10.7 million, or 45%, as a result of lower rates paid on such deposits, partially offset by increased costs from greater non-maturity deposit volumes. The change in interest income reflected a decline of $17.6 million, or 11%, in loan interest income from lower loan purchase discount accretion, which decreased $5.8 million, reduced loan volumes, and coupon rates at loan origination and re-pricing being generally lower than the existing portfolio. The decline in loan interest income was partially offset by increased net loan fee accretion of $6.8 million, primarily from PPP loans. Partially offsetting the lower loan interest income was an increase of $10.2 million, or 36%, in interest income earned from investment securities which reflected a larger volume of securities held for investment, partially offset by a decrease in yield from such securities.
The tax equivalent net interest margin for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 2.95%, or 35 basis points lower than the tax equivalent net interest margin of 3.30% for the year ended December 31, 2020. The tax equivalent yield on investment securities decreased by 59 basis points, while tax equivalent yield on loans decreased 27 basis points. The resulting yield on interest-earning assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 was 65 basis points lower than the year ended December 31, 2020, which primarily reflected the shift in earning asset mix to a greater proportion of investment securities, which generally have lower yields than loans, as well as the origination and re-pricing of loans at generally lower coupon rates compared to existing portfolio coupon rates. The cost of interest-bearing deposits decreased 37 basis points, while the average cost of borrowings was lower by 12 basis points for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Our lower deposit costs for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 were a result of lower market interest rates as a result of the continuation of the target federal funds interest rate of 0.0% - 0.25% in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as the origination and re-pricing of time deposits at lower rates than the existing portfolio.
Credit Loss (Benefit) Expense
We recorded credit loss benefit of $7.3 million during 2021 compared to credit loss expense of $28.4 million in 2020, a decrease of $35.7 million, or 125.9%. The Company recorded credit loss expense of $28.4 million in 2020 primarily due to the impact of economic uncertainty stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic on forecasted economic conditions. The credit loss benefit recorded in 2021 reflected overall improvements in forecasted economic conditions and improvement in the credit risk profile, coupled with net loan recoveries of $0.4 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to net loan charge-offs of $5.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020. The economic forecasts utilized by the Company for its loan credit loss estimation process are: (1) Midwest unemployment, (2) year-to-year change in national retail sales, (3) year-to-year change in the CRE Index, (4) year-to-year change in U.S. GDP, (5) year-to-year change in the National Home Price Index, and (6) Rental Vacancy.
Noninterest Income
The following table sets forth the various categories of noninterest income for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Total noninterest income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $42.5 million, an increase of $3.8 million, or 9.9%, from $38.6 million during the same period of 2020. This increase was primarily due to increases in loan revenue, investment services and trust activities, and card revenue of $2.8 million, $2.0 million and $1.3 million, respectively. The increase in loan revenue was primarily due to an increase of $1.4 million in the fair value of our mortgage servicing rights in 2021, compared with a decline of $1.9 million during the same period of 2020. Investment services and trust activities revenue was positively impacted by improvements in the financial markets and increased assets under administration, while the increase in card revenue primarily reflected an increase in transaction volumes and transaction margins in the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. Partially offsetting the identified increases in noninterest income was a decrease in ‘Other’ noninterest income of $2.3 million, which was primarily due to a decline in income from our commercial loan back-to-back swap program.
Noninterest Expense
The following table sets forth the various categories of noninterest expense for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019.
Noninterest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $116.6 million, a decrease of $33.3 million, or 22.2%, from $149.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to a $31.5 million goodwill impairment charge recorded in the third quarter of 2020 that did not recur in 2021. Excluding the goodwill impairment, noninterest expense decreased $1.8 million, or 1.5%, from the prior year end, largely due to decreases of $2.1 million, $1.6 million, and $0.9 million in ‘Other’ noninterest expense, amortization of intangibles, and legal and professional expenses, respectively. The decline in ‘Other’ noninterest expense was principally due to a reduction in tax credit partnership investment amortization of $1.9 million, coupled with a $0.8 million loss from termination of a cash flow hedge recognized in 2020 that did not recur in 2021. The decline in the amortization of intangibles reflected the accelerated amortization methodology utilized for certain finite-lived intangible assets. The decline in legal and professional expenses was primarily due to a reduction in loan legal expenses and non-recurring audit fees. Partially offsetting these identified declines in noninterest expense was an increase of $3.5 million in compensation and employee benefits that primarily stemmed from increased incentive and commission expense, normal annual increases, and increased share-based compensation expense.
Full-time equivalent employee levels were 731, 757, and 771 at December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Income Tax Expense
Our effective tax rate, or income taxes divided by income before taxes, was 22.3% for 2021 compared with 50.2% for 2020. Excluding non-deductible goodwill impairment, the effective income tax rate for the full year 2020 was 14.9%. The increase in income taxes is reflective of the increase in taxable income and a reduction in tax credits for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the prior year end. The Company’s effective tax rate is lower than its combined statutory tax rate due to benefits related to tax-exempt interest and bank-owned life insurance.
Financial Condition
Following is a table that represents the major categories of the Company’s balance sheet as of the dates indicated:
Debt Securities
The composition of debt securities available for sale was as follows:
Our investment securities portfolio is managed to provide a source of both liquidity and earnings. The size of the portfolio varies along with fluctuations in levels of deposits and loans. We consider many factors in determining the composition of our investment portfolio including tax-equivalent yield, credit quality, duration, expected cash flows and prepayment risk, as well as the liquidity position and the interest rate risk profile of the Company.
Debt securities available for sale are carried at fair value. As of December 31, 2021, the fair value of our debt securities available for sale was $2.3 billion, an increase of $0.6 billion from $1.7 billion at December 31, 2020, primarily driven by the excess liquidity generated by the increased levels of deposit balances that were deployed into investment security purchases. There were $19.0 million of gross unrealized gains and $31.0 million of gross unrealized losses in our debt securities available for sale portfolio for a net unrealized loss of $12.0 million at December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company’s mortgage-backed and collateralized mortgage obligations portfolios consisted of securities issued by government-sponsored enterprises (“GSEs”) such as the Federal National Mortgage Corporation, Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, Government National Mortgage Corporation and private entities. GSE issues are predominantly backed by one- to four-family mortgage loans and underwritten to the standards of and guaranteed by the issuer. The receipt of principal, at par, and interest on these securities is guaranteed by the respective GSE, and as such the Company believes exposure for credit-related losses from its mortgage-backed securities and collateralized mortgage obligations is reduced. Further, the Company owns several privately issued collateralized mortgage obligations. These securities are structured with high levels of credit enhancement and carry the highest ratings from the one or more of the major statistical credit rating agencies. The Company’s holdings of corporate bonds are primarily comprised of securities that are rated in one of the three highest rating categories by at least one of the major statistical credit rating agencies. In evaluating
corporate bonds, the company considers each issuers’ financial performance, liquidity, capital position and other company fundamentals in evaluating corporate securities. Similarly, the majority of the Company’s municipal holdings carry ratings in the top three ratings categories of one of the major statistical credit rating agencies. Relating to the Company’s holdings of non-rated municipal bonds, these issuers are predominantly located in the Company’s market area in the upper Midwest. In general, the small issue size of the non-rated bond offerings makes the cost obtaining a credit rating prohibitively expensive, which explains the lack of a credit rating.
Loans
The composition of our loan portfolio by type of loan was as follows:
Loans held for investment, net of unearned income, decreased $237.2 million, or 6.8%, to $3.25 billion as of December 31, 2021 from $3.48 billion at December 31, 2020, primarily as a result of PPP loan forgiveness. As of December 31, 2021, the amortized cost basis of PPP loans was $30.8 million, or 1.0% of loans held for investment, as compared to $259.3 million, or 7.4%, at December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, PPP loan balances in the agricultural and commercial and industrial loan portfolio segments were $0.1 million and $30.7 million, respectively, compared to $1.5 million and $257.8 million as of December 31, 2020. See Note 4. Loans Receivable and the Allowance for Credit Losses to our consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our loan portfolio.
Commitments under standby letters of credit, unused lines of credit and other conditionally approved credit lines totaled approximately $1.03 billion and $931.5 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively.
Our loan to deposit ratio decreased to 63.45% as of December 31, 2021 as compared to 76.58% as of December 31, 2020. The loan to deposit ratio fell when compared to the prior year-end primarily due to PPP loan forgiveness and deposit growth that was principally utilized to purchase debt securities.
The following table sets forth remaining maturities and rate types of loans at December 31, 2021:
Of the $1.33 billion of variable rate loans, approximately $751.2 million, or 56.5%, are subject to interest rate floors, with a weighted average floor rate of 3.75%.
Nonperforming Assets
The following table sets forth information concerning nonperforming assets at December 31 for each of the years indicated:
Total nonperforming assets were $31.9 million at December 31, 2021, compared to $45.0 million at December 31, 2020, a $13.1 million, or 29.1%, decrease. Nonperforming loans decreased from $42.7 million, or 1.23% of total loans, at December 31, 2020, to $31.5 million, or 0.97% of total loans, at December 31, 2021, while foreclosed assets, net, decreased $2.0 million, or 84.6%, during 2021. The nonperforming assets ratio fell 28 basis points from 0.81% at December 31, 2020, to 0.53% at December 31, 2021. These declines are representative of the improvements made in the overall asset quality in 2021. Foreclosed assets, net, are carried at the lower of cost or fair value less estimated costs of disposal. Additional discounts could be required to market and sell the properties, resulting in a write down through expense.
Loan Review and Classification Process for Agricultural Loans, Commercial and Industrial Loans, and Commercial Real Estate Loans:
The Bank maintains a loan review and classification process which involves multiple officers of the Bank and is designed to assess the general quality of credit underwriting and to promote early identification of potential problem loans. All commercial and agricultural loan officers are charged with the responsibility of risk rating all loans in their portfolios and updating the ratings, positively or negatively, on an ongoing basis as conditions warrant. Risk ratings are selected from an 8-point scale with ratings as follows: ratings 1- 4 Satisfactory (pass), rating 5 Watch (potential weakness), rating 6 Substandard (well-defined weakness), rating 7 Doubtful, and rating 8 Loss.
When a loan officer originates a new loan, based upon proper loan authorization, they document the credit file with an offering sheet summary, supplemental underwriting analysis, relevant financial information and collateral evaluations. This information is used in the determination of the initial loan risk rating. The Bank’s loan review department undertakes independent credit reviews of relationships based on either criteria established by loan policy, risk-focused sampling, or random sampling. Credit relationships with larger exposure may pose incrementally higher risks. As a result, the Bank's loan review department is required to review all credit relationships with total exposure of $5.0 million or more at least annually. In addition, the individual loan reviews consider such items as: loan type; nature, type and estimated value of collateral; borrower and/or guarantor estimated financial strength; most recently available financial information; related loans and total borrower exposure; and current and anticipated performance of the loan. The results of such reviews are presented to both executive management and the audit committee of the Company's board of directors.
Through the review of delinquency reports, updated financial statements or other relevant information, the lending officer and/or loan review personnel may determine that a loan relationship has weakened to the point that a watch (loan grade 5) or classified (loan grades 6 through 8) status is warranted. At least quarterly, the loan strategy committee will meet to discuss loan relationships with total related exposure of $1.0 million or above that are Watch rated credits, loan relationships with total related exposure of $500 thousand and above that are Substandard or worse rated credits, as well as loan relationships with total related exposure of $250 thousand and above that are on non-accrual. Credits below these designated thresholds are reviewed upon request. The lending officer is charged with preparing a loan strategy summary worksheet that outlines the background of
the credit problem, current repayment status of the loans, current collateral evaluation and a workout plan of action. This plan may include goals to improve the credit rating, assist the borrower in moving the loans to another institution and/or collateral liquidation. All such reports are presented to the loan strategy committee. Copies of the minutes of these committee meetings are presented to the board of directors of the Bank.
Depending upon the individual facts and circumstances and the result of the classified/watch review process, loan officers and/or loan review personnel may categorize a loan relationship as requiring an individual analysis. Once that determination has occurred, the credit analyst will complete an individually analyzed worksheet that contains an evaluation of the collateral (for collateral-dependent loans) based upon the estimated collateral value, adjusting for current market conditions and other local factors that may affect collateral value. Loan review personnel may also complete an independent individual analysis when deemed necessary. These judgmental evaluations may produce an initial specific allowance for placement in the Company’s allowance for credit losses calculation. An analysis for the underlying collateral value of each individually analyzed loan relationship is completed in the last month of the quarter. The individually analyzed worksheets are reviewed by the Credit Administration department prior to quarter-end. The board of directors of the Bank on a quarterly basis reviews the classified/watch reports including changes in credit grades of 5 or higher as well as all individually analyzed loans, the related allowances and foreclosed assets, net.
The review process also provides for the upgrade of loans that show improvement since the last review. All requests for an upgrade of a credit are approved by the proper authority based upon the aggregate credit exposure before the rating can be changed.
Loan Modifications
A TDR is a modification of the terms of a loan when a borrower is troubled (i.e., experiencing financial difficulties) and we grant a concession to the borrower that we would not otherwise consider. Prior to granting a concession we consider the borrower’s past loan payment performance, credit history, the individual circumstances surrounding the troubled borrower, and the troubled borrower’s plan to meet the terms of the loan in the future. Generally, short-term deferral of required payments is not considered a concession.
If a loan whose terms have been modified in a TDR has gone 90 days or more past due or is placed on nonaccrual status, it is included in the 90 days or more past due or nonaccrual totals. During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company modified 10 loans that were considered TDRs. See Note 1. Nature of Business and Significant Accounting Policies for additional information on factors considered related to concessions and Note 4. Loans Receivable and the Allowance for Credit Losses for details pertaining to loan modifications that were a result of COVID-19 that were not deemed to be TDRs.
Allowance for Credit Losses
The following table shows activity affecting the allowance for credit losses:
The following table sets forth the allowance for credit losses by loan portfolio segments compared to the percentage of loans to total loans by loan portfolio segment as of December 31 for each of the years indicated:
Actual Results: Our ACL as of December 31, 2021 was $48.7 million, which was 1.50% of loans held for investment, net of unearned income, as of that date. This compares with an ACL of $55.5 million as of December 31, 2020, which was 1.59% of loans held for investment, net of unearned income. The ACL at December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 does not include a reserve for the PPP loans as they are fully guaranteed by the SBA. When adjusted for the impact of PPP loans, the ratio of the ACL as a percentage of loans held for investment, net of unearned income, as of December 31, 2021 was 1.52%, a decrease of 20 basis points from the prior year’s ratio of 1.72% (a non-GAAP financial measure - see "Non-GAAP Presentations"). The decline in the ACL is reflective of overall improvements in forecasted economic conditions and improvement of the credit risk profile. The liability for off-balance sheet credit exposures totaled $4.0 million as of December 31, 2021 and $4.1 million as of December 31, 2020 and is included in 'Other liabilities' on the balance sheet.
The Company recorded a credit loss benefit related to loans of $7.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to credit loss expense of $27.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Gross charge-offs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $2.3 million, while there were $2.8 million in recoveries of previously charged-off loans. The ratio of net loan charge offs to average loans for the year ended December 31, 2021 declined to (0.01)%, a net recovery, compared to 0.15% for the year ended December 31, 2020 and was the lowest level experienced over the last five years.
Economic Forecast: At December 31, 2021, the economic forecast used by the Company showed the following: (1) Midwest unemployment - decreases over the next three forecasted quarters, followed by an increase in the fourth forecasted quarter; (2) Year-to-year change in national retail sales - increases over the next four forecasted quarters; (3) Year-to-year change in CRE Index - increases over the next four forecasted quarters; (4) Year-to-year change in U.S. GDP - increases over the next four forecasted quarters; (5) Year-to-year change in National Home Price Index - increases over the next four forecasted quarters; and (6) Rental Vacancy - increases over the next four forecasted quarters. The economic forecast loss driver data exhibited overall improvements in forecasted economic conditions compared to December 31, 2020.
Loan Policy: We review all nonaccrual loans greater than $250,000 individually on a quarterly basis to estimate the appropriate allowance due to collateral deficiency. Reasonably expected TDRs and executed non-performing TDRs greater than $250,000 are evaluated individually to determine the required ACL. TDRs performing in accordance with their modified contractual terms for a reasonable period of time may be included in the Company’s existing pools based on the underlying risk characteristics of the loan to measure the ACL. We review loans 90 days or more past due that are still accruing interest no less than quarterly to determine if the asset is both well secured and in the process of collection. If not, such loans are placed on non-accrual status.
Based on the inherent risk in the loan portfolio, management believed that as of December 31, 2021, the ACL was adequate; however, there is no assurance that loan credit losses will not exceed the ACL. In addition, growth in the loan portfolio or general economic deterioration may require the recognition of additional credit loss expense in future periods. See Note 4. Loans Receivable and the Allowance for Credit Losses for additional information related to the allowance for credit losses.
Deposits
The composition of deposits was as follows:
Deposits increased $567.5 million from December 31, 2020, or 12.5%, reflecting the combination of fiscal stimulus and the deposit of PPP loan proceeds, which were generally deposited into customer accounts at the Bank. Approximately 81.9% of our total deposits were considered “core” deposits as of December 31, 2021, compared to 81.6% at December 31, 2020. We consider core deposits to be the total of all deposits other than certificates of deposit and non-reciprocal brokered money market deposits.
The following table shows the composition and average balance of deposits for the indicated years:
Time deposits of $250,000 and over, which represents the U.S. time deposits in excess of the FDIC insurance limit and time deposits that are otherwise uninsured, had the following maturities at December 31, 2021:
Short-Term Borrowings and Long-Term Debt
The following table sets forth the composition of short-term borrowings and long-term debt for the periods presented.
See Note 11. Short-Term Borrowings and Note 12. Long-Term Debt to our consolidated financial statements for additional information related to short-term borrowings and long-term debt.
Off-Balance-Sheet Transactions
During the normal course of business, we are a party to financial instruments with off-balance-sheet risk in order to meet the financing needs of our customers. These financial instruments include commitments to extend credit, commitments to sell loans, and standby letters of credit. We follow the same credit policy (including requiring collateral, if deemed appropriate) to make such commitments as is followed for those loans that are recorded in our financial statements.
Our exposure to credit losses in the event of nonperformance is represented by the contractual amount of the commitments. Management does not expect any significant losses as a result of these commitments, and also expects to have sufficient liquidity available to cover these off-balance-sheet instruments. Off-balance-sheet transactions are more fully discussed in Note 18. Commitments and Contingencies to our consolidated financial statements.
The following table summarizes the Bank’s commitments by expiration period, as of December 31, 2021:
Capital Resources
Contractual Obligations
We are a party to many contractual financial obligations, including repayments of deposits and borrowings and payments for noncancellable operating lease and finance lease obligations. The table below summarizes certain future financial obligations of the Company due by period, as of December 31, 2021:
Shareholders’ Equity & Capital Adequacy
The following table summarizes certain capital ratios and per share amounts of the Company for the periods presented:
Shareholders’ Equity: Total shareholders’ equity was $527.5 million as of December 31, 2021, compared to $515.3 million as of December 31, 2020, an increase of $12.2 million, or 2.37%, primarily as a result of an increase in retained earnings, partially offset by accumulated other comprehensive loss and an increase in treasury stock.
Capital Adequacy: The Federal Reserve uses capital adequacy guidelines in its examination and regulation of bank holding companies and their subsidiary banks. Risk-based capital ratios are established by allocating assets and certain off-balance-sheet commitments into four risk-weighted categories. These balances are then multiplied by the factor appropriate for that risk-weighted category. Pursuant to the Basel III Rules, the Company and the Bank, respectively, are subject to regulatory capital adequacy requirements promulgated by the Federal Reserve and the FDIC. Failure by the Company or the Bank to meet minimum capital requirements could result in certain mandatory and discretionary actions by our regulators that could have a material adverse effect on our consolidated financial statements. Under the capital requirements and the regulatory framework for prompt corrective action, the Company and the Bank must meet specific capital guidelines that involve quantitative measures of the Company’s and the Bank’s assets, liabilities and certain off-balance-sheet items as calculated under regulatory accounting practices. The Company’s and the Bank’s capital amounts and classifications are also subject to qualitative judgments by regulators about components, risk weightings and other factors. Quantitative measures established by regulation to ensure capital adequacy require the Company and the Bank to maintain minimum amounts and ratios of total risk-based capital, Tier 1 capital (as defined in the regulations) and Common Equity Tier 1 Capital (as defined in the regulations) to risk-weighted assets (as defined in the regulations), and a leverage ratio consisting of Tier 1 capital (as defined in the regulations) to average assets (as defined in the regulations). As of December 31, 2021, the Company and the Bank exceeded federal regulatory minimum capital requirements to be classified as well-capitalized (including the capital conservation buffer). See Note 17. Regulatory Capital Requirements and Restrictions on Subsidiary Cash to our consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our regulatory capital ratios.
In order to be a “well-capitalized” depository institution, the Company and the Bank must maintain a Common Equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 6.5% or more; a Tier 1 capital ratio of 8% or more; a total capital ratio of 10% or more; and a leverage ratio of 5% or more. A capital conservation buffer, comprised of 2.5% of Common Equity Tier 1 Capital, is also established above the regulatory minimum capital requirements.
Stock Compensation
On April 20, 2017, the Company’s shareholders approved the MidWestOne Financial Group, Inc. 2017 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2017 Plan”). The 2017 Plan is the successor to the MidWestOne Financial Group, Inc. 2008 Equity Incentive Plan (the “2008 Plan”), which expired on November 20, 2017.
Restricted stock units were granted to certain officers and directors of the Company on February 15, 2021, May 15, 2021, and August 15, 2021 in the amounts of 65,168, 11,231, and 7,667, respectively. Additionally, during the year ended 2021, 54,233 whole restricted stock units were vested in connection with the vesting of previously awarded grants of restricted stock units, of which 4,326 shares were surrendered by grantees to satisfy tax requirements, and 9,544 unvested restricted stock units were forfeited. Additionally, officers and directors received cash in lieu of 33 fractional restricted stock units vested during 2021.
See Note 15. Stock Compensation Plans to our consolidated financial statements for additional information related to our stock compensation program.
Liquidity
Liquidity Management
Liquidity management involves meeting the cash flow requirements of depositors and borrowers. We conduct liquidity management on both a daily and long-term basis, and adjust our investments in liquid assets based on expected loan demand, projected loan maturities and payments, expected deposit flows, yields available on interest-bearing deposits, and the objectives of our asset/liability management program. Excess liquidity is invested generally in short-term U.S. government and agency securities, short- and medium-term state and political subdivision securities, and other investment securities. Our most liquid assets are cash and due from banks, interest-bearing bank deposits, and federal funds sold. The balances of these assets are dependent on our operating, investing, and financing activities during any given period.
Generally, the government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the form of fiscal stimulus payments to individuals, coupled with economic uncertainty stemming from the pandemic, has resulted in increased liquidity throughout 2020 and into 2021.
Cash and cash equivalents are summarized in the table below:
Generally, our principal sources of funds are deposits, advances from the FHLB, principal repayments on loans, proceeds from the sale of loans, proceeds from the maturity and sale of investment securities, our federal funds lines, and funds provided by operations. While scheduled loan amortization and maturing interest-bearing deposits are relatively predictable sources of funds, deposit flows and loan prepayments are greatly influenced by economic conditions, the general level of interest rates, and competition. We utilized particular sources of funds based on comparative costs and availability. The Bank maintains unsecured lines of credit with several correspondent banks and secured lines with the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and the FHLB that would allow us to borrow funds on a short-term basis, if necessary. We also hold debt securities classified as available for sale that could be sold to meet liquidity needs if necessary.
Net cash provided by operations was another major source of liquidity. The net cash provided by operating activities was $111.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $9.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, we had outstanding commitments to extend credit to borrowers of $1.01 billion, standby letters of credit of $16.3 million, and commitments to sell loans of $12.9 million. Certificates of deposit maturing in one year or less totaled $687.9 million as of December 31, 2021. We believe that a significant portion of these deposits will remain with us upon maturity.
Inflation
The effects of price changes and inflation can vary substantially for most financial institutions. While management believes that inflation affects the growth of total assets, it is difficult to assess its overall impact on the Company. The price of one or more of the components of the Consumer Price Index may fluctuate considerably and thereby influence the overall Consumer Price Index without having a corresponding effect on interest rates or upon the cost of those goods and services normally purchased by us. In years of high inflation and high interest rates, intermediate and long-term interest rates tend to increase, thereby adversely impacting the market values of investment securities, mortgage loans and other long-term fixed rate loans held by financial institutions. In addition, higher short-term interest rates caused by inflation tend to increase financial institutions’ cost of funds. In other years, the reverse situation may occur.
Non-GAAP Presentations
Certain ratios and amounts not in conformity with GAAP are provided to evaluate and measure the Company’s operating performance and financial condition, including return on average tangible equity, tangible common equity, tangible book value per share, tangible common equity ratio, net interest margin (tax equivalent), core net interest margin, efficiency ratio, and the adjusted allowance for credit losses ratio. Management believes these ratios and amounts provide investors with useful information regarding the Company’s profitability, financial condition and capital adequacy, consistent with how management evaluates the Company’s financial performance. The following tables provide a reconciliation of each non-GAAP measure to the most comparable GAAP equivalent.