ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on October 2, 2020, and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We have two wholly owned subsidiaries, which were formed on December 9, 2021, Merger Sub I and Merger Sub II.
We are not limited to a particular industry or geographic region for purposes of completing a Business Combination. We are an early stage and emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with early stage and emerging growth companies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had not commenced any operations. All activity from our formation through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation and our Initial Public Offering, and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination. We will not generate any operating revenues until after the completion of its initial Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the marketable securities held in the trust account.
We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement units, the proceeds of the sale of our securities in connection with our initial Business Combination (pursuant to subscription agreements, forward purchase contracts or backstop agreements, among others, that we may enter into), our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a Business Combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 20, 2021 we entered into the Business Combination Agreement by and among Merger Sub I, Merger Sub II, and Mondee. Pursuant to the terms and subject to the conditions of the Business Combination Agreement, ITHAX will become a Delaware corporation (the “Domestication”) and the parties will enter into a business combination transaction (together with the Domestication, the “Proposed Business Combination”) by which (i) Merger Sub I will merge with and into Mondee, with Mondee surviving the First Merger, and (ii) immediately following the First Merger, Mondee will merge with and into Merger Sub II, with Merger Sub II surviving the Second Merger.
Concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, the PIPE Investors entered into the PIPE Subscription Agreements pursuant to which the PIPE Investors have committed to purchase in a private placement 5,000,000 PIPE Shares at a purchase price of $10.00 per share and an aggregate purchase price of $50,000,000. The purchase of the PIPE Shares is conditioned upon, among other things, the consummation of the Transactions and will be consummated concurrently with the Closing.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities since inception have been organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, and subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination, at the earliest. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in a trust account, and recognize changes in the fair value of warrant liabilities as other income (expense). We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $3,311,639 which consisted of $833,758 of formation and operational costs, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $97,231, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,720,125, transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $675,351, and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $3,392.
For the period from October 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had net loss of $4,891 which consisted of formation and operational costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On February 1, 2021, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 24,150,000 public units, including 3,150,000 public units issued pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. Each public unit consists of one public share and one-half of one public warrant. The public units were sold at $10.00 per public unit, generating gross proceeds of $241,500,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 675,000 private placement units, comprised of one private placement share and one-half of one redeemable private placement warrant, at a price of $10.00 per private placement unit in a private placement to the Sponsor and Cantor, generating gross proceeds of $6,750,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the private placement units, a total of $241,500,000 was placed in the trust account. We incurred $14,681,445 in costs related to the Initial Public Offering, including $5,250,000 of underwriting fees, $9,082,500 of deferred underwriting fees and $348,945 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $678,926. Net income of $3,311,639 was affected by change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $4,720,125, transaction costs allocated to warrant liabilities of $675,351, interest earned on marketable securities held in the trust account of $97,231, and an unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the trust account of $3,392. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $154,832 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from October 2, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $4,891 which consisted of net loss.
As of December 31, 2021, we had marketable securities held in the trust account of $241,600,623 consisting of U.S. Treasury Bills with a maturity of 185 days or less. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay taxes, if any. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less income taxes payable), to complete our Business Combination. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $525,204. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit, at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the private placement units. Through the date of this filing, we have not made any borrowings under this arrangement.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business for one year from this filing. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing or draw on the Working Capital Loans (as defined in Note 5 in the consolidated financial statements) either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of a Business Combination. If
we are unable to complete the Business Combination because it does not have sufficient funds available, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following the Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet its obligations.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the date for mandatory liquidation and dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern through February 1, 2023, (the scheduled liquidation date of the Company if it does not complete a Business Combination prior to such date). Management’s plan to alleviate the substantial doubt is to complete a business combination prior to February 1, 2023. The Company entered into a definitive Business Combination Agreement on December 20, 2021 (as defined in Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements) and is in the process of completing this Business Combination. Management has assessed the likelihood of whether it will be able to carry out its plan to complete this business combination prior to February 1, 2023. Management believes, as it is contractual, the business combination will occur prior to the termination date set forth in the Business Combination Agreement of July 3, 2022, which is before the date of the mandatory liquidation date. As such, based on these factors and other considerations, Management believes that its plan alleviates the substantial doubt raised by the date for mandatory liquidation described above.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $10,000 for office space, secretarial and administrative support services. We began incurring these fees on January 27, 2021 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and our liquidation.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of (i) 3.5% of the gross proceeds of the initial 21,000,000 public units sold in the Initial Public Offering, or $7,350,000, and (ii) 6% of the gross proceeds from the public units sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $1,732,500. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the trust account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Vendor Agreements
On October 4, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with Deutsche Bank Securities Inc. for capital market advisement services and investment banking services related to the pending Business Combination. Specifically, the agreement relates to assisting in raising the funds as part of the PIPE financing. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee equal to 7% of the gross proceeds of securities sold in the PIPE placement and capped at $3,500,000.
On October 4, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with AXIA Capital Markets LLC for investment banking services related to the pending Business Combination. Specifically, the agreement relates to assisting in raising the funds as part of the PIPE financing. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee equal to $500,000 plus 3.5% of the gross proceeds of securities sold in the PIPE placement and capped at $1,500,000.
On December 15, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement with Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. for capital market advisement services related to the Business Combination Agreement. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee in the amount of $1,000,000 upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
On January 24, 2022, the Company entered into an agreement with a D.A. Davidson & Co. for advisory services related to the pending Business Combination Agreement. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee in the amount of $500,000 upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
On February 1, 2022, the Company entered into an agreement with a Northland Securities, Inc. for advisory services related to the pending Business Combination Agreement. The agreement calls for the vendor to receive a contingent fee in the amount of $625,000 upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
As of December 31, 2021 the Company entered into an agreement with a vendor for an insurance policy, which the vendor will only receive insurance run-off premium in the amount of approximately $1,100,000 upon the consummation of the Business Combination.
Through December 31, 2021, the Company incurred legal fees of approximately $1,100,000. These fees will only become due and payable upon the consummation of an initial Business Combination.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The private placement warrants and the public warrants, for periods where no observable traded price was available, are valued using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, and the Monte Carlo Model, respectively. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the public warrants from the public units, on March 22, 2021, the public warrant quoted market price on the Nasdaq Stock Market LLC was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”.Net income (loss) per ordinary share is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period. Subsequent measurement of the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from income (loss) per ordinary share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the units issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) the private placement, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. The outstanding warrants are exercisable to purchase 12,412,500 Class A ordinary shares in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021, the Company did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of the Company, except for the 787,500 founder shares in December 31, 2021 which are no longer forfeitable and thus included for dilutive purposes.