Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
You should read the following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes and other financial information included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion contains forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, such as statements of our plans, objectives, expectations, intentions and belief. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those set forth in the section titled “Risk Factors” under Part II, Item 1A below. These forward-looking statements may include, but are not limited to, statements regarding our future results of operations and financial position, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, business strategy, market size, potential growth opportunities, preclinical and clinical development activities, efficacy and safety profile of our product candidates, use of net proceeds from our offerings, our ability to maintain and recognize the benefits of certain designations received by product candidates, the timing and results of preclinical studies and clinical trials, commercial collaborations with third parties and the receipt and timing of potential regulatory designations, approvals and commercialization of product candidates. The words “believe,” “may,” “will,” “potentially,” “estimate,” “continue,” “anticipate,” “predict,” “target,” “intend,” “could,” “would,” “should,” “project,” “plan,” “expect,” and similar expressions that convey uncertainty of future events or outcomes are intended to identify forward-looking statements, although not all forward-looking statements contain these identifying words.
These statements are based upon information available to us as of the date of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, and while we believe such information forms a reasonable basis for such statements, such information may be limited or incomplete, and our statements should not be read to indicate that we have conducted an exhaustive inquiry into, or review of, all potentially available relevant information. These statements are inherently uncertain, and investors are cautioned not to unduly rely upon these statements.
Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company applying our proprietary insights into integrins to discover and develop a pipeline of potentially first-in-class oral small molecule integrin therapeutics. Integrins are a target class with multiple approved injectable blockbuster drugs for the treatment of serious chronic diseases, including autoimmune, cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, fibrosis and cancer. To date, no oral small molecule integrin therapies have been approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, or FDA. Despite this, we believe our unique platform can unlock the potential to reliably generate high-quality oral molecules against specific integrin targets. The Morphic integrin technology platform, or MInT Platform, was created leveraging our unique understanding of integrin structure and function to develop novel product candidates designed to achieve the potency, high selectivity, and pharmaceutical properties required for oral administration. We are advancing our pipeline, including our lead product candidate, MORF-057, an α4β7-specific integrin inhibitor affecting inflammation, into clinical development for the treatment of inflammatory bowel disease, or IBD. We submitted an investigational new drug application, or IND, for MORF-057 in July 2020, and the FDA permitted the study submitted under the IND to proceed in August 2020. In September 2020, we initiated a Phase 1 clinical trial of MORF-057 in healthy volunteers comprised of single-ascending dose, or SAD, food effect, and multiple-ascending dose, or MAD, cohorts to establish our clinical program and select doses for our Phase 2 program in IBD with an initial focus on ulcerative colitis, or UC.
The MORF-057 Phase 1 study included single ascending dose (SAD), multiple ascending dose (MAD), and food effect (FE) cohorts evaluating MORF-057 safety, PK, and PD. Healthy subjects were randomized 3:1 to receive a single dose of MORF-057 at 25, 50, 100, 150 and 400 mg or matching placebo in the SAD cohorts; or twice daily (BID) doses of 25, 50 and 100 mg MORF-057 or matching placebo for a total of 14 days in the MAD cohorts. A total of 67 eligible healthy subjects were enrolled into the studies, with 36 in the SAD, nine in the FE and 22 in the MAD cohorts. 66 subjects completed study treatment and one from the 50 mg BID MAD cohort withdrew consent for personal reasons.
MORF-057 was well tolerated in all cohorts and no safety signals were identified. MORF-057 demonstrated a favorable PK profile, where target engagement was confirmed, and a clear PK and PD relationship was established. MORF-057 was rapidly absorbed and systemic exposure was confirmed to increase approximately dose proportionally. A slight reduction in exposure without effect on trough concentrations was observed upon administration with a high fat meal in the food effect study. The results suggest food intake has no impact on trough MORF-057 levels and that MORF-057 can be administered without regard to food in planned studies in patients.
α4β7 receptor occupancy increased with dose and study day, achieving saturation (>99% RO) in individual patients from all cohorts above 25 mg by day 14. In the 100 mg BID cohort, MORF-057 saturated the α4β7 receptor (mean RO >99%). Dose-and time-dependent changes in biomarkers including specific α4β7 high expressing immune cell populations were observed, adding to evidence of proof of biology for MORF-057. These changes were consistent with those reported with other integrin inhibitors including the antibody drug vedolizumab which is approved for the treatment of IBD.
In August 2020, AbbVie exercised the option and now controls and is responsible for the development and commercialization of our αvβ6-specific integrin inhibitor program. In connection with the option exercise, AbbVie made a one-time $20.0 million
payment to us. Under this license, AbbVie controls and is responsible for the development and commercialization of this program. AbbVie has informed us that it does not intend to advance any of our selective oral αvβ6-specific integrin inhibitors due to a suspected on-target/ αvβ6-mediated safety signal that has been observed in pre-clinical testing. Details about these observations are planned to be released in an upcoming scientific publication. As a result, we do not expect to receive additional payments for this program under the AbbVie Agreement. We continue to advance additional discovery programs with AbbVie as a part of this collaboration.
In February 2019, we entered into an agreement with Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc., or Janssen, to develop novel integrin therapeutics, or the Janssen Agreement. In February 2021 Janssen paid us $5.0 million to commence work on a third research program. We are entitled to additional payments upon the achievement of certain milestones and royalties in accordance with the Janssen Agreement. In December 2021, Janssen informed us that they have decided not to exercise the options on the first two integrin targets. We have focused efforts on the third integrin research program which includes the potential development of integrin antibody activators. The first two integrin targets are being returned to us due to a lack of target validation in the specific disease of Janssen's interest.
Beyond these targets, we are using our MInT Platform to advance a broad pipeline of preclinical programs across a variety of additional therapeutic areas, all of which aim to harness the potential of inhibition or activation of an integrin receptor. Additional wholly-owned programs have advanced near to or into lead optimization phase of discovery. We presented positive preclinical data from our αvβ8 program at the American Association for Cancer Research Annual Meeting demonstrating anti-tumor activity in checkpoint refractory cancer models and continue our focus on advancing our avb8 program in oncology.
In March 2021, we announced an upsized underwritten public offering of 3,500,000 shares of our common stock at a price to the public of $70.00 per share, resulting in net proceeds of approximately $230.0 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and other offering expenses paid by us.
In July 2020, we entered into an Open Market Sale Agreement, or the Original Agreement, with Jefferies LLC, or Jefferies, with respect to an at-the-market offering program, or the Previous ATM, under which we may offer and sell, from time to time at our sole discretion, shares of our common stock, having an aggregate offering price of up to $75,000,000, referred to as Placement Shares, through Jefferies as its sales agent. In August 2021, we entered into Amended No. 1 to the Original Agreement with Jefferies with respect to an at-the-market offering program, or the New ATM, increasing the amount of Placement Shares, under the Original Agreement, which we may offer and sell, from time to time at its sole discretion, through Jefferies as is sales agent, up to an aggregate offering price of up to $150,000,000. We refer to the Previous ATM and the New ATM, collectively, as the ATM. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we issued and sold 556,983 shares for net proceeds of $25.7 million after deducting offering commissions and expenses. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $137.8 million of common stock remaining available for sale under the ATM. We may not sell any Placement Shares under the Previous ATM.
Since inception, our operations have focused on organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, establishing our intellectual property portfolio, and performing research to discover and develop oral small-molecule integrin therapeutics. Revenue generation activities to date have been limited to payments received from our collaboration agreements with AbbVie and Janssen, discussed further in Note 12 of the accompanying consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from product sales. From inception through December 31, 2021, we raised an aggregate of approximately $698.7 million of gross proceeds primarily through the issuance of equity, including our convertible preferred equity securities, our IPO, our underwritten public offering in March 2021, and sales of shares of our common stock pursuant to the ATM, along with payments received under our collaboration agreements.
Since inception, we have incurred significant operating losses. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $238.1 million. We expect to continue to incur significant and increasing expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future, as we advance our current and future product candidates through preclinical and clinical development, seek regulatory approval for them, maintain and expand our intellectual property portfolio, hire additional research and development and business personnel, and operate as a public company.
We will not generate revenue from product sales unless and until we successfully complete clinical development and obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for our product candidates and do not enter into a third-party commercialization partnership, we expect to incur significant expenses related to developing our commercialization capability to support product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution activities.
As a result, we will need substantial additional funding to support our continuing operations and pursue our growth strategy. Until we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity offerings and debt financings or other sources, such as additional collaboration agreements. We may be unable to raise additional funds or enter into such other agreements or arrangements when needed on
acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital or enter into such agreements as, and when, needed, could have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities of $408.1 million. We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements until the end of 2024.
Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
The current COVID-19 pandemic continues to present a substantial public health and economic challenge around the world and is affecting our employees, patients, communities and business operations, as well as the U.S. economy and financial markets. The extent of the ongoing impact of the novel strain of coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, or COVID-19, on our operational and financial performance will depend on certain developments, including the duration and spread of the outbreak, including the rise of variants that may be less responsive to existing vaccines, impact on our clinical and preclinical studies, employee or industry events, and effect on our suppliers and manufacturers, all of which are uncertain and cannot be predicted. Although we currently have not experienced much of an impact on our business, excluding minor changes to our development timelines, if there are closures or other restrictions in places we or our vendors work or transport supply that may result in constrained supply of our product candidates or delays in our clinical and preclinical studies or planned clinical trials, our business, results of operations and overall financial performance in future periods could be materially adversely impacted. In addition, we have experienced impacts from changes in how we and companies worldwide conduct business due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to restrictions on travel and in-person meetings, delays in future site activations and future enrollment of clinical trials, prioritization of hospital resources toward the COVID-19 pandemic effort, and delays in review by the FDA and comparable foreign regulatory agencies. As of the filing date of this Form 10-K, the extent to which COVID-19 may impact our financial condition, results of operations or guidance is uncertain. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will not be fully reflected in our results of operations and overall financial performance until future periods. See “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion of the possible impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
Financial Operations Overview
Collaboration Revenue
We do not have any products approved for sale, and as a result, we have not generated any revenue from product sales and do not expect to generate any revenue from the sale of products in the foreseeable future.
To date, all of our collaboration revenue has been derived from our agreements with AbbVie and Janssen. We expect that our revenue, until we have a marketed product, will be derived primarily from payments under our collaboration and option agreements with AbbVie and Janssen or other collaboration and license agreements that we may enter into in the future, if any.
Collaboration Revenue - AbbVie
In October 2018, we entered into a collaboration with AbbVie, an investor that held approximately 5% of our common stock at the time of the agreement, designed to advance a number of our oral integrin therapeutics for fibrosis-related indications. Under the terms of the AbbVie Agreement, AbbVie paid us an upfront payment of $100.0 million for research and development activities, and we provided to AbbVie exclusive license options on product candidates directed at multiple targets. In August 2020, AbbVie exercised its option to license the selective αvβ6-specific integrin inhibitors program and paid us a one-time payment of $20.0 million.
For each lead compound against a target under the AbbVie Agreement, we conduct research and development activities through the completion of IND-enabling studies, at which point AbbVie may pay a license fee of $20.0 million, on a target-by-target basis, to exercise its exclusive license option and assume responsibility for global development and commercialization. We are also eligible for clinical and commercial milestone payments and tiered royalties from high single digit to low teens on worldwide net sales for each licensed product. AbbVie has informed us that it does not intend to advance any of our selective oral αvβ6-specific integrin inhibitors due to a suspected on-target/ αvβ6-mediated safety signal that has been observed in pre-clinical testing. Details about these observations are planned to be released in an upcoming scientific publication. As a result, we do not expect to receive additional payments for this program under the AbbVie Agreement. In addition, for certain compounds for which we have completed IND-enabling studies and which meet certain advancement criteria for a liver indication, we have the option to commit to share development costs in exchange for an increased fixed royalty rate. We may exercise this option following completion of the first Phase 2b clinical trial for the relevant product.
Collaboration Revenue - Janssen
In February 2019, we entered into the Janssen Agreement to discover and develop novel integrin therapeutics for patients with conditions not adequately addressed by current therapies. The Janssen Agreement focuses on three integrin targets, each target the subject of a research program, with the ability to substitute up to two integrin targets not explored by us. Upon completing IND-enabling studies, on a research program-by-research program basis, Janssen may exercise an exclusive option to obtain an exclusive license with respect to the target that is the subject of the research program, including all licensed compounds that are the subject of the applicable research program, and then Janssen will be responsible for global clinical development and commercialization. In consideration of the rights granted, during 2019, Janssen paid us an upfront fee of $10.0 million for each of the first two research programs, and in December 2020 we agreed with Janssen to commence work on the third research program, and in February 2021 Janssen paid us $5.0 million for the third research program commencement fee. Janssen also funds research activities at agreed upon rates, pursuant to the terms of the agreement, and we are also eligible to receive additional milestone and royalty payments. In December 2021, Janssen informed us that they have decided not to exercise the options on the first two integrin targets which resulted in a reduction in scope of our responsibilities under the Janssen Agreement.
Expenses
Research and Development
Research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for our research and development activities, including our product candidate discovery efforts and preclinical studies under our research programs, which include:
▪employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and equity-based compensation expense for our research and development personnel;
▪costs of funding research performed by third parties that conduct research and development and preclinical activities on our behalf;
▪costs of manufacturing clinical supply related to any of our current or future product candidates;
▪expenses incurred under agreements with contract research organizations and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials;
▪costs of conducting preclinical studies of any of our current or future product candidates;
▪consulting and professional fees related to research and development activities, including equity-based compensation to non-employees;
▪costs of purchasing laboratory supplies and non-capital equipment used in our preclinical studies;
▪costs related to compliance with clinical regulatory requirements;
▪facility costs and other allocated expenses, which include expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance, depreciation and other supplies; and
▪fees for maintaining licenses and other amounts due under our third-party licensing agreements.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs for certain activities are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as information provided to us by our vendors and analyzing the progress of our preclinical studies or other services performed. Significant judgment and estimates are made in determining the accrued expense balances at the end of any reporting period. Non-refundable advance payments for research and development goods or services to be received in the future from third parties are capitalized and expensed as the related goods are delivered or the services are performed.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As such, at this time, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing, and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete our future product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, material net cash inflows will commence from the sale of our product candidates, if approved. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing product candidates, including the uncertainty of:
▪the scope, rate of progress, and expenses of our ongoing research activities as well as any additional preclinical studies and clinical trials and other research and development activities;
▪establishing an appropriate safety profile;
▪successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
▪whether our product candidates show safety and efficacy in our clinical trials;
▪receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities, if any;
▪establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
▪obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
▪commercializing the product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others; and
▪continued acceptable safety profile of the products following any regulatory approval.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development of our current and future product candidates would significantly change the costs and timing associated with the development of those product candidates.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials. We expect research and development costs to increase significantly for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our product candidates. However, we do not believe that it is possible at this time to accurately project total program-specific expenses through commercialization. There are numerous factors associated with the successful commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at this time based on our stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control will impact our clinical development programs and plans.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and equity-based compensation expenses for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal, and human resources functions. Other significant general and administrative expenses include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as our business expands to support expected growth in research and development activities, including our future clinical programs. These increases will likely include increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel and fees to outside consultants, among other expenses. We also incur expenses associated with being a public company, including costs for audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services related to compliance with the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, (“SEC”), and listing standards applicable to companies listed on Nasdaq, director and officer compensation and insurance premiums, and investor relations costs. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our product candidates and do not enter into a third-party commercialization collaboration, we expect to incur significant general and administrative expenses related to supporting product sales, marketing and distribution activities.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income, net consists primarily of interest income earned on our cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities.
Benefit from (Provision for) Income Tax Expense
We record a provision or benefit for income taxes on pre-tax income or loss based on our effective tax rate for the year. For additional details about the current year tax provision, refer to the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Collaboration Revenue
The decrease in collaboration revenue of $25.2 million is primarily attributable to a decrease in activity under the AbbVie Agreement. In the prior year period, AbbVie exercised its option for the selective αvβ6 -specific integrin inhibitors program resulting in the payment of a $20.0 million option exercise payment from AbbVie, which was recognized during the year ended December 31, 2020. Further, upon the AbbVie option exercise, we revised our estimates to complete the remaining performance obligations under the αvβ6 -specific integrin inhibitors program, which resulted in an increase in revenue during the prior year period. Offsetting the decrease in collaboration revenue from the prior year, based on recent scientific results, we decreased our estimates to complete the remaining performance obligations under the AbbVie Agreement based on changes in expected effort and the timing of the research services, which resulted in us recognizing $6.2 million in revenue in Q4 2021. The revenue for our collaborations fluctuates based on the timing and magnitude of costs incurred under the collaboration programs, as well as changes to our estimates to complete the remaining performance obligations. The contract modification for the Janssen Agreement did not have a material effect on the collaboration revenue.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense increased by $14.2 million, or 19% from $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $87.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external clinical and preclinical contract research organization (“CRO”) costs, which we track on a program-by-program basis related to a clinical product candidate, once the candidate has been identified. Our internal research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs, depreciation, and other indirect costs. The following table summarizes our research and development expense for years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The changes in research and development expense were primarily attributable to the following:
•The $6.9 million increase in external costs from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily related to manufacturing costs and other development activities to support Phase 2 clinical studies for MORF-057, as well as other external research costs to support our early development candidates, including αvβ8. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in expenditures associated with the αvβ6 program as a result of the option exercise by AbbVie in August 2020 and decreases in activity regarding other programs with AbbVie and Janssen.
▪The $7.3 million increase in internal costs from the year ended December 31, 2020 to the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in headcount to support the ongoing clinical activity for MORF-057 as well as our early-stage pipeline candidates.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense increased by $9.3 million, or 50%, from $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $27.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a $6.4 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expense, a $1.2 million increase in personnel costs, a $0.8 million increase in consulting fees, a $0.6 million increase in professional fees primarily due to increases in legal and accounting expenses related to public company administrative costs and a $0.4 million increase in D&O insurance premiums.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income decreased by $1.4 million due to a decrease in yields earned on marketable securities during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Benefit from Income Tax
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act included several income tax changes, including allowing for the carryback of net operating losses, expanding interest deductibility, and allowing for accelerated expensing of certain capital improvements. Based on the anticipated recovery of the federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period, we recognized an income tax benefit of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Comparison of the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue increased to $44.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 from $17.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2019. The overall increase in revenue is primarily attributable to $25.3 million increase in revenue recognized under our collaboration with AbbVie, which included $20.0 million from the option exercise payment received from AbbVie during the year, discussed further in Note 12 in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. Revenue we recognize from satisfaction of performance obligations under the AbbVie agreement is impacted by our estimates of the remaining costs to complete our obligations as well as the extent of activities conducted in each period, which require significant judgment, and may cause fluctuation in the revenue recognized from period to period. Additionally, revenue recognized from our collaboration with Janssen increased $2.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020 due to higher FTE cost reimbursements in 2020 as the collaboration agreement with Janssen was executed in February 2019.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expense increased by $19.9 million, or 37%, from $53.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $73.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external clinical and pre-clinical contract research organization (CRO) costs, which we track on a program-by-program basis related to a clinical product candidate that has been identified. Our internal research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs, depreciation, and other indirect costs. The following table summarizes our research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019:
The increase in research and development expense was primarily attributable to the following:
•The $7.6 million increase in external costs resulted primarily from the increase in preclinical development, manufacturing costs, and clinical trials costs associated with MORF-057, external research costs associated with our research programs targeting αvβ8 integrins and other earl development candidates, partially offset by a decrease in expenditures on αvβ6 and other AbbVie programs, primarily due to the August 2020 AbbVie option exercise for our αvβ6-specific integrin inhibitor program.
•The $12.3 million increase in internal costs was primarily attributable to a $6.5 million increase in employee compensation and benefits costs related to increased headcount to support increased activities in our research and development function, a $4.0 million increase in stock-based compensation expenses, $1.5 million increase in facility and other expenses.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expense increased by $8.3 million, or 81%, from $10.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to a $3.6 million increase in non-cash stock-based compensation expenses, an increase of $2.4 million in employee compensation and benefits due to increased headcount, an increase of $1.0 million in D&O insurance premiums, an increase of $0.8 million in professional services and consulting fees primarily due to increases in legal fees related to business development, regulatory and patent costs, and expenses related to public company administrative costs, and a $0.5 million increase in other expenses.
Interest Income, Net
Interest income decreased by $3.0 million from $4.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2019 to $1.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest income, net was attributable to lower yields on the U.S. Treasury securities held by the Company.
Benefit from Income Tax
On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was signed into law. The CARES Act included several income tax changes, included allowing for the carryback of net operating losses, expanding interest deductibility, and allowing for accelerated expensing of certain capital improvements.
We evaluated the changes and anticipate a full recovery of all federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period due to the carryback allowance of the net operating loss generated during fiscal year 2020 permitted under the CARES Act. Based on the anticipated recovery of the federal income tax paid for the December 31, 2019 tax period, we recognized an income tax benefit of $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. We recorded $0.9 million in income tax expense during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily due to the current tax liability associated with the tax recognition of the upfront AbbVie collaboration payment received in 2018.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
From inception through December 31, 2021, we raised an aggregate of approximately $698.7 million of gross proceeds primarily through the issuance of equity, including our convertible preferred equity securities, our IPO and follow-on equity offering, and sales of shares of our common stock under the ATM, along with payments received under our collaboration agreements.
The following table provides information regarding our total cash, cash equivalents, and marketable securities, each of which are stated at their respective fair values as of December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
The use of cash in all periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital. Net cash used in operating activities was $83.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $46.0 million in cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in operating activities was primarily driven primarily by a $50.5 million increase in net loss, partially offset by changes in operating assets and liabilities, and a $10.1 million increase equity-based compensation. The increase in net loss was primarily attributable to the $20.0 million option exercise payment from AbbVie in 2020 as well as a $23.5 million increase in operating expenses in 2021.
Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $41.7 million. The increase in cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 was primarily driven by a $28.2 million increase in operating expenses in 2020 compared to 2019, which was partially offset by the $20.0 million option exercise payment from AbbVie noted above. The increase in operating expenses during 2020 was attributable to increased development activities associated with MORF-057 and increased headcount to support our development efforts.
Net Cash (Used In) Provided by Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $113.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $8.2 million provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in cash used in investing activities in the current year is due to an increase in investments in marketable securities with proceeds from the underwritten public offering completed in March 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to 136.0 million. The increase in cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $144.2 million. Cash provided by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily resulted from proceeds from maturities of marketable securities exceeding purchases of marketable securities by $8.7 million. Cash used
in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 primarily resulted from purchases of marketable securities to invest the upfront payments received from AbbVie and Janssen and our IPO proceeds.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $266.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily resulted from the $230.0 million in net proceeds received from the underwritten public offering completed in March 2021, $25.7 million in net proceeds received from sales of shares of common stock under the ATM, and $10.6 million in proceeds received from issuance of common shares under ESPP and stock option exercises. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we received $4.6 million from the issuance of common shares under ESPP and stock option exercises.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $93.3 million The decrease in cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 amounted to $55.0 million. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2019 resulted from our IPO proceeds.
Funding Requirements
We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue research and development, conduct clinical trials, and seek marketing approval for our current and any of our future product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our current or our future product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, which costs we might offset through entry into collaboration agreements with third parties. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funding in connection with our continuing operations. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on acceptable terms, including, but not limited to, as a result of COVID-19, we would be forced to delay, reduce, or eliminate our research and development programs or future commercialization efforts. We expect our existing cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements until the end of 2024.
We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
▪the costs of conducting additional clinical and preclinical studies and future clinical trials;
▪the costs of future manufacturing;
▪the scope, progress, results and costs of discovery, preclinical development, laboratory testing, and clinical trials for other potential product candidates we may develop, if any;
▪the costs, timing, and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
▪our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
▪the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we might have at such time;
▪the costs and timing of future commercialization activities, including product sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution, for any of our product candidates for which we receive marketing approval;
▪the amount of revenue, if any, received from commercial sales of our product candidates, should any of our product candidates receive marketing approval;
▪the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, obtaining, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights, and defending intellectual property-related claims;
▪our headcount growth and associated costs as we expand our business operations and research and development activities;
▪the potential delays in our preclinical studies, our development programs and our current and planned clinical trials because of the COVID-19 pandemic; and
▪the cost of operating as a public company.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, collaborations, strategic alliances and licensing arrangements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our consolidated financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts, and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the consolidated financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements require the most significant judgments and estimates.
Revenue from Contracts with Customers
Through December 31, 2021, all of our revenue to date has been generated from the AbbVie Agreement and Janssen Agreement. We account for revenue pursuant to ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or ASC 606, which is a single comprehensive model for entities to use in accounting for revenue arising from contracts with customers and supersedes most current revenue recognition guidance, including industry-specific guidance. For additional details regarding our associated accounting policies of ASC 606, refer to Notes 2 and 12 to the consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to make estimates to determine amounts to be recognized in collaboration revenue. In particular, for our collaborations with AbbVie and Janssen, revenue attributable to research services is recognized as those services are provided, based on the costs incurred to date in proportion to total costs expected to satisfy those performance obligations. The estimated costs associated with the remaining effort requires judgment and impacts revenue recognition. The uncertainties in the estimated costs associated with the remaining effort is principally a result of those cost estimates being based on expected effort for novel research and is partially reliant on scientific results. The research and scientific results impact the timing and the magnitude of costs to complete the remaining performance obligations. Accordingly, revenue may fluctuate from period to period due to significant revisions to estimated costs, resulting in a change in the measure of progress for a performance obligation.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our consolidated financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf, and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and adjust, if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced. In certain instances, we prepay for services to be provided in the future. These amounts are expensed as the services are performed.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid balance accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts incurred.
Equity-Based Compensation
We measure employee and nonemployee equity-based compensation based on the grant date fair value of the equity-based awards and recognize equity-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period of the awards, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. We recognize forfeitures as they occur.
We estimate the fair value of stock option awards granted using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model, which uses as inputs, the fair value of our common stock and subjective assumptions we make, including the expected stock price volatility, the expected term of the award, the risk-free interest rate, and expected dividends. Due to insufficient company-specific historical data, we base the estimate of expected volatility on the historical volatility of a representative group of publicly traded companies for which historical information is available. The historical volatility is generally calculated based on a period of time commensurate with the expected term assumption. We use the simplified method to calculate the expected term for options granted to employees and directors. We utilize this method as we do not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. For options granted to non-employees, we utilize the expected term. The risk-free interest rate is based on a U.S. treasury instrument whose term is consistent with the expected term of the stock options. The expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero, as we have never paid dividends and do not have current plans to pay any dividends on our common stock.
Contractual Obligations
In August 2021, we exercised our one-time extension right for its existing lease for 32,405 square feet of office and laboratory space through May 2025, as provided for under the terms of the lease, and with future rent payments of $6.0 million as reflected in Note 6, "Leases." As of December 31, 2021, our contractual obligations remain consistent with those disclosed in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020 other than the office and laboratory space lease extension.
We entered into contracts with a number of third parties, including external CROs, that require us to make upfront payments, some of which may be non-refundable. Under various licensing and related agreements with third parties, we have agreed to make milestone payments and pay royalties to third parties. Pursuant to an exclusive license agreement with Children’s Medical Center Corporation, as amended in 2018, we are required to pay $80,000 per year until the agreement is terminated. We will also be responsible for up to $1.3 million of development milestone payments through the first regulatory approval of a licensed product, tiered royalty payments of low single-digit percentages on net sales of licensed products in the event that we realize sales from products covered by the license agreement, and between 10% and 20% of non-royalty income attributable to a sublicense of the CMCC rights. Amounts paid to CMCC are recorded as research and development expense in the statements of operations.
Pursuant to a collaboration agreement with Schrödinger, we may be required to pay Schrödinger certain development milestones, not to exceed in the aggregate, on a target-by-target basis, a low six-figure payment upon initiation of lead optimization and $3.1 million on a compound-by-compound basis, as well as royalties in the low single digits on sales of products containing such compounds. In addition, we have agreed to pay Schrödinger a percentage, in the mid-single digits, of certain payments we receive from third parties in connection with the licensing or transfer of the rights to exploit such compounds to such third parties, including a one-time fee of $1.0 million paid in 2019.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with vendors for preclinical studies, preclinical and clinical supply and manufacturing services, professional consultants for expert advice, and other vendors for other services for operating purposes. We have not included these payments in the table of contractual obligations above since the contracts do not contain any minimum purchase commitments and are cancelable at any time by us, generally upon 30 days prior written notice, and therefore we believe that our non-cancelable obligations under these agreements are not material.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We have reviewed all recently issued standards and have determined that, other than as disclosed in Note 2 to our consolidated financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report, such standards will not have a material impact on our financial statements or do not otherwise apply to our operations.