Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report. This discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that are based on our management’s current beliefs and assumptions, which statements are subject to substantial risks and uncertainties. Our actual results may differ materially from those expressed or implied by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed in “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of this Annual Report. Please also see “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” at the beginning of this Annual Report.
Overview
Movano is developing a platform to deliver purpose-driven healthcare solutions at the intersection of medtech and consumer devices. Our mission is to empower and inspire you to live a healthier, happier life.
Our proprietary platform uses RF technology, which we believe will enable the creation of low-cost and scalable sensors that are small enough to fit into wearables and other small form factors. Combined with our mobile app and cloud infrastructure, we expect that our platform will provide users with the ability to measure and continuously monitor vital health data and provide actionable feedback to jumpstart changes in behaviors.
Our platform is the foundation for our first product in development, the Movano Ring. The smart ring and its accompanying app will combine vital health metrics with personalized intelligent feedback and is designed for women of all ages, who are traditionally an afterthought when it comes to wearable technology. Once developed, we expect the Ring will measure heart rate, HRV, sleep, respiration, temperature, blood oxygen, steps, calories and incorporate women-centric features and design. The device will provide users and their network of caregivers with continuous health data distilled down to simple, yet meaningful, insights to help users make manageable lifestyle changes and take a more proactive approach that could mitigate the risks of chronic disease. A fundamental part of our corporate development strategy is to establish one or more strategic partnerships that would allow us to more fully exploit the potential of our technology.
On April 28, 2021, the Company established Movano Ireland Limited, organized under the laws of Ireland, as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Financial Operations Overview
We are a development stage company with a limited operating history. To date, we have invested substantially all of our efforts and financial resources into the research and development of the products we are developing, including conducting clinical studies and related general and administrative costs. To date, we have funded our operations primarily from the sale of our equity securities.
We have incurred net losses in each year since inception. Our net losses were $21.8 million and $13.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Substantially all of our net losses have resulted from costs incurred in connection with our research and development programs and from general and administrative costs associated with our operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $33.6 million in available cash, cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles, or GAAP, which requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. These estimates require the use of judgment as future events, and the effect of these events cannot be predicted with certainty. The COVID-19 pandemic created significant uncertainty and disruption in the global economy and financial markets. As a result, many of our estimates and assumptions require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. Our estimates may change as new events occur and additional information emerges, and such changes are recognized or disclosed in our consolidated financial statements. We evaluate and update our assumptions and estimates on an ongoing basis and we may consult outside experts to assist as considered necessary.
Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock
We record all shares of redeemable convertible preferred stock at their respective issuance price less issuance costs on the dates of issuance. Under certain circumstances, we would have been required to redeem the Series A and Series B redeemable convertible preferred stock unless an Initial Public Offering (“IPO”) had been consummated prior to April 1, 2021, or an extension or waiver was obtained upon approval of a majority of the holders of such preferred stock. As the preferred stock became redeemable due to the passage of time, we considered the preferred stock to be redeemable as of April 1, 2021. We record the accretion of the Series A and B preferred stock balances to their respective redemption amounts using the effective interest method. The redeemable convertible preferred stock is presented outside of stockholders’ deficit on the consolidated balance sheet and of December 31, 2020. Upon the IPO, the redeemable convertible preferred stock is converted in to 11,436,956 shares of common stock.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
We accounted for funds received from the Paycheck Protection Program as a financial liability with interest accrued and expensed over the term of the loan under the effective interest method. The loan remained recorded as a liability until the Company was legally released from the liability. The amount that was ultimately forgiven by the lender was recognized in the consolidated statement of operations and comprehensive loss as a gain extinguishment.
Convertible Financial Instruments
We bifurcate embedded redemption and conversion options from their host instruments and account for them as freestanding derivative financial instruments at fair value, if certain criteria are met. The criteria include circumstances in which (a) the economic characteristics and risks of the embedded derivative instrument are not clearly and closely related to the economic characteristics and risks of the host contract, (b) the hybrid instrument that embodies both the embedded derivative instrument and the host contract is not re-measured at fair value under otherwise applicable GAAP with changes in fair value reported in earnings as they occur and (c) a separate instrument with the same terms as the embedded derivative instrument would be considered a derivative instrument. Debt discounts under these arrangements are amortized to interest expense using the interest method over the earlier of the term of the related debt or their earliest date of redemption.
We may retain a third-party appraiser to estimate the fair value of the derivative financial instruments. These fair value estimates are subjective in nature and require careful consideration and judgement. Management reviews the third-party reports for reasonableness of the assigned values. We believe that the appraised values represent the fair value of the freestanding derivative financial instruments, and we have not had to modify the assumptions.
From time to time, we issue convertible financial instruments to nonemployees in payment for services that are provided. Until the services are completely rendered, we will expense the principal and any interest earned prior to the service completion to the representative expense account for the services performed and will record a noncurrent liability for the expected amount of the principal balance. Upon completion of the services, we will reclassify the noncurrent liability balance to the balance of an outstanding convertible financial instrument and assess the embedded redemption and conversion options that are applicable at that time.
Common Stock Warrants
During the normal course of business, from time to time, we issue warrants to purchase common stock as part of a debt or equity financing or to vendors as consideration to perform services. We assess each warrant to determine if it meets the characteristics of a liability or a derivative, and if the warrant does meet the characteristics of a liability or a derivative, we classify the warrant as a liability measured at fair value. The derivative liabilities are remeasured at each period end, on a recurring basis, to the estimated fair value with the changes in fair value reflected as current period income or loss until the warrant is exercised, extinguished, or expires. If the warrant does not meet the characteristics of a liability or a derivative, we classify the warrant as equity, and record the warrant at its fair value on the date of issuance. The fair value of our warrants are estimated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model which contains estimates and assumptions that require careful consideration and judgment. To date, we have not experienced changes in these estimates and have not had to modify our assumptions.
Stock-Based Compensation
We measure equity classified stock-based awards granted to employees, directors, and nonemployees based on the estimated fair value on the date of grant and recognizes compensation expense of those awards on a straight-line basis over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the respective award. The fair value of each stock option grant is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model. This valuation model for stock-based compensation expense requires us to make assumptions and judgments about the variables used in the calculation including the expected term, the volatility of the Company’s common stock, and an assumed risk-free interest rate. As a result, if we revise our assumptions and estimates, our stock-based compensation expense could change. These assumptions include:
Dividend Rate - The expected dividend rate was assumed to be zero, as we have not previously paid dividends on common stock and have no current plans to do so.
Expected Volatility - The expected volatility was derived from the historical stock volatilities of several public companies within our industry that we consider to be comparable to our business over a period equivalent to the expected term of the stock option grants.
Risk-Free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rate is based on the interest yield in effect at the date of grant for zero coupon U.S. Treasury notes with maturities approximately equal to the option’s expected term.
Expected Term - The expected term represents the period that our stock options are expected to be outstanding. The expected term of option grants that are considered to be “plain vanilla” are determined using the simplified method. The simplified method deems the term to be the average of the time-to-vesting and the contractual life of the options. For other option grants not considered to be “plain vanilla,” we determined the expected term to be the contractual life of the options.
Forfeitures - We made the one-time policy election to recognize forfeitures when they occur.
Fair Value of Common Stock
Prior to our IPO in March 2021, the fair values of the shares of our common stock underlying our share-based awards and warrant grants were estimated on each grant date by our board of directors. In order to determine the fair value of our common stock, our board of directors considered, among other things, valuations of our common stock prepared by an independent third-party valuation firm in accordance with the guidance provided by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants Practice Guide, Valuation of Privately-Held-Company Equity Securities Issued as Compensation.
The fair value of the Company’s common stock was estimated using a two-step process. First, the Company’s enterprise value was established using generally accepted valuation methodologies, such as comparable public company and market adjusted option pricing analysis as well as consideration of company financing transactions. Second, the enterprise value was allocated among the securities that comprise the capital structure of the Company using the option-pricing method. The option-pricing method treats all levels of the capital structure as call options on the enterprise’s value, with exercise price based on the “breakpoints” between each of the different claims on the securities. The inputs necessary for the option-pricing model include the current equity value (the enterprise value as previously calculated), breakpoints (the various characteristics for each class of equity, including liquidation preferences and priority distributions, in accordance with the Company’s certificate of incorporation, as amended and restated), term, risk-free rate, and volatility.
Given the absence of a public trading market for our common stock, our board of directors exercised their judgment and considered a number of objective and subjective factors to determine the best estimate of the fair value of our common stock, including valuations performed by an independent third party, developments in our operations, sales of preferred stock, the prices, rights, preferences and privileges of our preferred stock relative to the common stock, actual operating results and financial performance and capital resources, the conditions in the our industry and the economy and capital markets in general, the stock price performance and volatility of comparable public companies, the likelihood of achieving a liquidity event for shares of our common stock underlying these stock options, such as an initial public offering or sale of our company, and the lack of liquidity of our common stock, among other factors.
The assumptions underlying these valuations were highly complex and subjective and represented management’s best estimates, which involved inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. As a result, if we had used significantly different assumptions or estimates, the fair value of our common stock and our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different.
The fair value of the underlying common stock was determined by the board of directors until the IPO when our common stock started trading on The Nasdaq Capital Market under the ticker symbol MOVE on March 23, 2021. Consequently, after our IPO the fair value of the shares of common stock underlying the stock options is the closing market price on the option grant date.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on differences between the financial statement and tax basis of assets and liabilities and net operating loss and credit carryforwards using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. Valuation allowances are established when necessary to reduce deferred tax assets to the amounts expected to be realized.
We account for unrecognized tax benefits using a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We establish a liability for tax-related uncertainties based on estimates of whether, and the extent to which, additional taxes will be due. We record an income tax liability, if any, for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax returns. To the extent that the assessment of such tax positions changes, the change in estimate is recorded in the period in which the determination is made. The liability is adjusted considering changing facts and circumstances, such as the outcome of a tax audit. The provision for income taxes includes the impact of liability provisions and changes to the liability that are considered appropriate. Changes in recognition or measurement are reflected in the period in which the change in judgment occurs.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Our consolidated statements of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 as discussed herein are presented below.
Research and Development
Research and development expenses totaled $13.4 million and $8.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase of $5.1 million was due primarily to the growth of the Company and its activities. Research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included expenses related to employee compensation of $6.0 million, tools and equipment expenses of  $1.0 million, other professional fees of $5.9 million, rent of $0.1 million, depreciation and amortization of $0.1 million, and other expenses of $0.3 million. Research and development expenses for year ended December 31, 2020 included expenses related to employee compensation of $2.2 million, tools and equipment expenses of $0.8 million, rent of $0.1 million, other professional fees of $5.2 million, and other expenses of $0.1 million.
General and Administrative
General and administrative expenses totaled $6.4 million and $2.7 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. This increase of $3.6 million was due primarily to the growth of the Company and its activities. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 included expenses related to employee and board of director compensation of $3.2 million, professional and consulting fees of $1.7 million, and other expenses of $1.5 million. General and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2020 included expenses related to employee and board of director compensation of $1.6 million, professional and consulting fees of $0.9 million, and other expenses of $0.2 million.
Loss from Operations
Loss from operations was $19.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $11.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 was a net other expense of $2.0 million as compared to a net other expense of $1.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2021 included interest expense of $0.9 million related to the accrual of interest and amortization of debt discounts on the convertible promissory notes and $1.6 million related to the change in fair value of the warrant liability, which were partially offset by $0.1 million related to the change in the fair value of the derivative liability and forgiveness of the Paycheck Protection Program Loan of $0.4 million. Other income (expense), net for the year ended December 31, 2020 included interest expense of $1.0 million related to the accrual of interest and amortization of debt discounts on the convertible promissory notes and $1.5 million related to the change in the fair value of warrant liability, which were partially offset by $0.6 million related to the change in fair value of the derivative liability.
Net Loss
As a result of the foregoing, net loss was $21.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $13.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are presented on a basis that it is a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. We have not generated any revenues from operations since inception, and do not expect to do so in the foreseeable future. We have experienced operating losses and negative operating cash flows since inception and expect to continue to do so. We have financed our working capital requirements since inception through the sale of equity securities and convertible promissory notes.
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments of $33.6 million available to fund our ongoing business activities. We believe that our cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments as of December 31, 2021 will be sufficient to fund our projected operating requirements for at least 12 months. However, such cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments are not expected to be sufficient to enable us to complete the development and commercialization of our proposed solution. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● advance the engineering design and development of our proposed wearable and other potential products;
● prepare applications required for marketing approval of our proposed solution in the United States;
● develop our plans for manufacturing, distributing and marketing our proposed wearable and other potential products; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development, planned commercialization efforts and our operation as a public company.
The following table summarizes our cash flows for the periods indicated (in thousands):
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used cash of $16.2 million in operating activities, as compared to $10.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The $16.2 million used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $21.8 million during the year and changes in our operating assets and liabilities totaling $1.3 million. These items were offset by non-cash items, including depreciation and amortization of $0.1 million, stock-based compensation of $1.9 million, accretion of the debt discount on our convertible promissory notes of $0.8 million, the forgiveness of our PPP loan of $0.4 million, accrued interest on our convertible promissory notes of $0.1 million, accretion of discount on short-term investments of $0.2 million, compensation of nonemployee services upon the issuance of common stock of $0.1 million, the change in the fair value of the derivative liability of $0.1 million and the change in the fair value of the warrant liability of $1.6 million.
The $10.7 million used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily attributable to our net loss of $13.0 million during the period and changes in our operating assets and liabilities totaling $0.7 million. These items were offset by non-cash items, including stock-based compensation of $0.3 million for a stock grant and stock-based compensation of $0.4 million, accretion of the debt discount on our convertible promissory notes of $0.7 million, accrued interest on our convertible promissory notes of $0.3 million, non-employee services of $0.2 million under convertible promissory notes, issuance of convertible promissory notes for services of $0.2 million, change in fair value of warrant liability of $1.5 million, and offset by a $0.6 million change in the fair value of our derivative liability.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company used cash of $16.7 million in investing activities, consisting of $23.6 million in purchases of marketable securities and $0.6 million for the purchase of office and laboratory equipment, offset by maturities of short-term investments of $7.5 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, there were no cash flows from investing activities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company was provided cash of $44.8 million from financing activities, comprised of $44.7 million from the net proceeds of our initial public offering and $0.1 million from the issuance of common stock.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, the Company was provided cash of $12.1 million from financing activities, comprised of $11.8 million from the issuance of convertible promissory notes, which was partially offset by $0.7 million of issuance costs, $0.7 million in proceeds from the Paycheck Protection Program loan, which was partially offset by the repayment of $0.4 million, and $0.7 million from the issuance of common stock.
Funding Requirements
We anticipate that, excluding non-recurring items, we will continue to generate annual losses for the foreseeable future as we continue the development of our products in development. We will require additional capital to fund our operations, to complete our ongoing and planned clinical studies, to commercialize our products, to continue investing in and to further develop our general infrastructure, and such funding may not be available to us on acceptable terms or at all.
If we are unable to raise additional capital in sufficient amounts or on terms acceptable to us, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce the scope of, or terminate one or more of our clinical studies, research and development programs, or our future commercialization efforts.
Our future funding requirements will depend on many factors, including the following:
● the scope, rate of progress, results and cost of our product development and clinical testing;
● the cost of manufacturing our products in development and any products that we may develop in the future;
● the number and characteristics of the potential products that we pursue;
● the cost, timing, and outcomes of regulatory approvals; and
● the magnitude and extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business operations and operating results, as described in “Risk Factors - Risks Related to Our Business.”
We expect to satisfy future cash needs through existing capital balances, through some combination of public or private equity offerings, debt financings, licensing arrangements, and other marketing and distribution arrangements. Please see “Risk Factors-Risks Related to Our Business.”
Contractual Obligations
Material contractual obligations arising in the normal course of business primarily consist of operating leases. See Note 13 to the consolidated financial statements for amounts outstanding for operating leases on December 31, 2021.