Item 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and the notes accompanying those statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The results described below are not necessarily indicative of the results to be expected in any future periods.
Company Overview
MultiPlan is a leading provider of data analytics and technology-enabled solutions designed to bring affordability, efficiency and fairness to the United States healthcare industry. We do so through services focused on reducing medical cost and improving payment accuracy for the payors of healthcare, which are health insurers, self-insured employers and other health plan sponsors (typically through their health plan administrators), and, indirectly, the plan members who are the consumers of healthcare services.
Founded initially in 1980 as a New York-based hospital network, MultiPlan has evolved both organically and through acquisition into a national organization offering three categories of services:
•Analytics-Based Services: data-driven algorithms which detect claims over-charges and either negotiate or recommend fair reimbursement using a variety of data sources and pricing algorithms;
•Network-Based Services: contracted discounts with healthcare providers to form one of the largest independent preferred provider organizations ("PPO") in the United States with over 1.2 million under contract, as well as outsourced network development and/or management services; and
•Payment and Revenue Integrity Services: data, technology, and clinical expertise deployed to identify and remove improper and unnecessary charges before or after claims are paid, or to identify and help restore and preserve underpaid premium dollars.
Although the end beneficiary of our services are employers and other plan sponsors and their health plan members, our direct customers are mostly health plan administrators ("Payors"). We offer these Payors a single electronic gateway to a comprehensive set of services in each of the above three categories, which are used in combination or individually to reduce the medical cost burden on their health plan customers and members while fostering fair and efficient payments to the providers. These comprehensive offerings have enabled us to maintain long-term relationships with a number of our customers, including relationships of over 25 years with some of the nation's largest Payors. For the year ended December 31, 2021, our services identified approximately $21.7 billion in potential medical cost savings.
We believe our solutions provide a strong value proposition to Payors, their health plan customers and healthcare consumers, as well as to providers. Overall, our service offerings aim to reduce healthcare costs in a manner that is orderly, efficient and fair to all parties. In addition, because in most instances the fee for our services is directly linked to the savings we identify, our revenue model is aligned with the interests of our customers.
The Transactions
On July 12, 2020, Churchill entered into the Merger Agreement by and among First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub, Holdings, and MultiPlan Parent. On October 8, 2020, the Merger Agreement was consummated and the Transactions were completed.
The Transactions were accounted for as a reverse recapitalization, with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded, in accordance with GAAP. Under this method of accounting, Churchill was treated as the "acquired" company for financial reporting purposes with MultiPlan Parent determined to be the accounting acquiror. This determination was primarily based on the existing MultiPlan Parent stockholders being the majority stockholders and holding majority voting power in the combined company, MultiPlan Parent's senior management comprising the majority of senior management of the combined company, and the ongoing operations of MultiPlan Parent comprising the ongoing operations of the combined company. Accordingly, for accounting purposes, the Transactions were treated as the equivalent of MultiPlan Parent issuing shares for the net assets of Churchill, accompanied by a recapitalization. The net assets of Churchill were recognized at fair value (which were consistent with carrying value), with no goodwill or other intangible assets recorded. See Note 4 The Transactions of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further information on the Transactions.
As a consequence of the Transactions, we became the successor to an SEC-registered and NYSE-listed company.
HST Acquisition
On November 9, 2020, the Company acquired HST, a healthcare technology company that enables value-driven health benefit plan designs featuring reference-based pricing and tools to engage health plan members and providers in making the best use of available benefits both before and after care delivery. The Company acquired 100 percent of the voting equity interests of HST.
The results of operations and financial condition of HST have been included in the Company's consolidated results from the date of acquisition. In connection with the HST acquisition, the Company incurred transaction costs. The transaction costs have been expensed as incurred and these amounts, totaling $0.1 million and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, are included in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
DHP Acquisition
On February 26, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of DHP, an analytics and technology company offering healthcare payment and revenue integrity services. The Company acquired 100 percent of the voting equity interest of DHP. The acquisition strengthens MultiPlan's service offering in the payment integrity market with new and complementary services to help its payor customers manage the overall cost of care and improve their competitiveness. It also adds revenue integrity services for plans that receive premiums from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
The results of operations and financial condition of DHP have been included in the Company's consolidated results from the date of acquisition. In connection with the DHP acquisition, the Company incurred transaction-related expenses of $4.9 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The transaction-related expenses have been expensed as incurred and are included in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
Uncertainty Relating to the Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic
As discussed in Note 1 General Information and Basis of Accounting of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report, the COVID-19 pandemic has negatively impacted our business, results of operations and financial condition during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
We temporarily closed all of our offices and restricted travel due to concern for our employees' health and safety and also in compliance with state orders. Most of our approximately 2,400 employees continue to work remotely. Other than these modifications, we have not experienced any material changes to our operations including receiving and processing transactions with our customers as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Effects from COVID-19 began to impact our business in first quarter 2020 with various federal, state, and local governments and private entities mandating restrictions on travel, restrictions on public gatherings, closure of non-essential commerce, and shelter in place orders. The Company experienced an approximately 4.6% decline in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to 2019 primarily due to reduced volume from customers as a result of restrictions on elective medical procedures and non-essential medical services. Although the revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, exceeded revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020 and the pre-COVID revenues for the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company's revenues continue to be negatively impacted by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, but to a lesser extent compared to 2020 as vaccination rates have increased and restrictions on medical services have been lifted. The extent of the ultimate impact of COVID-19 will depend on the severity and duration of the pandemic. Future developments remain uncertain, including the number of confirmed cases, the emergence of highly contagious variants, and any actions taken by federal, state and local governments such as economic relief efforts, as well as U.S. and global economies, consumer behavior and healthcare utilization patterns.
In connection with the COVID-19 pandemic, the CARES Act was enacted on March 27, 2020 and included certain changes to corporate income taxes. Specifically, the CARES Act provided numerous tax provisions and other stimulus measures, including temporary changes regarding the prior and future utilization of net operating losses, temporary changes to the prior and future limitations on interest deductions, temporary suspension of certain payment requirements for the employer portion of Social Security taxes, technical corrections from prior tax legislation for tax depreciation of certain qualified improvement property, and the creation of certain payroll tax credits associated with the retention of employees. We assessed these impacts and noted the largest impact is due to the tax law change related to the interest disallowance rules retroactive to 2019. The other aspects of the CARES Act did not have a material effect on us.
Factors Affecting Our Results of Operations
Key Technology
Our strength as a company is our ability to use data and analytics to develop new service opportunities to enhance our customer relationships and to increase revenues. We use technology, data and analytics to transform healthcare transactions into multiple opportunities for savings and recurring revenues by leveraging data and analytics to inform our transaction processing systems (i.e., our claims processing systems). The transaction processing systems generate savings for our customers, revenues for us, and each transaction adds more data to our intelligence engine and data warehouse. The intelligence engine drives our analytics and development of new saving opportunities and revenue growth through service enhancement or new product development.
Our technology also contributes to our ability to efficiently process our transactions through EDI batch files, real-time web services and online through customer and provider portals. We believe our current infrastructure can support significantly more than the current transaction volume giving us room for growth and increased volume. Our application platforms are architected and built with redundancy to eliminate downtime. All of the claims processed in our system are received via EDI or direct web service integration. As we process more claims through EDI and direct service integration, our electronic integration with customers results in substantial back office interconnectivity and considerably reduces complexity and processing failures. Because we believe our transaction processing systems are scalable, we should be able to absorb significant increases in volume at minimal marginal costs. Our integration into our customers' systems and processes is an important component of our business model.
Medical Cost Savings
Our business and revenues are driven by the ability to lower medical costs through claims savings for our customers. The medical charges of those claims can influence our ability to generate claim savings.
The following table presents the medical charges processed and the potential savings identified for the periods presented:
_____________________________
(1)Medical charges processed represent the aggregate dollar amount of claims processed by our cost management solutions in the period presented. The dollar amount of the claim for purposes of this calculation is the dollar amount of the claim prior to any reductions that may be made as a result of the claim being processed by our cost management solutions. Medical charges processed include medical charges processed on HST acquired claims of $1.9 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. No medical charges processed by HST were included for 2020 and 2019. Medical charges processed exclude medical charges processed by DHP in all time periods.
(2)Potential medical cost savings represent the aggregate amount of potential savings in dollars identified by our cost management solutions in the period presented. Since certain of our fees are based on the amount of savings achieved by our customers and our customers are the final adjudicator of the claims and may choose not to reduce claims or reduce claims by only a portion of the potential savings identified, potential medical cost savings may not directly correlate with the amount of fees earned in connection with the processing of such claims. Potential medical cost savings include potential medical cost savings identified on HST acquired claims of $1.5 billion for the year ended December 31, 2021. No potential medical cost savings for HST were included for 2020 and 2019. Potential medical cost savings exclude potential medical cost savings identified by DHP in all time periods.
(3)Changes to previously reported medical charges processed and potential medical cost savings are due to client claim resubmissions or cancellation of claims. Examples of these changes include, but are not limited to, adjudication changes, billing changes, and elimination of claims that were later determined to be invalid.
Our medical charges processed and potential medical cost savings figures may not be directly comparable from period to period due to the completion and integration of acquisitions made in a particular period.
Business Model
Our business model avoids reimbursement, underwriting and malpractice risk and exposure. We do not provide or manage healthcare services or provide medical care. This reduces our exposure to state and federal regulations that are imposed on insurers and medical services providers.
Healthcare Industry Exposure
According to CMS, healthcare expenditures will grow from $3.8 trillion, or 17.8% of U.S. GDP, in 2019 to represent 19.7% of GDP by 2028, representing a compounded annual growth rate of 5.5%. There are a multitude of factors driving this expected growth, including recent regulations and ongoing secular trends, such as the aging population and other demographic factors, which are driving expanded healthcare coverage and increased utilization. Additional growth in healthcare costs are driven by availability of new medical technologies, therapies and modalities. As expenditures continue to rise, stakeholders and especially payors, are becoming increasingly focused on solutions that reduce medical costs and improve payment accuracy.
Components of Results of Operations
Revenues
We generate revenues from several sources including: (i) Analytics-Based Services that use our leading and proprietary information technology platform to offer customers solutions to reduce medical costs, (ii) Network-Based Services that process claims at a discount compared to billed fee-for-service rates and by using an extensive network and (iii) Payment and Revenue Integrity Services that use data, technology, and clinical expertise to identify improper, unnecessary and excessive charges. Payors typically compensate us through either a PSAV achieved or a PEPM rate. Approximately 93% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 were based on a PSAV achieved rate.
Costs of Services (exclusive of depreciation and amortization of intangible assets)
Costs of services (exclusive of depreciation and amortization of intangible assets) consist of all costs specifically associated with claims processing activities for customers, sales and marketing, and the development and maintenance of our networks, analytics-based services, and payment and revenue integrity services. Two of the largest components in costs of services are personnel expenses and access and bill review fees. Access and bill review fees include fees for accessing non-owned third-party provider networks, expenses associated with vendor fees for database access and systems technology used to reprice claims, and outsourced services. Third-party network expenses are fees paid to non-owned provider networks used to supplement our owned network assets to provide more network claim savings to our customers.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses include corporate management and governance functions composed of general management, legal, treasury, tax, real estate, financial reporting, auditing, benefits and human resource administration, communications, public relations, billing and information management. In addition, general and administrative expenses include taxes, insurance, advertising, transaction costs, and other general expenses.
Depreciation Expense
Depreciation expense consists of depreciation and amortization of property and equipment related to our investments in leasehold improvements, furniture and equipment, computer hardware and software, and internally generated capitalized software development costs. We provide for depreciation and amortization on property and equipment using the straight-line method to allocate the cost of depreciable assets over their estimated useful lives.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
Amortization of intangible assets includes amortization of the value of our customer relationships, provider network, technology, and trademarks which were identified in valuing the intangible assets in connection with the June 6, 2016 acquisition by H&F, as well as recent acquisitions by the Company.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of accrued interest and related interest payments on our outstanding long-term debt and amortization of debt issuance costs, discounts and premiums.
Loss (Gain) on Extinguishment of Debt
The Company recognizes a loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt for the difference between the net carrying amount of the extinguished debt immediately before the refinancing and the fair value of the new debt instruments, and fees associated with the issuance of the new debt under the refinancing.
(Gain) Loss on Investments
(Gain) loss on investments consists of the changes in the fair value of the Company's investments.
Change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares
The Company remeasures the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares at each reporting period. The changes in fair value are primarily due to the change in the stock price of the Company's Class A common stock over the reporting period.
Income Tax Expense (Benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) consists of federal, state, and local income taxes. Due to the variability of our taxable income as compared to net income, stock-based compensation and the variability of the jurisdictions where income is earned, our effective tax rate can vary significantly from one period to the next depending on relative changes in net income.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
We use EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EPS to evaluate our financial performance. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and adjusted earnings per share are financial measures that are not presented in accordance with GAAP. We believe the presentation of these non-GAAP financial measures provides useful information to investors in assessing our financial condition and results of operations across reporting periods on a consistent basis by excluding items that we do not believe are indicative of our financial operating results of our core business.
These measurements of financial performance have important limitations as analytical tools and should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under GAAP. Additionally, they may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. Some of these limitations are:
•such measures do not reflect our cash expenditures or future requirements for capital expenditures or contractual commitments;
•such measures do not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•such measures do not reflect the significant interest expense, or cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debt;
•such measures do not reflect any cash requirements for any future replacement of depreciated assets;
•such measures do not reflect the impact of stock-based compensation upon our results of operations;
•such measures do not reflect our income tax (benefit) expense or the cash requirements to pay our income taxes;
•such measures do not reflect the impact of certain cash charges resulting from matters we consider not to be indicative of our ongoing operations; and
•other companies in our industry may calculate these measures differently from how we do, limiting their usefulness as a comparative measure.
In evaluating EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EPS, you should be aware that in the future we may incur expenses similar to those eliminated in the presentation.
EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA, and Adjusted EPS are widely used measures of corporate profitability eliminating the effects of financing and capital expenditures from the operating results. We define EBITDA as net income adjusted for interest expense, interest income, income tax expense (benefit) , depreciation, amortization of intangible assets, and non-income taxes. We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA further adjusted to eliminate the impact of certain items that we do not consider to be indicative of our core business, including other expense, change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested
founder shares, transaction related expenses, loss (gain) on the debt extinguishment, (gain) loss on investments and stock-based compensation. See our consolidated financial statements for more information regarding these adjustments. Adjusted EBITDA is used in our agreements governing our outstanding indebtedness for debt covenant compliance purposes. Our Adjusted EBITDA calculation is consistent with the definition of Adjusted EBITDA used in our debt instruments.
Adjusted EPS is used in reporting to our Board and executive management and as a component of the measurement of our performance. We believe that this measure provides useful information to investors because it is the profitability measure we use to evaluate earnings performance on a comparable year-to-year basis. Adjusted EPS is defined as net income (loss) adjusted for amortization of intangible assets, stock-based compensation, transaction related expenses, (gain) loss on investments, loss (gain) on debt extinguishment, other expense, change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares and tax effect of adjustments to arrive at Adjusted net income divided by our weighted average number of shares outstanding.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the periods presented:
____________________
Material differences between MultiPlan Corporation and MPH for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include differences in interest expense, change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares, stock-based compensation, and net insurance premiums associated with our captive insurance company, which are eliminated in the consolidated financial reporting of MultiPlan Corporation. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 interest expense for MultiPlan Corporation was $82.1 million, $107.2 million, and $112.0 million higher than interest expense, respectively, for MPH due to interest expense incurred by MultiPlan Corporation on the Senior Convertible Notes (issued on October 8, 2020) and Senior PIK Notes (redeemed October 8, 2020) including amortization of discount on Senior PIK Notes, net of debt issue costs. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares, and stock-based compensation are recorded in the parent company MultiPlan Corporation and not in the MPH operating company and therefore represent differences between MultiPlan Corporation and MPH. In the year ended December 31, 2021, MPH had higher EBITDA expenses than MultiPlan Corporation of $0.4 million due to insurance premiums paid to our captive insurance company, net of related captive insurance company costs which are eliminated in the consolidated financial reporting of MultiPlan Corporation.
The following table presents a reconciliation of net income (loss) to Adjusted EPS for the periods presented:
____________________
(1) The shares of the Company's common stock, prior to the Transactions, have been retroactively restated as shares reflecting the exchange ratio established in the Transactions.
Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations
As a result of a number of factors, our historical results of operations may not be comparable to our results of operations in future periods and may not be directly comparable from period to period. Set forth below is a brief discussion of the key factors impacting the comparability of our results of operations.
The Transactions
On July 12, 2020, Churchill entered into the Merger Agreement by and among First Merger Sub, Second Merger Sub, Holdings, and Polaris. On October 8, 2020, the Merger Agreement was consummated and the Transactions were completed.
HST Acquisition
On November 9, 2020, the Company completed the acquisition of HST, a healthcare technology company that enables value-driven health benefit plan designs featuring reference-based pricing and tools to engage health plan members and providers in making the best use of available benefits both before and after care delivery.
The results of operations and financial condition of HST have been included in the Company's consolidated results from the date of acquisition.
DHP Acquisition
On February 26, 2021, the Company completed the acquisition of DHP, an analytics and technology company offering healthcare payment and revenue integrity services. The Company acquired 100 percent of the voting equity interest of DHP. The acquisition strengthens MultiPlan's service offering in the payment integrity market with new and complementary services to help its payor customers manage the overall cost of care and improve their competitiveness. It also adds revenue integrity services for plans that receive premiums from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
The results of operations and financial condition of DHP have been included in the Company's consolidated results from the date of acquisition. In connection with the DHP acquisition, the Company incurred transaction-related expenses of $4.9 million and $0.6 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The transaction-related expenses have been expensed as incurred and are included in general and administrative expenses in the accompanying consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
Debt Refinancings, Repayments and Repricing
During August and September of 2019, the Company repurchased and cancelled $121.3 million of the Senior PIK Notes, resulting in the recognition of a gain on debt extinguishment of $18.5 million in the year ended December 31, 2019.
On October 8, 2020, the Senior PIK notes were redeemed in full for a total redemption price of $1,237.6 million, resulting in the recognition of a loss on debt extinguishment of $35.7 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
On October 29, 2020, the Company (a) issued 5.750% Notes under MPH and increased the revolving credit facility under the senior secured credit facilities from $100.0 million to $450.0 million and (b) repaid all outstanding 7.125% Notes and $369.0 million of indebtedness under Term Loan G with the net proceeds of the 5.750% Notes, together with $715.0 million of cash on hand. As a result, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $67.2 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
On August 24, 2021, MPH issued new senior secured credit facilities composed of $1,325.0 million of Term Loan B and $450.0 million of a Revolver B, and $1,050.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Secured Notes. MPH used the net proceeds from Term Loan B, and the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes to repay all of the outstanding balance of its Term Loan G of $2,341.0 million, and pay fees and expenses in connection therewith. As a result, we recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $15.8 million in the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest on Term Loan B and Revolver B is calculated, at MPH's option, as (a) LIBOR (or, with respect to the term loan facility only, 0.50%, whichever is higher), plus the applicable margin, or (b) the highest rate of (1) prime rate, (2) the federal funds effective rate, plus 0.50%, (3) the LIBOR for an interest period of one month, plus 1.00% and (4) 0.50% for Term Loan B and 1.00% for Revolver B, in each case, plus an applicable margin of 4.25% for Term Loan B and between 3.50% and 4.00% for Revolver B, depending on MPH's first lien debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio. The interest rate in effect for Term Loan B was 4.75% as of December 31, 2021.
The Company is obligated to pay a commitment fee on the average daily unused amount of Revolver B. The annual commitment fee can range from an annual rate of 0.25% to 0.50% based on the Company's first lien debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio, as defined in the agreement.
In connection with the issuance of our debt instruments, the Company incurred specific expenses related to raising the debt, including commissions, fees and expenses of investment bankers and underwriters, registration and listing fees, accounting and legal fees pertaining to the financing and other external, incremental expenses paid to advisors that were directly attributable to realizing the proceeds of the debt issues. These costs were capitalized and are being amortized over the term of the related debt using the effective interest method. The amortization of the debt issuance costs, premiums and discounts are included in interest expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
In the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018, and 2017, we did not recognize expense for the portions of debt issuance costs related to the amounts of the principal loan prepayments of Term Loan G made in each year, which resulted in an understatement of long-term debt of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2019. We corrected this error as an out-of-period adjustment resulting in an overstatement of interest expense of $2.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Stock-Based Compensation
Prior to the consummation of the Transactions, we were a wholly-owned subsidiary of Holdings and our stock-based compensation was granted to employees in the form of Units via a Class B Unit Award Agreement. The fair value of the Units was remeasured at each reporting period. The consummation of the Transactions constituted a definitive Liquidity Event under the agreements governing the Unit awards and as a result the incentive plan was liquidated. For the year ended December 31,
2020, the Company recorded stock-based compensation expense under the Class B Unit Award Agreement of $405.8 million in the accompanying consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
Since the consummation of the Transactions, the Company has operated under the 2020 Omnibus Incentive Plan effective October 8, 2020. To date, awards granted under the 2020 Omnibus Incentive Plan have been in the form of Employee RS, Employee RSUs, Fixed Value RSUs, Employee NQSOs and Director RSUs. Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company has granted 4.2 million Employee NQSOs, 2.9 million Employee RSUs, 0.1 million Employee RS, 0.5 million Fixed Value RSUs and 0.1 million Director RSUs under the 2020 Omnibus Incentive Plan. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company recorded stock-based compensation expense under the 2020 Omnibus Incentive Plan of 18.0 million and 0.2 million, respectively, in the accompanying consolidated statements of income (loss) and comprehensive income (loss).
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table provides the results of operations for the periods indicated:
NM = Not meaningful
Revenues
The increase in revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to increased claims volumes from customers, higher savings rates per unit of billed charges on processed claims, favorable changes in the mix of claims toward higher charge medical services as the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic subsided, and revenues from the acquisitions of DHP and HST. Acquired revenues related to the acquisitions of DHP and HST were $44.4 million and $2.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in revenues, excluding acquired revenues, was $137.4 million or 14.7% for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Network-Based Services revenues increased in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases in claims volumes from customers, higher savings rates on processed claims, and reduced effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on claim mix, partially offset by certain client adoptions of our Analytics-Based Services in lieu of our Network-Based Services.
Analytics-Based Services revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increases in claim volumes from customers, higher savings rates, reduced effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on claim mix, certain client adoptions of our Analytics-Based Services in lieu of our Network-Based Services and revenues from the acquisition of HST. Within Analytics-Based Services, revenue increased across all major product categories: Reference-Based Pricing, which includes our Data iSight program, Financial Negotiation, and Value-Driven Health Plan Services.
Payment and Revenue Integrity Services revenues increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to revenues from the acquisition of DHP, increases in claims volumes from customers, and reduced effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on claim mix. The acquisition of DHP contributed to revenues from our Data Mining and Clinical Auditing Services and added revenues from new product categories, including Revenue Integrity Services and Coordination of Benefits and Subrogation Services.
Costs of Services (exclusive of depreciation and amortization of intangible assets)
The decrease in cost of services for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to decreases in personnel expenses primarily related to stock-based compensation as explained below.
The decrease in personnel expenses, including contract labor, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to decreases in stock-based compensation of $160.4 million partially offset by increases in other compensation-related expenses, including salaries, bonus, commissions, fringe benefits and contract labor of $19.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in other compensation-related expenses was primarily due to increased headcount related to organic growth, the full year impact of the HST acquisition in fourth quarter 2020, and the acquisition of DHP in first quarter 2021. The change in stock-based compensation expense over these time periods was primarily the result of changes in the stock-based compensation plans as described above in the Factors Affecting the Comparability of our Results of Operations.
General and Administrative Expenses
The decrease in general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to a decrease in personnel expenses of $202.0 million, a decrease in transaction-related expenses of $22.0 million, and an increase in capitalized development costs of $10.5 million, partially offset by an increase in professional fees of $8.6 million including higher legal, audit, and consulting fees, an increase in insurance premiums of $6.5 million primarily related to higher errors and omissions liability and directors and officers liability insurance, an increase in integration expenses of $8.7 million primarily related to integrating HST and DHP, an increase in equipment lease and
maintenance expenses of $2.8 million, an increase in the loss on disposal of assets of $2.6 million based on a periodic review of capitalized computer hardware and software, and an increase in other general and administrative expenses of $0.8 million.
The decrease in personnel expenses of $202.0 million was due to a decrease in stock-based compensation of $227.6 million, partially offset by an increase in other compensation related expenses, including salaries, bonus, fringe benefits, and contract labor of $25.6 million due to increased headcount through organic growth, non-integration related severance costs of $5.0 million, the full year impact of the acquisition of HST in fourth quarter of 2020, and the acquisition of DHP in first quarter of 2021. The decrease in transactions costs of $22.0 million was primarily due to higher costs associated with the Transactions on October 8, 2020 and acquisition of HST on November 9, 2020 as compared to the costs associated with the acquisition of DHP on February 26, 2021. See Note 5 Business Combinations and Note 4 The Transactions of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Depreciation Expense
The increase in depreciation expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to purchases of property and equipment, including internally generated capitalized software in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, partially offset by assets that were written-off or became fully depreciated in the period.
Amortization of Intangible Assets
The increase in the amortization of intangible assets for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the acquisitions of HST and DHP. This expense represents the amortization of intangible assets, as explained above and in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Interest Expense and Interest Income
The decrease in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was due to the effect of (i) the Transactions on October 8, 2020 when we redeemed our Senior PIK Notes (8.500% interest rate) and issued Convertible PIK Notes (6.000% interest rate), (ii) the Refinancing on October 29, 2020 when we prepaid $369.0 million of principal balance on Term Loan G and we redeemed the 7.125% Notes and issued 5.750% Notes, and (iii) the refinancing on August 24, 2021 when MPH issued new senior secured credit facilities composed of Term Loan B and Revolver B, and issued the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes, using the net proceeds to repay all of the outstanding balance of Term Loan G.
In the years ended December 31, 2017, 2018 and 2019, we did not recognize expense for the portions of debt issuance costs related to the amounts of the principal loan prepayments made in each year, which resulted in an understatement of long-term debt of $2.3 million as of December 31, 2019. We corrected this error as an out-of-period adjustment resulting in an overstatement of interest expense of $2.3 million in the year ended December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, our long-term debt was $4,879.1 million and included (i) $1,308.4 million Term Loan B, discount on Term Loan B of $12.9 million, (ii) $1,050.0 million of 5.50% Senior Secured Notes, (iii) $1,300.0 million of 5.750% Senior Notes, (iv) $1,300.0 million of Senior Convertible PIK Notes, discount on Senior Convertible PIK Notes of $27.7 million (reduction in discount on Senior Convertible PIK Notes from December 30, 2020 relates to the adoption of ASU 2020-06 effective January 1, 2021), and (v) $0.1 million of long-term finance lease obligations, net of (vi) debt issue costs of $38.8 million. As of December 31, 2021, our total debt had an annualized weighted average cash interest rate of 4.6%.
As of December 31, 2020, our long-term debt was $4,578.5 million and included (i) $2,341.0 million Term Loan G, discount on Term Loan G of $3.8 million, (ii) $1,300.0 million of 5.750% Senior Notes, (iii) $1,300.0 million of Senior Convertible PIK Notes, discount on Senior Convertible PIK Notes of $329.5 million, and (iv) $0.1 million of long-term finance lease obligations, net of (v) debt issue costs of $29.3 million. As of December 31, 2020, our total debt had a weighted average cash interest rate of 4.9%
Loss (gain) on extinguishment of debt
As a result of the refinancing transactions of August 24, 2021, the Company recognized a loss on debt extinguishment of $15.8 million representing the difference between Term Loan G's net carrying amount immediately before the refinancing and the fair value of the new debt instruments, and fees associated with the issuance of the new debt under the refinancing.
The loss on extinguishment of debt for the year ended December 31, 2020 was the result of the redemption in full of the 7.125% Notes, redemption in full of the Senior PIK Notes, and the repayment of $369.0 million of indebtedness under our term loan facility.
Change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares
The Company measures at each reporting period the fair values of the Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the fair values of the Private Placement Warrants and the unvested founder shares decreased by $6.5 million and $26.1 million, respectively. The decrease was primarily due to the variations in the stock price of the Company's Class A common stock over that period.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Net income before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $135.5 million generated a provision for income taxes of $33.4 million with an effective tax rate of 24.6%. Net loss before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 of $546.9 million generated a benefit for income taxes of $26.3 million with an effective tax rate of 4.8%. Our effective tax rate for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 differed from the statutory rate primarily due to non-deductible stock-based compensation expense, non-deductible mark-to-market liability, limitations on executive compensation, changes in the Company's deferred state tax rate due to operations, and state tax expense.
Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019
For a discussion comparing our consolidated operating results from the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Results of Operations for the Years Ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the Commission on March 16, 2021.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash, cash equivalents, and restricted cash of $188.4 million, which includes restricted cash of $3.1 million, and $450.0 million of loan availability under the revolving credit facility. In connection with the Refinancing, the capacity of the revolving credit facility was increased from $100.0 million to $450.0 million and $369.0 million of indebtedness under the Term Loan G was repaid. On August 24, 2021, the maturity of the revolving credit facility was extended from June 7, 2023 to August 24, 2026. As of December 31, 2021, we had three letters of credit that reduce the capacity of the revolver by $1.8 million and are used to satisfy real estate lease agreements for three of our offices in lieu of security deposits. See Note 3 Long-Term Debt of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information on the August 24, 2021 refinancing.
On August 27, 2021, the Company's Board of Directors approved a share repurchase program authorizing the Company to repurchase up to $250.0 million of its Class A common stock from time to time in open market transactions. The repurchase program was effective immediately and expires on December 31, 2022. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has repurchased approximately $100.0 million of its Class A common stock as part of this program using cash on hand.
Our primary sources of liquidity are internally generated funds combined with our borrowing capacity under our revolving credit facility. We believe that these sources will provide sufficient liquidity for us to meet our working capital, capital expenditure and other cash requirements for the next twelve months and for the long term. We may from time to time at our sole discretion, purchase, redeem or retire our long-term debt, through tender offers, in privately negotiated or open market transactions or otherwise. We plan to finance our capital expenditures with cash from operations. Furthermore, our future liquidity and future ability to fund capital expenditures, working capital and debt requirements are also dependent upon our future financial performance, which is subject to many economic, commercial, financial and other factors that are beyond our control, including the ability of financial institutions to meet their lending obligations to us. If those factors significantly change, our business may not be able to generate sufficient cash flow from operations or future borrowings may not be available to meet our liquidity needs. We anticipate that to the extent we require additional liquidity as a result of these factors or in order to execute our strategy, it would be financed either by borrowings under our senior secured credit facilities, by other indebtedness, additional equity financings or a combination of the foregoing. We may be unable to obtain any such additional financing on reasonable terms or at all.
Cash Flow Summary
The following table is derived from our consolidated statements of cash flows:
For the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash flows from operating activities provided $404.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and $377.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This $27.3 million, or 7.2%, increase in cash flows from operating activities was primarily the result of increase in net income of $622.6 million, after adjusting for non-cash items of $521.3 million, offset by changes in net working capital of $74.0 million.
The $521.3 million decrease in non-cash items was primarily due to a decrease in stock-based compensation of $388.0 million, decrease in loss on extinguishment of debt of $87.2 million, change in the deferred tax benefit of $36.9 million, decrease in loss on investments of $12.2 million, decrease in the amortization of right-of-use-asset of $1.4 million, and the decrease in non-cash interest costs of $10.6 million, offset by increases in depreciation expense of $4.3 million, increase in amortization of intangible assets of $5.5 million, increases in loss on disposal of assets of $2.4 million, and the change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares of $2.8 million.
The increase in net income of $622.6 million was primarily the result of increases in revenues and reductions in costs of services, general and administrative expenses, interest expense, loss on extinguishment of debt, and decreases in the change in fair value of Private placement Warrants and unvested founder shares, offset by increases in depreciation expense, increases in amortization expense, increases in change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares, increases in the provision for income taxes, and decreases in interest income as explained above.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, $44.0 million was used by changes in working capital including increases in net accounts receivable of $33.8 million primarily due to increases in year-over-year revenues and timing of collections, increases in prepaid expenses and other assets of $7.0 million, increases in prepaid taxes of $5.1 million, and decreases in operating lease obligations of $5.9 million, offset by increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $7.7 million.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, $30.0 million was provided by changes in working capital including decreases in net accounts receivable of $14.8 million primarily due to declines in year-over-year revenues and timing of collections, decreases in prepaid taxes of $2.1 million primarily due to a retrospective change in the tax law, and increases in accounts payable and accrued expenses of $29.1 million, offset by increases in prepaid expenses and other assets of $7.5 million and decreases in operating lease obligations of $8.5 million. The increase in accounts payable and accrued expenses is primarily due to an increase in accrued interest of $13.6 million and accrued taxes of $9.8 million.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, net cash of $228.4 million was used in investing activities including $149.7 million for the acquisition of DHP and $84.6 million for purchases of property and equipment and capitalization of software development, offset by proceeds from the sale of investment of $5.6 million. For the year ended December 31, 2020, net cash of $210.8 million was used in investing activities including $140.0 million for the acquisition of HST and $70.8 million for purchases of property and equipment and capitalization of software development. This increase in purchases of property and equipment and capitalization of software development of $13.8 million was primarily due to increased capitalization of software development on capital projects primarily to enhance our information technology infrastructure and platforms to increase efficiencies, data security, and service line capabilities.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Cash flows used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $114.7 million primarily consisting of repayments of Term Loan G of $2,341.0 million, $100.0 million of purchases of treasury stock, and $3.8 million of taxes paid on net settlement of vested share awards and repayments of Term Loan B of $3.3 million, offset by the issuance of Term Loan B of $1,298.9 million and the issuance of $1,034.5 million of the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes.
Cash flows used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 were $61.6 million primarily consisting of $369.0 million of prepayments on our Term Loan G, $1,615.6 million for the extinguishment of the 7.125% Notes, $1,202.3 million for extinguishment of the Senior PIK Notes, $101.1 million for the purchase of treasury stock, and $23.5 million for the payment of debt issuance costs, offset by $682.4 million for the effect of the Transactions, $1,267.5 million of cash provided by the issuance of Senior Convertible PIK Notes and $1,300.0 million of cash provided by the issuance of the 5.750% Notes. In addition, there was $98.0 million of borrowings on and repayments of our Revolver G.
For the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019
For a discussion comparing our cash flows from operating activities, investing activities, and financing activities from the year ended December 31, 2020 with the year ended December 31, 2019, refer to Part II, Item 7. "Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Cash Flow Summary - For the year ended December 31, 2020 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2019" in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, which was filed with the Commission on March 16, 2021.
Term Loans and Revolvers
On August 24, 2021, MPH issued new senior secured credit facilities composed of $1,325.0 million of Term Loan B and $450.0 million of Revolver B, and $1,050.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Secured Notes. MPH used the net proceeds from Term Loan B, issued with a discount of 1.00%, and the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes to repay all of the outstanding balance of its Term Loan G of $2,341.0 million, and pay fees and expenses in connection therewith.
Interest on Term Loan B and Revolver B is calculated, at MPH's option, as (a) LIBOR (or, with respect to the term loan facility only, 0.50%, whichever is higher), plus the applicable margin, or (b) the highest rate of (1) prime rate, (2) the federal funds effective rate, plus 0.50%, (3) the LIBOR for an interest period of one month, plus 1.00% and (4) 0.50% for Term Loan B and 1.00% for Revolver B, in each case, plus an applicable margin of 4.25% for Term Loan B and between 3.50% and 4.00% for Revolver B, depending on MPH's first lien debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio. The interest rate in effect for Term Loan B was 4.75% as of December 31, 2021.
Term Loan B matures on September 1, 2028 and Revolver B matures on August 24, 2026.
For all our debt agreements with an interest rate dependent on LIBOR, we are currently assessing and monitoring how transitioning from LIBOR to an alternative reference rate may affect us past 2023.
We are obligated to pay a commitment fee on the average daily unused amount of our revolving credit facility. The annual commitment fee rate was 0.50% at December 31, 2021 and 0.25% at December 31, 2020. The fee can range from an annual rate of 0.25% to 0.50% based on our consolidated first lien debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio, as defined in the agreement.
Senior Notes
On October 8, 2020, the Senior PIK notes were redeemed in full for a total redemption price of $1,237.6 million, which included a redemption premium and accrued interest. The interest rate on the Senior PIK Notes was fixed at 8.5% and was payable semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year.
On October 8, 2020, the Company issued $1,300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of Senior Convertible PIK Notes. The Senior Convertible PIK Notes were issued with a 2.5% discount with a maturity date of October 15, 2027. Prior to the adoption of ASU 2020-06 on January 1, 2021, the nature of the notes required management to separate the Senior Convertible PIK Notes into liability and equity components. ASU 2020-06’s elimination of the beneficial conversion guidance resulted in "recombining" the equity and debt components of the Senior Convertible PIK Notes into a single liability. As a result, $297.9 million of the discount on the liability created by recognition of a component of the convertible debt in equity was eliminated on January 1, 2021. See Note 3 New Accounting Pronouncements and Note 9 Long-Term Debt of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further detail.
The Senior Convertible PIK Notes are convertible into shares of Class A common stock based on a $13.0 conversion price, subject to customary anti-dilution adjustments. The interest rate on the Senior Convertible PIK Notes is fixed at 6% in cash and 7% in kind, and is payable semi-annually on April 15 and October 15 of each year.
On October 29, 2020, the 7.125% Notes were redeemed in full for a total redemption price of $1,661.3 million, which included a redemption premium and accrued interest. The interest rate on the 7.125% Notes was fixed at 7.125% and was payable semi-annually on June 1 and December 1 of each year.
On October 29, 2020, the Company issued $1,300.0 million in aggregate principal amount of the 5.750% Notes. The 5.750% Notes are guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis jointly and severally by the Company and its subsidiaries and have a maturation date of November 1, 2028. The 5.750% Notes were issued at par. The interest rate on the 5.750% Notes is fixed at 5.750%, and is payable semi-annually on May 1 and November 1 of each year.
On August 24, 2021 MPH issued $1,050.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 5.50% Senior Secured Notes with a maturation date of September 1, 2028. The interest rate on the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes is fixed at 5.50%, and is payable semi-annually on March 1 and September 1 of each year. The 5.50% Senior Secured Notes are guaranteed and secured as described below under "-Guarantees and Security."
Debt Covenants and Events of Default
We are subject to certain affirmative and negative debt covenants under the debt agreements governing our indebtedness that limit our and/or certain of our subsidiaries' ability to engage in specific types of transactions. These covenants limit our and/or certain of our subsidiaries' ability to, among other things:
•incur additional indebtedness or issue disqualified or preferred stock;
•pay certain dividends or make certain distributions on capital stock or repurchase or redeem capital stock;
•make certain loans, investments or other restricted payments;
•transfer or sell certain assets;
•incur certain liens;
•place restrictions on the ability of its subsidiaries to pay dividends or make other payments to us;
•guarantee indebtedness or incur other contingent obligations;
•prepay junior debt and make certain investments;
•consummate any merger, consolidation or amalgamation, or liquidate, wind up or dissolve itself (or suffer any liquidation or dissolution), or dispose of all or substantially all of its business units, assets or other properties; and
•engage in transactions with our affiliates.
Certain covenants related to the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes will cease to apply to the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes for so long as such notes have investment grade ratings from both Moody’s Investors Service, Inc. and S&P Global Ratings.
In connection with the Refinancing, the Revolver Ratio was amended such that, if, as of the last day of any fiscal quarter of MPH, the aggregate amount of loans under the revolving credit facility, letters of credit issued under the revolving credit facility (to the extent not cash collateralized or backstopped or, in the aggregate, in excess of $10.0 million) and swingline loans are outstanding and/or issued in an aggregate amount greater than 35% of the total commitments in respect of the revolving credit facility at such time, the revolving credit facility will require MPH to maintain a maximum first lien secured leverage ratio of 6.75 to 1.00. Our consolidated first lien debt to consolidated EBITDA ratio was 2.61 times and 3.14 times as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020 we were in compliance with all of the debt covenants.
The debt agreements governing the new senior secured credit facilities, Term Loan G, the Revolver G, the 5.750% Notes and the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes contain customary events of default, subject to grace periods and exceptions, which include, among others, payment defaults, cross-defaults to certain material indebtedness, certain events of bankruptcy, material
judgments, in the case of the debt agreements governing the new senior secured credit facilities and the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes, failure of a guarantee on the liens on material collateral to remain in effect, in the case of the debt agreements governing the new senior secured credit facilities, Term Loan G and the Revolver G, and any change of control. Upon the occurrence of an event of default under such debt agreements, the lenders and holders of such debt will be permitted to accelerate the loans and terminate the commitments, as applicable, thereunder and exercise other specified remedies available to the lenders and holders thereunder.
See the footnotes to the EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA reconciliation table provided above under "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" for material differences between the financial information of MultiPlan and MPH.
Guarantees and Security
All obligations under the debt agreements governing Term Loan B, Revolver B and the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes are unconditionally guaranteed by MPH Acquisition Corp. 1, the direct holding company parent of MPH, and each existing and subsequently acquired or organized direct or indirect wholly owned U.S. organized restricted subsidiary of MPH (subject to certain exceptions). All such obligations, and the guarantees of such obligations, are secured, subject to permitted liens and other exceptions, by a first priority lien shared between the senior secured credit facilities and the 5.50% Senior Secured Notes on substantially all of MPH’s and the subsidiary guarantors’ tangible and intangible property, and a pledge of all of the capital stock of each of their respective subsidiaries.
Critical Accounting Policies
A critical accounting policy is one that is both important to the portrayal of a company's financial condition and results and requires management's most difficult, subjective, or complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. Our financial statements and accompanying notes are prepared in accordance with GAAP. Preparation of financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We base these determinations upon the best information available to us during the period in which we account for our financial condition and results. Our estimates and assumptions could change materially as conditions within and beyond our control change or as further information becomes available. We record changes in our estimates in the period the change occurs.
The following is a discussion of our critical accounting policies and the related management estimates and assumptions necessary in determining the value of related assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses.
Revenue Recognition
We derive revenues from contracts with customers by selling various cost management services and solutions. Variable consideration is estimated using the expected value method based on our historical experience and best judgment at the time. Due to the nature of our arrangements, certain estimates may be constrained if it is probable that a significant reversal of revenues will occur when the uncertainty is resolved. For our PSAV contracts, portions of revenues that are recognized and collected in a reporting period may be returned or credited in subsequent periods. These credits are the result of payors not utilizing the discounts that were initially calculated, or differences between our estimates of savings achieved for a customer and the amounts self-reported in the following month by that same customer. Significant judgment is used in constraining estimates of variable consideration, and these estimates are based upon both client-specific and aggregated factors that include historical billing and adjustment data, client contract terms, and performance guarantees. We update our estimates at the end of each reporting period as additional information becomes available.
See Note 2 Summary of Significant Accounting Policies of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Goodwill
Goodwill is calculated as the excess of the purchase price in an acquisition over the fair value of identifiable net assets acquired. Acquired intangible assets are separately recognized if the benefit of the intangible asset is obtained through contractual or other legal rights, or if the intangible asset can be sold, transferred, licensed, rented, or exchanged, regardless of the Company's intent to do so.
We assess the impairment of our goodwill at least annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value may not be recoverable. We performed our 2021 impairment assessment of goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets and determined that no impairment existed as of November 1, 2021. The Company's management is not aware
of any triggering events subsequent to the impairment review, and management believes no impairments exist as of December 31, 2021 that need to be disclosed.
The goodwill arose from the acquisition of the Company in 2016 by Holdings, the HST acquisition in 2020 and the DHP acquisition in 2021. The carrying value of goodwill was $4,363.1 million and $4,257.3 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively and no impairment has been recognized to date.
Stock-Based Compensation
Prior to the Transactions
Stock-based compensation expense includes costs associated with Units awarded to certain members of key management. Stock-based compensation is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the Unit and is recognized as compensation expense, net of forfeitures, over the applicable requisite service period of the Unit. The fair value of the Units is remeasured at each reporting period. Based on the put right available to the employee participants, stock-based compensation Units have been accounted for as a liability classified within Holdings' consolidated financial statements and we recorded these Units within shareholders' equity as an equity contribution from Holdings based on the fair value of the outstanding Units at each reporting period.
Each individual award was composed of time vesting units and performance vesting units. Time vesting units and performance vesting units vest based on the vesting dates and the achievement of certain performance measures as defined in each award agreement. We amortize the time vesting units on a straight line basis, and the performance vesting units on a graded vesting basis.
We determined the fair value of our awards based on (i) the customized payout structure of the subject Units, (ii) liquidity timing, and (iii) vesting hurdles, as applicable, based on the output of Monte Carlo simulations. The simulation was based on a risk neutral framework which is a common technique for valuing financial derivatives that possess optionality.
Changes in the assumptions made on (i) liquidity dates, (ii) volatility, (iii) discount rates and (iv) the risk-free rate can materially affect the estimate of fair value and ultimately how much stock-based compensation expense is recognized. The Company has historically been a private company and lacked company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, it estimated its expected stock volatility based on the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies. The risk-free interest rate is based on U.S. Treasury constant maturity yields commensurate with the remaining term for each liquidity date assumption. These inputs are subjective and generally require significant analysis and judgment to develop.
The consummation of the Transactions constituted a definitive Liquidity Event under the agreements governing the Unit awards and as a result the valuation as of October 7, 2020 used the cumulative exit value of the Company, corresponding to the transaction value and prior distributions, and removed the discount for lack of marketability.
After the consummation of the Transactions
The fair value of the awards under the 2020 Omnibus Incentive Plan is measured on the grant date. We determine the fair value of the Employee RS, Employee RSUs and Director RSUs with time based vesting using the value on our common stock on the date of the grant. We determine the fair value of Employee NQSOs with an exercise price equal to the price of the Company's Class A common stock on the grant date ("at-the-money") using a Black-Scholes option pricing model while taking into consideration the price of the Company's Class A common stock, vesting conditions, and the expected term obtained using the simplified method of averaging the vesting term and the original contractual term of the options. The fair value of Employee NQSOs with an exercise price higher than the Company's Class A common stock on the grant date is estimated on the date of grant using a binomial-lattice option pricing model while taking into consideration the price of the Company's Class A common stock, vesting conditions, and a sub optimal exercise factor calibrated to the valuation obtained from the Black-Scholes options model used for a hypothetical at-the-money option with the same vesting schedules. We determine the fair value of the Fixed Value RSUs using the fixed dollar amount of the award. The Fixed Value RSUs are classified as liabilities.
We amortize the value of these awards to expense over the vesting period on a straight line basis for employees, and in the same period(s) and in the same manner as if the Company had paid cash in exchange for the goods or services instead of a share-based award for non-employees. The Company recognizes forfeitures as they occur.
See Note 15 Stock-Based Compensation of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares
The Company classifies the Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares as a long-term liability on its consolidated balance sheets. Each Private Placement Warrant and unvested founder share is initially recorded at fair value on the date of consummation of the Transactions using an option pricing model, and it is re-measured to fair value at each subsequent reporting date. The Company will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value for the founder shares until the earlier of the re-vesting or forfeiture of these instruments. The Company will continue to adjust the liability for changes in fair value for the private placement warrants until the warrant is equity classified.
We determine the fair value of the Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares using an option pricing model while taking into consideration (i) the price of the Company's Class A common stock, (ii) transfer restrictions, and (iii) vesting hurdles, as applicable. The simulation was based on a risk neutral framework which is a common technique for valuing financial derivatives that possess optionality.
Certain assumptions used in the model are subjective and require significant management judgment, and include the (i) the risk-free rate, (ii) volatility, and (iii) the discount for lack of marketability. Changes in these assumptions can materially affect the estimate of the fair value of these instruments and ultimately change in fair value of Private Placement Warrants and unvested founder shares and expenses. The Company has historically been a private company and lacked sufficient company-specific historical and implied volatility information. Therefore, it estimated its expected stock volatility based on the implied volatility of our publicly traded financial instruments and the historical volatility of a publicly traded set of peer companies. The risk-free interest rate is based on the 5 year U.S. Treasury constant maturity yields. The discount for lack of marketability for privately held securities is based on the average rate protective put method that estimates the discount based on the average price over the restriction period rather than based on the final price.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using the asset and liability method. Under the asset and liability method, deferred income tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred income tax assets and liabilities are measured using the enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. Deferred income tax assets are recognized for deductible temporary differences, net operating loss carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards if it is more likely than not that the tax benefits will be realized. The ultimate realization of deferred income tax assets is dependent upon the generation of future taxable income during the periods in which those temporary differences become deductible. We evaluate a variety of factors on a regular basis to determine the amount of deferred income tax assets to recognize in our financial statements, including our recent earnings history, current and projected future taxable income, the number of years our net operating loss and tax credits can be carried forward, the existence of taxable temporary differences, any changes in current tax law, such as the CARES Act, the TCJA and available tax planning strategies.
Customer Concentration
Three customers individually accounted for 34%, 19% and 10% of revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 35%, 20% and 9% of revenues for each of the years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019. The loss of the business of one or more of our larger customers could have a material adverse effect on our results of operations.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 3 New Accounting Pronouncements of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosure about Market Risk
See