ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
Marpai, Inc. was formed as a Delaware corporation on January 22, 2021 with the intention to facilitate an initial public offering and other related transactions in order to carry on the business of two healthcare entities, Marpai Health and Continental Benefits LLC. Marpai Inc.’s mission is to positively change healthcare for the benefit of (i) our Clients; (ii) our Members, and (iii) the Providers. We are creating the healthcare payer of the future for self-insured employers in the U.S., what we refer to as the “Payer of the Future.” Through the use of the latest technology and artificial intelligence or “A.I.,” we believe we have the ability to predict costly events, such as who is likely to develop a chronic disease or require a costly operation over the next twelve months. With this knowledge, we aim to optimize care so that employers can save money, while employees can have access to high-quality care and enjoy good healthcare outcomes.
Our company is the combination of Marpai Health, Inc., and Continental Benefits LLC. Marpai Health is our A.I.-focused subsidiary, with a research and development team in Tel Aviv, Israel. Continental Benefits is our healthcare payer subsidiary that provides administration services to self-insured employer groups across the United States. It acts as a third-party administrator or “TPA” handling all administrative aspects of providing healthcare to self-insured employer groups. We have combined these two businesses to create what we believe to be the Payer of the Future, which has not only the licenses, processes and know- how of a payer but also the latest A.I. technology. This combination allows us to differentiate in the TPA market by delivering something new - a technology-driven service that we believe can lower the overall cost of healthcare while maintaining or improving healthcare outcomes.
Since December 2019, Marpai Health and Continental Benefits have been working together on information exchange and joint development of A.I. models to predict the onset of chronic conditions and up- coming high-cost events such as expensive imaging or orthopedic surgeries. We believe early detection would lead some portion of Continental Benefits’ Members to avoid, delay or better manage their disease. This matters in both cost terms to the employers and in wellbeing for the Members. By recommending our Members to seek appropriate medical consultation with effective providers, we believe our technology can help mitigate the financial and wellbeing costs for employers and Members.
Many states have enacted laws prohibiting physicians from practicing medicine in partnership with non- physicians, such as business corporations. In some states, including New York, these take the form of laws or regulations prohibiting splitting of physician fees with non-physicians or others. As we do not engage in the practice of medicine or fee-splitting with any medical professionals, we do not believe these laws restrict our business. Our activities involve only monitoring and analyzing historical claims data, including our Members’ interactions with licensed healthcare professionals, and recommending healthcare providers and/or sources of treatment. We do not provide medical prognosis or healthcare. In accordance with various states’ corporate practice of medicine laws and states’ laws and regulations which define the practice of medicine, our call center staff are prohibited from providing Members with any evaluation or recommendation concerning a medical condition, diagnosis, prescription, care and/or treatment. Rather, our call center staff can only provide Members with general and publicly available information that is non-specific to the Members’ medical conditions and statistical information about the prevalence of medical conditions within certain populations or under certain
circumstances. Our call center staff do not discuss Members’ individual medical conditions and are prohibited from asking Members for any additional PHI as such term is defined under the HIPAA. Our call center staff have been trained and instructed to always inform Members that they are not licensed medical professionals, are not providing medical advice, and that Members should reach out to their medical provider for any medical advice.
In the area of high-cost events, like a high-cost image or a surgery, our customer data show large variations in cost for the same procedure, even given the same geography. For example, the median cost of an MRI of the brain may be approximately $1,000 in a given geography, but a significant amount of procedures priced above the median cost 3-5 times the median. By predicting which Members are on trajectories to have high-cost tests or surgeries, we can help guide them to lower cost, but high-quality providers. This saves money for employers, while ensuring Members get the best care.
After having worked together for over a year to identify and collaboratively develop A.I. solutions tailored to the self-insured employer market, Marpai Health started to implement its A.I.-enabled prediction tools as part of Continental Benefits’ patent-pending TopCare program®. In January 2021, our A.I.- powered TopCare program® became live, making it possible for us to offer our Members care management with high-impact predictions. Although our A.I. technology has not yet been integrated with any of our TPA business’ core systems, other than TopCare, to date, we plan to use A.I. in virtually every part of our TPA business. On April 1, 2021 we acquired all of the equity interests of Marpai Health and Continental Benefits (“Acquisition”), since the Acquisition, Marpai Health and Continental Benefits have been operating as one company under the “Marpai” brand.
Representation in the Financial Statements of Marpai, Inc.
The audited consolidated financial statements of Marpai, Inc and the discussion of the results of its operations in this annual report, reflect the results of the operations of Marpai Health (and its subsidiary EYME) for all periods presented and the results of Continental Benefits since its acquisition on April 1, 2021. Marpai Captive was incorporated in March 2022 and, therefore, had no financial statements as of December 31, 2021.
Results of Operations - Comparison of the Years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Comparison of the Years December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues and Cost of Revenue
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our total revenue was $14,226,794 and $0, respectively. The revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 consists exclusively of Continental Benefits’ revenues. Continental Benefits results of operations have been included in our consolidated results of operations since its acquisition on April 1, 2021.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our cost of revenue exclusive of depreciation and amortization was $10,289,578 and $0, respectively. The cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 consists exclusively of Continental Benefits’ cost revenue. Continental Benefits results of operations have been included in our consolidated results of operations since its acquisition on April 1, 2021.
Total cost of revenues consists of (i) service fees, which primarily include vendor fees associated with the client’s benefit program selections, (ii) the direct labor cost associated with claim management and processing services, and (iii) direct labor costs associated with providing customer support and services to the clients, members, and other external stakeholders.
Research and Development
We incurred $1,733,964 of research and development expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,766,388 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $32,424 or 1.8%. The decrease is attributable to having increased expenditures amounting to approximately $877,000 associated primarily with a higher number of research and development personnel offset by an increase of approximately $895,000 in the amount of research and development costs of internal use software that were capitalized in the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. We started capitalization of certain research and development costs when the project reached the development stage in August 2020, which resulted in a substantial portion of the software development costs being capitalized starting then through December 31, 2021.
General and Administrative Expenses
We incurred $8,055,572 of general and administrative expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $1,499,376 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $6,556,196. The increase for year ended December 31, 2021 was due to general and administrative expenses of Continental Benefits amounting to approximately $3,981,000 (which were not included in the operating results of the Company prior to its acquisition on April 1, 2021) as well as increase in the general and administrative expenses of Marpai, Inc. amounting to approximately $2,716,000, primarily due to an increase in accounting and legal services in the amount of approximately $550,100 related to the acquisition of Continental Benefits, as well as increases in the cost of personnel and professional fees associated with the growth of the Company over the last year as well as its transition from a private company to a public company.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
We incurred $4,965,209 of sales and marketing expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $27,583 for the year ended December 31, 2020, an increase of $4,937,626. This increase was primarily due to an increase of approximately $1,233,000 in branding expense, and Continental Benefits’ sales and marketing expenses from April 1, 2021, the date of the Acquisition, through December 31, 2021 in the amount of approximately $3,704,000 (which were not included in the operating results of the Company prior to its acquisition on April 1, 2021).
Information Technology Expenses
We incurred $2,492,060 of information technology expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The information technology expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021 consist exclusively of Continental Benefits’ expenses which have been included in our consolidated results of operations since its acquisition on April 1, 2021.
Facilities expenses, depreciation and amortization
We incurred facilities expenses of $589,926 and depreciation and amortization expenses of $1,961,733 compared to facilities expenses of $0 and depreciation expenses of $74,384 for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase was due to Continental Benefits’ expenses from April 1, 2021, the date of the Acquisition, through December 31, 2021, and amortization of software that was previously capitalized and reached post implementation stage during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest Expense, net
We incurred $427,178 of interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $521,140 for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $93,962. The decrease was the result of the reduction of interest expense related to convertible notes that were repaid in cash or converted into equity at the time of the acquisition of Marpai Health and Continental Benefits and after our initial public offering in October 2021.
Net Loss
Net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 amounted to $15,984,835 as compared to a loss of $3,867,984 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the net loss was due to increases in general and administrative expenses, sales and marketing expenses and research and development expenses, for the reasons mentioned above, partially offset by Continental benefits’ revenue net of cost of revenues from April 1, 2021, the date of the Acquisition, through December 31, 2021. In addition, in the year ended December 31, 2021 we incurred other operating expenses due to the consolidation of the operating results of Continental Benefits’ effective upon its acquisition on April 1,2021.
Loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $1.59, as compared to $1.60 loss per share for the year ended December 31, 2020. The loss per share for the year decreased mainly as a result of an increase in our weighted average number of shares due to the issuance of additional shares during the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021, partially offset by an increase in net loss for the year. The increase in weighted average common shares outstanding reflects primarily the issuances of our common shares at our initial public offering as well as the issuance of our common shares upon the conversion of convertible notes.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As shown in the accompanying consolidated financial statements as of December 31, 2021, the Company had an accumulated deficit of approximately $21.5 million, cash and cash equivalents of approximately $19.2 million and working capital of approximately $15.8 million.
We have spent most of our cash resources on funding our operating activities. Through December 31, 2021, we have financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from the sale and issuance of our Common Stock as well as convertible promissory notes.
On October 29, 2021, the Company announced the closing of its IPO and full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option. The Company issued a total of 7,187,500 shares of common stock at a public offering price of $4.00 per share for gross proceeds of $28.75 million. Net of underwriting fees and all offering expenses, the proceeds to the Company amounted to approximately $24.5 million. As a result of the IPO, all of the Company’s outstanding notes were either converted pursuant to their terms or repaid in full.
On April 1, 2021, pursuant to the terms of the Purchase and Reorganization Agreement, and a Note Exchange Agreement, we issued the New Notes with an aggregate principal balance of $2,198,459 in exchange for certain then outstanding convertible promissory notes of Marpai Health of equivalent amount of outstanding principal and accrued interest. The New Notes carried a simple interest rate of 8% per annum over a two-year term and the principal and accrued and unpaid interest thereon. New Notes converted into 820,365 shares of Class A common stock upon the closing of the IPO. A purchase note at a total principal amount of $2,930,000 and accrued interest of $252,381 (“Purchase Note”), was converted into 781,250 shares of Class A common stock upon the closing of the IPO with the remaining balance repaid in cash.
In June 2021, the Company entered into convertible debt agreements with several investors for the issuance of convertible promissory notes in the aggregate principal amount of $300,000 (the “June 2021 Notes”). The June 2021 Notes were due two years from the date, of issuance and accrue interest at 8% per annum, payable in cash at maturity or convertible to shares. June 2021 Notes converted into 110,547 shares of Class A common stock upon the closing of the IPO.
On July 29, 2021, the Company issued to HillCour Investment Fund LLC a promissory note in the principal amount of up to $3,000,000 (the “HillCour Promissory Note”). Interests on the HillCour Promissory Note accrued at 6% per annum. All outstanding principal and accrued interests thereunder was to become due and payable on the earlier of (i) January 29, 2022, or (ii) closing of the IPO. HillCour Promissory Note, including $3,000,000 of principal and $27,083 of accrued interest, was repaid on November 2, 2021.
Cash Flows
The following tables summarizes selected information about our sources and uses of cash and cash equivalents for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities totaled $10,795,252 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and increased by $8,845,973 as compared to $1,949,279 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily driven by our net loss for the year of $15,984,835 partially offset by non-cash items totaling approximately $3.6 million as well as decrease in net working capital items amounting to approximately $1.6 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used In) Investing Activities
A total of $9,643,740 was provided by investing activities in the year ended December 31, 2021 and increased by $10,197,805 as compared to $554,065 used for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in net cash was mainly due to the cash and restricted cash acquired as part of the Acquisition, offset by an amount of approximately $1.5 million expended during the year ended December 31, 2021 on capitalized software.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Financing activities provided net cash of $25,267,223 and $4,075,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, in 2021 the cash provided from financing activities was primarily from our initial public offering compared to 2020 when it was primarily related to proceeds from the sale and issuance of convertible promissory notes.
Critical Accounting Estimates
Our consolidated financial statements are prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires management to make estimates, assumptions and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the applicable periods. We evaluate our estimates, assumptions, and judgments on an ongoing basis. Our estimates, assumptions and judgments are based on historical experience and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Different assumptions and judgments would change the estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements, which, in turn, could change the results from those reported.
See Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements included in this Annual Report for a description of the significant accounting policies that we use to prepare our consolidated financial statements.
Critical accounting policies that were impacted by the estimates, judgments and assumptions used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements are discussed below.
Capitalized Software
We comply with the guidance of ASC Topic 350-40, “Intangibles - Goodwill and Other - Internal Use Software”, in accounting for the Company’s internally developed system projects that it utilizes to provide its services to customers. These system projects generally relate to the Company’s software that is not intended for sale or otherwise marketed. Internal and external costs incurred during the preliminary project stage are expensed as they are incurred. Once a project has reached the development stage, we capitalize direct internal and external costs until the software is substantially complete and ready for its intended use. Costs for upgrades and enhancements are capitalized, whereas costs incurred for maintenance are expensed as incurred. These capitalized software costs are amortized on a project by- project basis over the expected economic life of the underlying software on a straight-line basis, which is generally three to five years. Amortization commences when the software is available for its intended use.
Goodwill
Goodwill is recognized and initially measured as any excess of the acquisition-date consideration transferred in a business combination over the acquisition-date amounts recognized for the net identifiable assets acquired. Goodwill is not amortized but is tested for impairment annually, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not result in an impairment of goodwill. The Company operates in one reporting segment and reporting unit; therefore, goodwill is tested for impairment at the consolidated level. First, we assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than it’s carrying amount. If we conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, we conduct a quantitative goodwill impairment test comparing the fair value of the applicable reporting unit with its carrying value. If the carrying amount of the reporting unit exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit, we recognize an impairment loss in the consolidated statement of operations for the amount by which the carrying amount exceeds the fair value of the reporting unit. We perform the annual goodwill impairment test on December 31. There was no goodwill impairment for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Income Taxes
The Company accounts for income taxes using an asset and liability approach that requires the recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities for future tax consequences attributable to differences between financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax basis, net operating losses, tax credit and other carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates when the assets and liabilities are expected to be realized or settled. The Company regularly reviews deferred tax assets for realizability and establishes valuation allowances based on available evidence including historical operating losses, projected future taxable income, expected timing of the reversals of existing temporary differences, and appropriate tax planning strategies. If the Company’s assessment of the realizability of a deferred tax asset changes, an increase to a valuation allowance will result in a reduction of net earnings at that time, while the reduction of a valuation allowance will result in an increase of net earnings at that time.
The Company follows ASC Topic 740-10-65-1 in accounting for uncertainty in income taxes by prescribing rules for recognition, measurement, and classification in financial statements of tax positions taken or expected to be in a tax return. This prescribes a two-step process for the financial statement measurement and recognition of a tax position. The first step involves the determination of whether it is more likely than not (greater than 50 percent likelihood) that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, based on the technical merits of the position. The second step requires that any tax position that meets the more likely than not recognition threshold be measured and recognized in the financial statements at the largest amount of benefit that is a greater than 50 percent likelihood of being realized upon ultimate settlement. This topic also provides guidance on the accounting for related interest and penalties, financial statement classification and disclosure. The Company’s policy is that any interest or penalties related to uncertain tax positions are recognized in income tax expense when incurred. We have no uncertain tax positions or related interest or penalties requiring accrual on December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue when control of the promised services is transferred to the Company’s customers in an amount that reflects the consideration expected to be entitled to in exchange for those services. As the Company completes its performance obligations, which are identified below, it has an unconditional right to consideration, as outlined in the Company’s contracts.
All the Company’s contracts with customers obligate the Company to perform services. Services provided include health and welfare administration, dependent eligibility verification, COBRA administration, and benefit billing. Revenue is recognized over time as services are provided as the performance obligations are satisfied through the effort expended to research, investigate, evaluate, document, and report claims, and control of these services is transferred to the customer. The Company has the right to receive payment for all services rendered.
The transaction price of a contract is the amount of consideration to which the Company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer.
To determine the transaction price of a contract, we consider our customary business practices and the terms of the contract. For the purpose of determining transaction prices, we assume that the services will be transferred to the customer as promised in accordance with existing contracts and that the contracts will not be canceled, renewed, or modified.
The Company’s contracts with customers have fixed fee prices that are denominated per employee per month. We include amounts of variable consideration in a contract’s transaction price only to the extent that it is probable that the amounts will not be subject to significant reversals (that is, downward adjustments to revenue recognized for satisfied performance obligations). In determining amounts of variable consideration to include in a contract’s transaction price, we rely on our experience and other evidence that supports our qualitative assessment of whether revenue would be subject to a significant reversal. We consider all the facts and circumstances associated with both the risk of a revenue reversal arising from an uncertain future event and the magnitude of the reversal if that uncertain event were to occur.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company accounts for share-based awards issued to employees in accordance with ASC Topic 718, “Compensation-Stock Compensation”. In addition, we issue stock options to non-employees in exchange for consulting services and accounts for these in accordance with the provisions of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2018-07, “Improvements to Nonemployee Share-Based Payment Accounting” (“ASU 2018-07”). Compensation expense is measured at the grant date, based on the calculated fair value of the award, and recognized as an expense over the requisite service period, which is generally the vesting period of the grant. For modification of share-based payment awards, the Company records the incremental fair value of the modified award as share-based compensation on the date of modification for vested awards or over the remaining vesting period for unvested awards. The incremental compensation is the excess of the fair value of the modified award on the date of modification over the fair value of the original award immediately before the modification. The sum of the incremental compensation cost and the remaining unrecognized compensation cost for the original award on the modification date is recognized over the requisite service period.
The Company estimates the expected term of our stock options granted to employees using the simplified method, whereby the expected term equals the average of the vesting term and the original contractual term of the option. The Company utilizes this method as the Company does not have sufficient historical exercise data to provide a reasonable basis upon which to estimate the expected term. For stock options granted to non-employees, the Company utilizes the contractual term of the option as the basis for the expected term assumption. All other assumptions used to calculate the grant date fair value are generally consistent with the assumptions used for options granted to employees. For purposes of calculating share-based compensation, we estimate the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes option-pricing model. The determination of the fair value of share-based payment awards utilizing the Black-Scholes model is affected by the Company’s stock price and a number of assumptions, including expected volatility, expected life, risk-free interest rate and expected dividends. The expected volatility is primarily based on the historical volatility of peer company data while the expected life of the stock options is based on historical and other economic data trended into the future. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant for periods corresponding to the expected option term. The dividend yield assumption is based on the Company’s history and expectation of no dividend payouts.
If factors change and the Company employs different assumptions, share-based compensation expense may differ significantly from what has been recorded in the past. If there is a difference between the assumptions used in determining share-based compensation expense and the actual factors which become known over time, specifically with respect to anticipated forfeitures, the Company may change the input factors used in determining share-based compensation costs for future grants. These changes, if any, may materially impact the Company’s results of operations in the period such changes are made. Incremental compensation costs arising from subsequent modifications of awards after the grant date are recognized when incurred. In addition, we account for forfeitures of awards as they occur. For share-based awards that vest based on performance conditions, expense is recognized when it is probable that the conditions will be met.
Recently Issued and Adopted Accounting Pronouncements
A discussion of recent accounting pronouncements is included in Note 3 to our consolidated financial statements in this annual report.