Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Description of Merck’s Business
Merck & Co., Inc. (Merck or the Company) is a global health care company that delivers innovative health solutions through its prescription medicines, vaccines, biologic therapies and animal health products. The Company’s operations are principally managed on a products basis and include two operating segments, which are the Pharmaceutical and Animal Health segments, both of which are reportable segments.
The Pharmaceutical segment includes human health pharmaceutical and vaccine products. Human health pharmaceutical products consist of therapeutic and preventive agents, generally sold by prescription, for the treatment of human disorders. The Company sells these human health pharmaceutical products primarily to drug wholesalers and retailers, hospitals, government agencies and managed health care providers such as health maintenance organizations, pharmacy benefit managers and other institutions. Human health vaccine products consist of preventive pediatric, adolescent and adult vaccines. The Company sells these human health vaccines primarily to physicians, wholesalers, physician distributors and government entities.
The Animal Health segment discovers, develops, manufactures and markets a wide range of veterinary pharmaceutical and vaccine products, as well as health management solutions and services, for the prevention, treatment and control of disease in all major livestock and companion animal species. The Company also offers an extensive suite of digitally connected identification, traceability and monitoring products. The Company sells its products to veterinarians, distributors and animal producers.
The Company previously had a Healthcare Services segment that provided services and solutions focused on engagement, health analytics and clinical services to improve the value of care delivered to patients. The Company divested the remaining businesses in this segment during the first quarter of 2020.
Spin-Off of Organon & Co.
On June 2, 2021, Merck completed the spin-off of products from its women’s health, biosimilars and established brands businesses into a new, independent, publicly traded company named Organon & Co. (Organon) through a distribution of Organon’s publicly traded stock to Company shareholders. The distribution is expected to qualify and has been treated as tax-free to the Company and its shareholders for U.S. federal income tax purposes. The established brands included in the transaction consisted of dermatology, non-opioid pain management, respiratory, select cardiovascular products, as well as the rest of Merck’s diversified brands franchise. Merck’s existing research pipeline programs continue to be owned and developed within Merck as planned. The historical results of the businesses that were contributed to Organon in the spin-off have been reflected as discontinued operations in the Company’s consolidated financial statements through the date of the spin-off (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements).
Overview
Financial Highlights
* Calculation not meaningful.
(1) Non-GAAP net income and non-GAAP earnings per share (EPS) exclude acquisition and divestiture-related costs, restructuring costs and certain other items. For further discussion and a reconciliation of GAAP to non-GAAP net income and EPS (see “Non-GAAP Income and Non-GAAP EPS” below).
Executive Summary
During 2021, Merck delivered on its strategic priorities by executing commercially to drive strong revenue and earnings growth in the year, completing key business development transactions, accelerating its broad pipeline, and achieving notable regulatory milestones. Also, on June 2, 2021, Merck completed the spin-off of Organon. The historical results of the businesses that were contributed to Organon in the spin-off have been reflected as discontinued operations in the Company’s consolidated financial statements through the date of the spin-off.
Worldwide sales were $48.7 billion in 2021, an increase of 17% compared with 2020, or 16% excluding the favorable effect of foreign exchange. The sales increase was driven primarily by growth in oncology, vaccines, hospital acute care and animal health. Additionally, revenue in 2021 reflects the benefit of sales of molnupiravir, an investigational oral antiviral COVID-19 treatment. As discussed below, COVID-19-related disruptions negatively affected sales in 2021, but to a lesser extent than in 2020, which benefited year-over-year sales growth.
Merck continues to execute scientifically compelling business development opportunities to augment its pipeline. In November 2021, Merck acquired Acceleron Pharma Inc. (Acceleron), a publicly traded biopharmaceutical company evaluating the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta superfamily of proteins through the development of pulmonary and hematologic therapies. In April 2021, Merck acquired Pandion Therapeutics, Inc. (Pandion), a clinical-stage biotechnology company developing novel therapeutics designed to address the unmet needs of patients living with autoimmune diseases. Additionally, Merck entered into a collaboration with Gilead Sciences, Inc. (Gilead) to jointly develop and commercialize long-acting treatments in HIV.
In 2021, Merck received over 30 approvals and filed over 20 New Drug Applications (NDAs) and supplemental Biologics License Applications (BLAs) across the U.S., the EU, Japan and China. During 2021, the Company received numerous regulatory approvals within oncology. Keytruda received approval for additional indications in the U.S. and/or internationally as monotherapy in the therapeutic areas of breast, colorectal, cutaneous squamous cell, esophageal, melanoma and renal cell cancers, as well as in combination with chemotherapy in the therapeutic areas of breast, cervical, gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancers. Keytruda was also approved in combination with Lenvima both for the treatment of certain adult patients with endometrial cancer and for the treatment of renal cell cancer. Lenvima is being developed in collaboration with Eisai Co., Ltd. (Eisai). Lynparza, which is being developed in collaboration with AstraZeneca PLC (AstraZeneca), received approval in China as monotherapy for the treatment of certain adult patients with metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer. Additionally, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved Welireg (belzutifan), an oral hypoxia-inducible factor-2 alpha (HIF-2α) inhibitor, for the treatment of adult patients with von Hippel-Lindau (VHL)
disease who require therapy for associated renal cell carcinoma (RCC), central nervous system hemangioblastomas, or pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, not requiring immediate surgery.
Also in 2021, as updated in February 2022, the FDA granted Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) for molnupiravir, an investigational oral antiviral COVID-19 treatment being developed in a collaboration with Ridgeback Biotherapuetics LP (Ridgeback). Molnupiravir also received conditional marketing authorization in the United Kingdom (UK) and Special Approval for Emergency in Japan. Also in 2021, the FDA and the European Commission (EC) approved Vaxneuvance (Pneumococcal 15-valent Conjugate Vaccine), a pneumococcal conjugate vaccine for use in adults. Additionally, Verquvo, a medicine to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and heart failure hospitalization following a hospitalization for heart failure or need for outpatient intravenous diuretics in adults was approved in the U.S., the EU and Japan. Verquvo is being jointly developed with Bayer AG (Bayer). In January 2022, the Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (MHLW) approved Lyfnua (gefapixant) for adults with refractory or unexplained chronic cough.
In addition to the recent regulatory approvals discussed above, the Company advanced its late-stage pipeline with several regulatory submissions.
Keytruda is under review in the U.S. and/or internationally for supplemental indications for the treatment of certain patients with triple negative breast, cervical, endometrial, melanoma, renal cell and tumor mutation burden-high (TMBH) cancers. Lynparza is under review for supplemental indications for the treatment of certain patients with breast and prostate cancers. Lenvima is under review in combination with Keytruda for a supplemental indication for the treatment of certain patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). MK-4482, molnupiravir, is under a rolling review by the European Medicines Agency (EMA); MK-7264, gefapixant, a selective, non-narcotic, orally-administered, investigational P2X3-receptor antagonist being developed for the treatment of refractory, chronic cough is under review in the U.S. and the EU; and Vaxneuvance (V114), a 15-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, is under priority review by the FDA for the prevention of invasive pneumococcal disease in pediatric patients. V114 is also under review in Japan for use in adults.
The Company’s Phase 3 oncology programs include:
•Keytruda in the therapeutic areas of biliary, cutaneous squamous cell, gastric, hepatocellular, mesothelioma, ovarian, prostate and small-cell lung cancers;
•Lynparza as monotherapy for colorectal cancer and in combination with Keytruda for non-small-cell lung and small-cell lung cancers;
•Lenvima in combination with Keytruda for colorectal, esophageal, gastric, head and neck, melanoma and non-small-cell lung cancers;
•Welireg for RCC;
•MK-1308A, the coformulation of quavonlimab, Merck’s novel investigational anti-CTLA-4 antibody, and pembrolizumab for RCC;
•MK-3475, pembrolizumab subcutaneous for non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC);
•MK-7119, Tukysa (tucatinib), which is being developed in collaboration with Seagen Inc. (Seagen), for breast cancer;
•MK-4280A, the coformulation of favezelimab, Merck’s novel investigational anti-LAG3 therapy, and pembrolizumab for colorectal cancer; and
•MK-7684A, the coformulation of vibostolimab, an anti-TIGIT therapy, and pembrolizumab for NSCLC.
Additionally, the Company has candidates in Phase 3 clinical development in several other therapeutic areas including:
•MK-7962, sotatercept, for the treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), which was obtained in the Acceleron acquisition;
•MK-1654, clesrovimab, for the prevention of respiratory syncytial virus;
•MK-8591, islatravir, an investigational nucleoside reverse transcriptase translocation inhibitor (NRTTI) for the prevention of HIV-1 infection (which is on clinical hold);
•MK-8591A, islatravir in combination with doravirine for the treatment of HIV-1 infection (which is on clinical hold); and
•MK-4482, molnupiravir, which is reflected in Phase 3 development in the U.S. as it remains investigational following EUA.
The Company is allocating resources to support its commercial opportunities in the near term while investing heavily in research to support future innovations and long-term growth. Research and development expenses in 2021 reflect higher clinical development spending and increased investment in discovery research and early drug development.
In November 2021, Merck’s Board of Directors approved an increase to the Company’s quarterly dividend, raising it to $0.69 per share from $0.65 per share on the Company’s outstanding common stock. During 2021, the Company returned $7.5 billion to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases.
In December 2021, the Company completed its inaugural issuance of a $1.0 billion sustainability bond, which was part of an $8.0 billion underwritten bond offering. The Company intends to use the net proceeds from the sustainability bond offering to support projects and partnerships in the Company’s priority environmental, social and governance (ESG) areas and contribute to the advancement of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
COVID-19 Update
During the COVID-19 pandemic Merck has remained focused on protecting the safety of its employees, ensuring that its supply of medicines and vaccines reaches its patients, contributing its scientific expertise to the development of an antiviral therapy, supporting efforts to expand manufacturing capacity and supply of SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 medicines and vaccines (see below), and supporting health care providers and Merck’s communities. Although COVID-19-related disruptions negatively affected results in 2021 and 2020, Merck continues to experience strong global underlying demand across its business.
In 2021, Merck’s sales were unfavorably affected by COVID-19-related disruptions, which resulted in an estimated negative impact to Merck’s Pharmaceutical segment sales of approximately $1.3 billion. Roughly 75% of Merck’s Pharmaceutical segment revenue is comprised of physician-administered products, which, despite strong underlying demand, have been affected by social distancing measures and fewer well visits. Merck’s sales were favorably affected by the authorization of molnupiravir in several markets as discussed further below, which resulted in sales of $952 million in 2021. In 2020, the estimated negative impact of COVID-19-related disruptions to Merck’s sales was approximately $2.1 billion, of which approximately $2.0 billion was attributable to the Pharmaceutical segment and approximately $50 million was attributable to the Animal Health segment.
In April 2021, Merck announced it was discontinuing the development of MK-7110 (formerly known as CD24Fc) for the treatment of hospitalized patients with COVID-19, which was obtained as part of Merck’s acquisition of OncoImmune (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements). This decision resulted in charges of $207 million to Cost of sales in 2021. In January 2021, the Company announced the discontinuation of the development programs for its COVID-19 vaccine candidates, V590 and V591, following Merck’s review of findings from Phase 1 clinical studies for the vaccines. In these studies, both V590 and V591 were generally well tolerated, but the immune responses were inferior to those seen following natural infection and those reported for other SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 vaccines. Due to the discontinuation, the Company recorded a charge of $305 million in 2020, of which $260 million was reflected in Cost of sales and the remaining $45 million of costs were reflected in Research and development expenses.
Operating expenses reflect a minor positive effect in 2021 as investments in COVID-19-related research largely offset the favorable impact of lower spending in other areas due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Operating expenses were positively affected in 2020 by approximately $500 million primarily due to lower promotional and selling costs, as well as lower research and development expenses, net of investments in COVID-19-related antiviral and vaccine research programs. In addition, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused some disruption and volatility in the Company’s global supply chain network, and the Company may in the future experience disruptions in availability and delays in shipments of raw materials and packaging, as well as related cost inflation.
In December 2021, the FDA granted EUA for molnupiravir based on positive results from the Phase 3 MOVe-OUT clinical trial. Additionally, in December 2021, Japan’s MHLW granted Special Approval for
Emergency for molnupiravir. In November 2021, the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency granted conditional marketing authorization for molnupiravir. In addition, in October 2021, the EMA initiated a rolling review for molnupiravir. Merck plans to work with the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use of the EMA to complete the rolling review process to facilitate initiating the formal review of the Marketing Authorization Application. Merck is developing molnupiravir in collaboration with Ridgeback. The companies are actively working with other regulatory agencies worldwide to submit applications for emergency use or marketing authorization. Merck has entered into advance purchase and supply agreements for molnupiravir in more than 30 markets. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to the collaboration with Ridgeback.
In March 2021, Merck announced it had entered into multiple agreements to support efforts to expand manufacturing capacity and supply of SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 medicines and vaccines. The Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), a division of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, is providing Merck with funding to adapt and make available a number of existing manufacturing facilities for the production of SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 vaccines and medicines. Merck has also entered into agreements to support the manufacturing and supply of Johnson & Johnson’s SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 vaccine. Merck is using certain of its facilities in the U.S. to produce drug substance, formulate and fill vials of Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine.
Pricing
Global efforts toward health care cost containment continue to exert pressure on product pricing and market access worldwide. Changes to the U.S. health care system as part of health care reform enacted in prior years, as well as increased purchasing power of entities that negotiate on behalf of Medicare, Medicaid, and private sector beneficiaries, have contributed to pricing pressure. In several international markets, government-mandated pricing actions have reduced prices of generic and patented drugs. In addition, the Company’s revenue performance in 2021 was negatively affected by other cost-reduction measures taken by governments and other third parties to lower health care costs. In the U.S., the Biden Administration and Congress continue to discuss legislation designed to control health care costs, including the cost of drugs. The Company anticipates all of these actions and additional actions in the future will continue to negatively affect revenue performance.
Operating Results
Sales
Worldwide sales grew 17% in 2021 primarily due to higher sales in the oncology franchise largely driven by strong growth of Keytruda and increased alliance revenue from Lynparza and Lenvima, as well as higher sales in the vaccines franchise, primarily attributable to growth in Gardasil/Gardasil 9, Varivax and ProQuad. Also contributing to revenue growth in 2021 were higher sales in the virology franchise attributable to molnupiravir, higher sales in the hospital acute care franchise, reflecting growth in Bridion and Prevymis, as well as higher sales of animal health products. Additionally, sales in 2021 benefited from higher third-party manufacturing sales and the achievement of milestones for an out-licensed product that triggered contingent payments to Merck. As discussed above, COVID-19-related disruptions unfavorably affected sales in 2021, but to a lesser extent than in 2020, which benefited year-over-year sales growth. Sales growth in 2021 was partially offset by lower sales of Pneumovax 23, the suspension of sales in 2020 of hospital acute care product Zerbaxa, and lower sales of virology products Isentress/Isentress HD.
Sales in the U.S. grew 14% in 2021 primarily driven by higher sales of Keytruda, sales of molnupiravir, higher sales of Bridion, Gardasil 9, Varivax and ProQuad, increased alliance revenue from Lynparza and Lenvima,
as well as higher sales of animal health products. Lower sales of Pneumovax 23, Januvia/Janumet and Zerbaxa partially offset revenue growth in the U.S. in 2021.
International sales increased 20% in 2021 primarily due to growth in Gardasil/Gardasil 9, Keytruda, sales of molnupiravir, increased alliance revenue from Lynparza and Lenvima, as well as higher sales of Januvia/Janumet, Bridion, Prevymis and animal health products. International sales growth in 2021 was partially offset by lower sales of Noxafil, Zerbaxa and Isentress/Isentress HD. International sales represented 54% and 53% of total sales in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Worldwide sales increased 6% in 2020 primarily due to higher sales in the oncology franchise, as well as growth in certain hospital acute care products and animal health. Growth in these areas was largely offset by the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic as discussed above, competitive pressure in the virology franchise and pricing pressure in the diabetes franchise.
See Note 19 to the consolidated financial statements for details on sales of the Company’s products. A discussion of performance for select products in the franchises follows.
Pharmaceutical Segment
Oncology
(1) Alliance revenue represents Merck’s share of profits, which are product sales net of cost of sales and commercialization costs (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements).
Keytruda is an anti-PD-1 (programmed death receptor-1) therapy that has been approved as monotherapy for the treatment of certain patients with cervical cancer, classical Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL), cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma (cSCC), esophageal or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) carcinoma, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), HCC, NSCLC, melanoma, Merkel cell carcinoma, microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) or mismatch repair deficient (dMMR) cancer (solid tumors) including MSI-H/dMMR colorectal cancer, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma, TMB-H cancer (solid tumors), and urothelial carcinoma including non-muscle invasive bladder cancer. Additionally, Keytruda is approved as monotherapy for the adjuvant treatment of certain patients with RCC. Keytruda is also approved for the treatment of certain patients in combination with chemotherapy for metastatic squamous and nonsquamous NSCLC, in combination with chemotherapy, with or without bevacizumab for cervical cancer, in combination with chemotherapy for esophageal cancer, in combination with chemotherapy for gastric cancer, in combination with chemotherapy for HNSCC, in combination with chemotherapy for triple-negative-breast cancer (TNBC), in combination with axitinib for advanced RCC, and in combination with Lenvima for both endometrial carcinoma and RCC. The Keytruda clinical development program includes studies across a broad range of cancer types.
Global sales of Keytruda grew 20% in 2021 driven by higher demand as the Company continues to launch Keytruda with multiple new indications globally, although the COVID-19 pandemic had a dampening effect on growing demand by negatively affecting the number of new patients starting treatment. Sales in the U.S. continue to build across the multiple approved indications, in particular for the treatment of advanced NSCLC as monotherapy, and in combination with chemotherapy for both nonsquamous and squamous metastatic NSCLC, along with continued uptake in the TNBC, RCC, HNSCC, MSI-H cancer, and esophageal cancer indications. Keytruda sales growth in international markets reflects continued uptake predominately for the NSCLC, HNSCC and RCC indications, particularly in Europe. Sales growth in 2021 was partially offset by lower pricing in Europe, China and Japan. Global sales of Keytruda grew 30% in 2020 driven by higher demand globally, particularly in the U.S. and Europe, although the COVID-19 pandemic had an unfavorable effect on growing demand. Sales growth in 2020 was partially offset by lower pricing in Japan and Europe.
Keytruda received numerous regulatory approvals in 2021 summarized below.
Date Approval
January 2021 EC approval as a first-line treatment in adult patients with MSI-H or dMMR colorectal cancer based on the KEYNOTE-177 study.
March 2021 EC approval of an expanded label as monotherapy for the treatment of adult and pediatric patients aged 3 years and older with relapsed or refractory cHL who have failed autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT) or following at least two prior therapies when ASCT is not a treatment option based on the KEYNOTE-204 and KEYNOTE-087 trials.
March 2021 FDA approval in combination with platinum- and fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy for the treatment of certain patients with locally advanced or metastatic esophageal or GEJ carcinoma that is not amenable to surgical resection or definitive chemoradiation based on the KEYNOTE-590 trial.
May 2021 FDA approval in combination with trastuzumab, fluoropyrimidine- and platinum-containing chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of patients with locally advanced unresectable or metastatic human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2)-positive gastric or GEJ adenocarcinoma based on the KEYNOTE-811 trial.
May 2021 EC approval of the 400 mg every six weeks (Q6W) dosing regimen to indications where Keytruda is administered in combination with other anticancer agents.
June 2021 China’s National Medical Products Administration (NMPA) approval as a first-line treatment of adult patients with MSI-H or dMMR colorectal cancer that is KRAS, NRAS and BRAF all wild-type based on the KEYNOTE-177 study.
June 2021 EC approval in combination with chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of patients with locally advanced unresectable or metastatic carcinoma of the esophagus or HER2-negative GEJ adenocarcinoma in adults whose tumors express PD-L1 based on the KEYNOTE-590 trial.
July 2021 FDA approval as monotherapy for the treatment of patients with locally advanced cSCC that is not curable by surgery or radiation based on the KEYNOTE-629 trial.
July 2021 FDA approval of Keytruda plus Lenvima for the treatment of patients with advanced endometrial carcinoma that is not MSI-H or dMMR who have disease progression following prior systemic therapy in any setting and are not candidates for curative surgery or radiation based on the KEYNOTE-775/Study 309 trial.
July 2021 FDA approval of Keytruda for treatment of patients with high-risk, early-stage TNBC in combination with chemotherapy as neoadjuvant treatment and then continued as single agent as adjuvant treatment after surgery based on the KEYNOTE-522 trial.
August 2021 FDA approval of Keytruda plus Lenvima for the first-line treatment of adult patients with advanced RCC based on the KEYNOTE-581 trial/Study 307 trial.
August 2021 Japan’s Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA) approval for the treatment of patients with unresectable, advanced or recurrent MSI-H colorectal cancer based on the KEYNOTE-177 trial.
August 2021 Japan’s PMDA approval for the treatment of patients with PD-L1-positive, hormone receptor-negative and HER2-negative, inoperable or recurrent breast cancer based on the KEYNOTE-355 trial.
September 2021 China’s NMPA approval in combination with chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of patients with locally advanced, unresectable or metastatic carcinoma of the esophagus or GEJ based on the KEYNOTE-590 trial.
October 2021 FDA approval in combination with chemotherapy, with or without bevacizumab, for the treatment of patients with persistent, recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer based on the KEYNOTE-826 trial.
October 2021 EC approval in combination with chemotherapy for the first-line treatment of locally recurrent unresectable or metastatic TNBC in adults whose tumors express PD-L1 and who have not received prior chemotherapy for metastatic disease based on the KEYNOTE-355 trial.
November 2021 FDA approval for the adjuvant treatment of patients with RCC at intermediate-high or high risk of recurrence following nephrectomy, or following nephrectomy and resection of metastatic lesions based on the KEYNOTE-564 trial.
November 2021 EC approval of Keytruda plus Lenvima for the first-line treatment of adult patients with advanced RCC based on the CLEAR (Study 307)/KEYNOTE-581 trial.
November 2021 EC approval of Keytruda plus Lenvima for the treatment of advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma in adults who have disease progression on or following prior treatment with a platinum-containing therapy in any setting and who are not candidates for curative surgery or radiation based on the KEYNOTE-775/Study 309 trial.
November 2021 Japan’s PMDA approval in combination with chemotherapy (5-fluorouracil plus cisplatin) for the first-line treatment of patients with radically unresectable, advanced or recurrent esophageal carcinoma in combination with chemotherapy based on the KEYNOTE-590 trial.
December 2021 FDA approval for the adjuvant treatment of adult and pediatric (12 years and older) patients with stage IIB or IIC melanoma following complete resection based on the KEYNOTE-716 trial; FDA expanded the indication for the adjuvant treatment of stage III melanoma following complete resection to include pediatric patients (12 years and older).
December 2021 Japan’s MHLW approval of Keytruda in combination with Lenvima for the treatment of patients with unresectable, advanced or recurrent endometrial carcinoma that progressed after cancer chemotherapy based on the KEYNOTE-775/Study 309 trial.
In March 2021, Merck announced it was voluntarily withdrawing the U.S. indication for Keytruda for the treatment of patients with metastatic small-cell lung cancer with disease progression on or after platinum-based chemotherapy and at least one other prior line of therapy. The withdrawal of this indication was done in consultation with the FDA and does not affect other indications for Keytruda. As announced in January 2020, KEYNOTE-604, the confirmatory Phase 3 trial for this indication, met one of its dual primary endpoints of progression-free survival but did not reach statistical significance for the other primary endpoint of overall survival.
In 2022, Merck initiated the withdrawal of the U.S. accelerated approval indication for Keytruda for the treatment of patients with recurrent locally advanced or metastatic gastric or GEJ adenocarcinoma whose tumors express PD-L1, with disease progression on or after two or more prior lines of therapy. The decision was made in consultation with the FDA following the Oncologic Drugs Advisory Committee evaluation of this third-line gastric cancer indication for Keytruda as a monotherapy because it failed to meet its post-marketing requirement of demonstrating an overall survival benefit in a Phase 3 study. The withdrawal of this indication does not affect other indications for Keytruda.
The Company is a party to certain third-party license agreements pursuant to which the Company pays royalties on sales of Keytruda. Under the terms of the more significant of these agreements, Merck pays a royalty of 6.5% on worldwide sales of Keytruda through 2023 to one third party; this royalty will decline to 2.5% for 2024 through 2026 and will terminate thereafter. The Company pays an additional 2% royalty on worldwide sales of Keytruda to another third party, the termination date of which varies by country; this royalty will expire in the U.S. in 2024 and in major European markets in 2025. The royalties are included in Cost of sales.
Lynparza is an oral poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibitor being developed as part of a collaboration with AstraZeneca (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements). Lynparza is approved for the treatment of certain types of advanced ovarian, breast, pancreatic and prostate cancers. Alliance revenue related to Lynparza grew 36% in 2021 and 63% in 2020 due to continued uptake across the multiple approved indications in the U.S., Europe, Japan and China. In June 2021, Lynparza was granted conditional approval in China as monotherapy for the treatment of certain previously treated adult patients with germline or somatic BRCA-mutated metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer based on the results of the PROfound trial.
Lenvima is an oral receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor being developed as part of a collaboration with Eisai (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements). Lenvima is approved for the treatment of certain types of thyroid cancer, HCC, in combination with everolimus for certain patients with RCC, and in combination with Keytruda both for the treatment of certain patients with endometrial carcinoma and for the treatment of certain patients with RCC. Alliance revenue related to Lenvima grew 21% in 2021 and 44% in 2020 primarily due to higher demand in the U.S. and China.
Global sales of Emend (aprepitant), for the prevention of certain chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting, declined 13% in 2021 reflecting lower volumes in Europe and China. Worldwide sales of Emend
decreased 63% in 2020 primarily due to lower demand and pricing in the U.S. due to generic competition for Emend for Injection following U.S. patent expiry in September 2019. Also contributing to the Emend sales decline in 2020 was lower demand in Europe and Japan as a result of generic competition for the oral formulation of Emend following loss of market exclusivity in May 2019 and December 2019, respectively.
In June 2021, Koselugo (selumetinib) was granted conditional approval in the EU for the treatment of pediatric patients three years of age and older with neurofibromatosis type 1 who have symptomatic, inoperable plexiform neurofibromas based on positive results from the National Cancer Institute Cancer Therapy Evaluation Program-sponsored SPRINT Stratum 1 trial. Koselugo was approved by the FDA in April 2020. Koselugo is part of the same collaboration with AstraZeneca referenced above that includes Lynparza.
In August 2021, the FDA approved Welireg, an oral HIF-2α inhibitor, for the treatment of adult patients with VHL disease who require therapy for associated RCC, central nervous system hemangioblastomas, or pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors, not requiring immediate surgery. The approval was based on results from the open-label Study 004 trial. Welireg was obtained as part of Merck’s 2019 acquisition of Peloton Therapeutics, Inc. (Peloton). See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
Vaccines
Worldwide sales of Gardasil/Gardasil 9, vaccines to help prevent certain cancers and other diseases caused by certain types of human papillomavirus (HPV), grew 44% in 2021 driven primarily by strong global demand, particularly in China, as well as increased supply. Higher pricing in China and the U.S. also contributed to sales growth in 2021. Sales growth in 2021 was unfavorably affected by the replenishment in 2020 of doses borrowed from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Pediatric Vaccine Stockpile, which favorably affected sales by $120 million in 2020. The timing of public sector purchases in the U.S. also partially offset sales growth in 2021. Global sales of Gardasil/Gardasil 9 grew 5% in 2020 primarily due to higher volumes in China and the replenishment in 2020 of doses borrowed from the CDC Pediatric Vaccine Stockpile in 2019. The replenishment resulted in the recognition of sales of $120 million in 2020, which, when combined with the reduction of sales of $120 million in 2019 due to the borrowing, resulted in a favorable impact to sales of $240 million in 2020 compared with 2019. Lower demand in the U.S. and Hong Kong, SAR, PRC attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic partially offset the increase in sales of Gardasil/Gardasil 9 in 2020.
The Company is a party to certain third-party license agreements pursuant to which the Company pays royalties on sales of Gardasil/Gardasil 9. Under the terms of the more significant of these agreements, Merck pays a 7% royalty on worldwide sales of Gardasil/Gardasil 9 to one third party (royalty obligations under this agreement expire in December 2023) and an additional 7% royalty on sales of Gardasil/Gardasil 9 in the U.S. to another third party (these royalty obligations expire in December 2028). The royalties are included in Cost of sales.
Global sales of ProQuad, a pediatric combination vaccine to help protect against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella, grew 14% in 2021 due to higher sales in the U.S. reflecting higher demand driven by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic recovery, as well as higher pricing. Worldwide sales of ProQuad declined 10% in 2020 driven primarily by lower demand in the U.S. resulting from fewer measles outbreaks in 2020 compared with 2019, coupled with the unfavorable impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher pricing.
Worldwide sales of M-M-R II, a vaccine to help protect against measles, mumps and rubella, grew 3% in 2021 primarily due to higher sales in the U.S. reflecting the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic recovery inclusive of higher public sector mix of business. Lower demand in Europe partially offset M-M-R II sales growth in 2021. Global sales of M-M-R II declined 31% in 2020 driven primarily by lower demand in the U.S. resulting from fewer
measles outbreaks in 2020 compared with 2019, coupled with the unfavorable impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Lower demand in Brazil also contributed to the M-M-R II sales decline in 2020.
Global sales of Varivax, a vaccine to help prevent chickenpox (varicella), grew 18% in 2021 primarily reflecting the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic recovery and higher pricing in the U.S. Higher government tenders in Brazil also contributed to Varivax sales growth in 2021. Worldwide sales of Varivax declined 15% in 2020 driven primarily by lower demand in the U.S. resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, partially offset by higher pricing. The Varivax sales decline in 2020 was also attributable to lower government tenders in Brazil.
Worldwide sales of Pneumovax 23, a vaccine to help prevent pneumococcal disease, declined 18% in 2021 primarily due to lower sales in the U.S. attributable to lower demand reflecting prioritization of COVID-19 vaccination, partially offset by higher pricing. Global sales of Pneumovax 23 grew 17% in 2020 primarily due to higher volumes in Europe and the U.S. attributable in part to heightened awareness of pneumococcal vaccination. Higher pricing in the U.S. also contributed to Pneumovax 23 sales growth in 2020.
In July 2021, the FDA approved Vaxneuvance for active immunization for the prevention of invasive disease caused by 15 Streptococcus pneumoniae serotypes in adults 18 years of age and older. In December 2021, Vaxneuvance was approved by the EC. These approvals were based on data from seven clinical studies assessing safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity in adults. In October 2021, the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) voted to recommend vaccination either with a sequential regimen of Vaxneuvance followed by Pneumovax 23, or with a single dose of 20-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine both for adults 65 years and older and for adults ages 19 to 64 with certain underlying medical conditions. These recommendations subsequently were adopted by the director of the CDC and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and published in the CDC’s Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. In September 2021, Merck announced a settlement and license agreement with Pfizer Inc. (Pfizer), resolving all worldwide patent infringement litigation related to the use of Merck’s investigational and licensed pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) products, including Vaxneuvance. Under the terms of the agreement, Merck will make certain regulatory milestone payments to Pfizer, as well as royalty payments on the worldwide sales of its PCV products. The Company will pay royalties of 7.25% of net sales of all Merck PCV products through 2026; and 2.5% of net sales of all Merck PCV products from 2027 through 2035.
Vaxelis (Diphtheria and Tetanus Toxoids and Acellular Pertussis, Inactivated Poliovirus, Haemophilus b Conjugate and Hepatitis B Vaccine), developed as part of a U.S.-based partnership between Merck and Sanofi Pasteur, is now available in the U.S. for active immunization of children six weeks through four years of age to help prevent diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, poliomyelitis, hepatitis B, and invasive disease due to Haemophilus influenzae type b. In February 2021, the CDC’s ACIP included Vaxelis as a combination vaccine option in the CDC’s Recommended Child and Adolescent Immunization Schedule. Sales of Vaxelis in the U.S. are made through the U.S.-based Merck/Sanofi Pasteur partnership, the results of which are reflected in equity income from affiliates included in Other (income) expense, net. Supply sales to the partnership are recorded within Sales. Vaxelis is also approved in the EU where it is marketed directly by Merck and Sanofi Pasteur.
Hospital Acute Care
* Calculation not meaningful.
Global sales of Bridion, for the reversal of two types of neuromuscular blocking agents used during surgery, grew 28% in 2021 due to higher demand globally, particularly in the U.S. and Europe, attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic recovery, as well as increased usage of neuromuscular blockade reversal agents and Bridion’s growing share within the class. Bridion was also approved by the FDA in June 2021 for pediatric patients aged 2 years and older undergoing surgery. Worldwide sales of Bridion grew 6% in 2020 due to higher demand globally,
particularly in the U.S. However, fewer elective surgeries as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic unfavorably affected demand in 2020.
Worldwide sales of Prevymis, a medicine for prophylaxis (prevention) of cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection and disease in adult CMV-seropositive recipients of an allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplant, grew 32% in 2021 and increased 70% in 2020 due to continued uptake since launch in several markets, particularly in Europe and the U.S.
Worldwide sales of Noxafil, an antifungal agent for the prevention of certain invasive fungal infections, declined 21% in 2021 primarily due to generic competition in Europe, partially offset by higher demand in China. The patent that provided market exclusivity for Noxafil in a number of major European markets expired in December 2019. As a result, the Company is experiencing lower demand for Noxafil in these markets due to generic competition and expects the decline to continue. Global sales of Noxafil declined 50% in 2020 due to generic competition in the U.S. and in Europe. The patent that provided U.S. market exclusivity for certain forms of Noxafil representing the majority of U.S. Noxafil sales expired in July 2019.
In December 2020, the Company temporarily suspended sales of Zerbaxa, a combination antibacterial and beta-lactamase inhibitor for the treatment of certain bacterial infections, and subsequently issued a product recall, following the identification of product sterility issues. As a result, the Company recorded an intangible asset impairment charge in 2020 related to Zerbaxa (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements). A phased resupply of Zerbaxa was initiated in the fourth quarter of 2021, which the Company expects to continue during 2022.
Immunology
Sales of Simponi, a once-monthly subcutaneous treatment for certain inflammatory diseases (marketed by the Company in Europe, Russia and Turkey), declined 2% in 2021 and were nearly flat in 2020. Sales of Simponi are being unfavorably affected by biosimilar competition for competing products. The Company expects this competition will continue to unfavorably affect sales of Simponi.
Sales of Remicade, a treatment for inflammatory diseases (marketed by the Company in Europe, Russia and Turkey), declined 9% in 2021 and decreased 20% in 2020 driven by ongoing biosimilar competition in the Company’s marketing territories in Europe. The Company lost market exclusivity for Remicade in major European markets in 2015 and no longer has market exclusivity in any of its marketing territories. The Company is experiencing pricing and volume declines in these markets as a result of biosimilar competition and expects the declines to continue.
The Company’s marketing rights with respect to these products will revert to Janssen Pharmaceuticals, Inc. on October 1, 2024.
Virology
Molnupiravir is an investigational oral antiviral COVID-19 medicine being developed in a collaboration with Ridgeback (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements). The FDA granted an EUA for molnupiravir in December 2021; as updated in February 2022, to authorize molnupiravir for the treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in high-risk adults for whom alternative FDA-approved or authorized treatment options are not
accessible or clinically appropriate. Also in December 2021, Japan’s MHLW granted Special Approval for Emergency for molnupiravir to treat infectious disease caused by SARS-CoV-2. In November 2021, the UK’s MHRA granted conditional marketing authorization for molnupiravir to treat mild to moderate COVID-19 in adults at risk of developing severe illness. Merck has entered into advance purchase and supply agreements for molnupiravir in more than 30 markets and Merck began shipping molnupiravir in the fourth quarter of 2021 to countries where it is approved or authorized. Sales of molnupiravir were $952 million in 2021 primarily consisting of sales in the U.S., the UK and Japan.
Worldwide sales of Isentress/Isentress HD, an HIV integrase inhibitor for use in combination with other antiretroviral agents for the treatment of HIV-1 infection, declined 10% in 2021 and decreased 12% in 2020 primarily due to competitive pressure particularly in Europe and the U.S. The Company expects competitive pressure for Isentress/Isentress HD to continue.
Global sales of Zepatier, a treatment for adult patients with chronic hepatitis C virus genotype (GT) 1 or GT4 infection, declined 23% in 2021 primarily due to lower demand from competitive pressure in the U.S. and Europe. Worldwide sales of Zepatier declined 55% in 2020 driven by lower demand globally due to competition and declining patient volumes, coupled with the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cardiovascular
(1) Alliance revenue represents Merck’s share of profits from sales in Bayer’s marketing territories, which are product sales net of cost of sales and commercialization costs (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements).
Adempas and Verquvo are part of a worldwide collaboration with Bayer to market and develop soluble guanylate cyclase (sGC) modulators (see Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements). Adempas is approved for the treatment of certain types of PAH. Verquvo was approved in the U.S. in January 2021 to reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and heart failure hospitalization following a hospitalization for heart failure or need for outpatient intravenous diuretics in adults with symptomatic chronic heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. Verquvo was also approved in Japan in June 2021 and in the EU in July 2021. These approvals were based on the results of the VICTORIA trial. Alliance revenue from the collaboration grew 22% in 2021 and rose 38% in 2020. Revenue from the collaboration also includes sales of Adempas and Verquvo in Merck’s marketing territories. Sales of Adempas in Merck’s marketing territories grew 14% in 2021 primarily reflecting higher demand in Europe.
Diabetes
Worldwide combined sales of Januvia and Janumet, medicines that help lower blood sugar levels in adults with type 2 diabetes, were nearly flat in 2021 and declined 4% in 2020. Sales performance in both periods reflects continued pricing pressure and lower demand in the U.S., largely offset by higher demand in certain international markets, particularly in China. The Company expects U.S. pricing pressure to continue. Januvia and Janumet will lose market exclusivity in the U.S. in January 2023, in the EU in September 2022, and in China in July 2022. The Company anticipates sales of Januvia and Janumet in these markets will decline substantially after the loss of exclusivity. Combined sales of Januvia and Janumet in the U.S., Europe and China represented 33%, 24% and 9%, respectively, of total combined Januvia and Janumet sales in 2021.
Animal Health Segment
Sales of livestock products grew 12% in 2021 primarily due to higher demand for ruminant products, including animal health intelligence solutions for animal identification, monitoring and traceability, as well as higher demand for poultry and swine products. Sales of livestock products increased 6% in 2020 predominantly due to an additional five months of sales in 2020 related to the April 2019 acquisition of Antelliq, a leader in digital animal identification, traceability and monitoring solutions (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements). Sales of companion animal products grew 29% in 2021 and rose 10% in 2020 primarily due to higher demand for parasiticides, including the Bravecto line of products, as well as higher demand for companion animal vaccines.
Costs, Expenses and Other
* Calculation not meaningful.
Cost of Sales
Cost of sales was $13.6 billion in both 2021 and 2020 and was $12.0 billion in 2019. Cost of sales includes the amortization of intangible assets recorded in connection with acquisitions, collaborations, and licensing arrangements, which totaled $1.6 billion in 2021, $1.8 billion in 2020 and $1.7 billion in 2019. Costs in 2021 and 2020 also include charges of $225 million and $260 million, respectively, related to the discontinuation of COVID-19 development programs (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements). Additionally, costs in 2020 and 2019 include intangible asset impairment charges of $1.6 billion and $705 million related to marketed products and other intangibles (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements). The Company may recognize additional impairment charges in the future related to intangible assets that were measured at fair value and capitalized in connection with business combinations and such charges could be material. Costs in 2020 also include inventory write-offs of $120 million related to a recall for Zerbaxa (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements). Also included in cost of sales are expenses associated with restructuring activities, which amounted to $160 million in 2021, $175 million in 2020 and $251 million in 2019, primarily reflecting accelerated depreciation and asset write-offs related to the planned sale or closure of manufacturing facilities. Separation costs associated with manufacturing-related headcount reductions have been incurred and are reflected in Restructuring costs as discussed below.
Gross margin was 72.0% in 2021 compared with 67.2% in 2020. The gross margin improvement in 2021 reflects lower impairments and amortization of intangible assets (noted above), as well as the favorable effects of product mix and lower inventory write-offs. Partially offsetting the gross margin improvement in 2021 were higher manufacturing costs, the impact of molnupiravir (which has a lower gross margin due to profit sharing with Ridgeback as discussed in Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements), and higher compensation and benefit costs. Gross margin was 67.2% in 2020 compared with 69.3% in 2019. The gross margin decline in 2020 reflects the unfavorable effects of higher impairments and amortization of intangible assets, pricing pressure, a charge related to the discontinuation of COVID-19 vaccine development programs, and higher inventory write-offs related to the recall of Zerbaxa (noted above), partially offset by the favorable effects of product mix and lower restructuring costs.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expenses were $9.6 billion in 2021, an increase of 8% compared with 2020. The increase was primarily due to higher administrative costs, including compensation and benefits, higher promotional expenses in support of the Company’s key growth pillars, and higher acquisition-related costs, including costs related to the acquisition of Acceleron. The COVID-19 pandemic drove lower spending in 2020 which contributed to the increase in SG&A expenses in 2021. These increases were partially offset by the favorable effects of foreign exchange and a contribution in 2020 to the Merck Foundation. SG&A expenses were $9.0 billion in 2020, a decline of 5% compared with 2019. The decline was driven primarily by lower administrative, selling and promotional costs, including lower travel and meeting expenses, due in part to the COVID-19 pandemic, and the favorable effect of foreign exchange, partially offset by a contribution to the Merck Foundation.
Research and Development
Research and development (R&D) expenses were $12.2 billion in 2021, a decline of 9% compared with 2020 primarily due to lower upfront payments related to acquisitions and collaborations. The decline was partially offset by higher clinical development spending and increased investment in discovery research and early drug development, net of the reimbursement of a portion of molnupiravir development costs through the partnership with Ridgeback. Higher compensation and benefit costs, higher in-process research and development (IPR&D) impairment charges, as well as costs related to the acquisition of Acceleron also partially offset the decline in R&D expenses in 2021. R&D expenses were $13.4 billion in 2020, an increase of 38% compared with 2019. The increase was driven largely by higher upfront payments related to acquisitions and collaborations, higher clinical development spending and increased investment in discovery research and early drug development. Higher restructuring costs also contributed to the increase in R&D expenses in 2020. The increase in R&D expenses in 2020 was partially offset by lower IPR&D impairment charges and lower costs resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, net of spending on COVID-19-related vaccine and antiviral research programs.
R&D expenses are comprised of the costs directly incurred by Merck Research Laboratories (MRL), the Company’s research and development division that focuses on human health-related activities, which were $7.1 billion in 2021, $6.5 billion in 2020 and $6.0 billion in 2019. Also included in R&D expenses are Animal Health research costs, licensing costs and costs incurred by other divisions in support of R&D activities, including depreciation, production and general and administrative, which in the aggregate were $3.0 billion in 2021, $2.6 billion in 2020 and $2.6 billion in 2019. Additionally, R&D expenses in 2021 include a $1.7 billion charge for the acquisition of Pandion. R&D expenses in 2020 include a $2.7 billion charge for the acquisition of VelosBio Inc., a $462 million charge for the acquisition of OncoImmune and charges of $826 million related to transactions with Seagen. R&D expenses in 2019 include a $993 million charge for the acquisition of Peloton. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements for more information on these transactions. R&D expenses also include IPR&D impairment charges of $275 million, $90 million and $172 million in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements). The Company may recognize additional impairment charges in the future related to the cancellation or delay of other pipeline programs that were measured at fair value and capitalized in connection with business combinations and such charges could be material. In addition, R&D expenses in 2021 and 2020 include $28 million and $83 million, respectively, of costs associated with restructuring activities, primarily relating to accelerated depreciation. R&D expenses also include expense or income related to changes in the estimated fair value measurement of liabilities for contingent consideration recorded in connection with business combinations. The Company recorded $35 million of expenses in 2021 compared with a net reduction in expenses of $95 million and $39 million in 2020 and 2019, respectively, related to changes in these estimates.
Restructuring Costs
In 2019, Merck approved a global restructuring program (Restructuring Program) as part of a worldwide initiative focused on further optimizing the Company’s manufacturing and supply network, as well as reducing its global real estate footprint. This program is a continuation of the Company’s plant rationalization and builds on prior restructuring programs. The actions currently contemplated under the Restructuring Program are expected to be substantially completed by the end of 2023, with the cumulative pretax costs to be incurred by the Company to implement the program estimated to be approximately $3.5 billion. The Company expects to record charges of
approximately $400 million in 2022 related to the Restructuring Program. The Company anticipates the actions under the Restructuring Program will result in annual net cost savings of approximately $900 million by the end of 2023.
Restructuring costs, primarily representing separation and other related costs associated with these restructuring activities, were $661 million in 2021, $575 million in 2020 and $626 million in 2019. Separation costs incurred were associated with actual headcount reductions, as well as estimated expenses under existing severance programs for headcount reductions that were probable and could be reasonably estimated. Also included in restructuring costs are asset abandonment, facility shut-down and other related costs, as well as employee-related costs such as curtailment, settlement and termination charges associated with pension and other postretirement benefit plans and share-based compensation plan costs. For segment reporting, restructuring costs are unallocated expenses.
Additional costs associated with the Company’s restructuring activities are included in Cost of sales, Selling, general and administrative expenses and Research and development costs. The Company recorded aggregate pretax costs of $868 million in 2021, $880 million in 2020 and $915 million in 2019 related to restructuring program activities (see Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements).
Other (Income) Expense, Net
Other (income) expense, net, was $1.3 billion of income in 2021 compared with $890 million of income in 2020 primarily due to higher income from investments in equity securities, net, largely related to higher realized and unrealized gains on certain investments including the disposition in 2021 of the Company’s ownership interest in Preventice Solutions Inc. (Preventice) as a result of the acquisition of Preventice by Boston Scientific, partially offset by higher foreign exchange losses and pension settlement costs. Other (income) and expense, net, was $890 million of income in 2020 compared with $129 million of expense in 2019, primarily due to higher income from investments in equity securities, net, largely related to Moderna, Inc.
For details on the components of Other (income) expense, net, see Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements.
Pharmaceutical segment profits are comprised of segment sales less standard costs, as well as SG&A expenses directly incurred by the segment. Animal Health segment profits are comprised of segment sales, less all cost of sales, as well as SG&A and R&D expenses directly incurred by the segment. For internal management reporting presented to the chief operating decision maker, Merck does not allocate the remaining cost of sales not included in segment profits as described above, R&D expenses incurred by MRL, or general and administrative expenses, nor the cost of financing these activities. Separate divisions maintain responsibility for monitoring and managing these costs, including depreciation related to fixed assets utilized by these divisions and, therefore, they are not included in segment profits. Also excluded from the determination of segment profits are costs related to restructuring activities and acquisition and divestiture-related costs, including the amortization of intangible assets and amortization of purchase accounting adjustments, intangible asset impairment charges, and expense or income related to changes in the estimated fair value measurement of liabilities for contingent consideration. Additionally, segment profits do not reflect other expenses from corporate and manufacturing cost centers and other miscellaneous income or expense. These unallocated items are reflected in “Other” in the above table. Also included in “Other” are miscellaneous corporate profits (losses), as well as operating profits (losses) related to third-party manufacturing sales. Beginning in 2021, the amortization of intangible assets previously included as part of the calculation of
segment profits is now included in unallocated non-segment corporate expenses. Prior period Pharmaceutical and Animal Health segment profits have been recast to reflect this change on a comparable basis.
Pharmaceutical segment profits grew 19% in 2021 primarily due to higher sales and the favorable effect of foreign exchange, partially offset by higher administrative and promotional costs. Pharmaceutical segment profits increased 11% in 2020 driven primarily by higher sales, as well as lower selling and promotional costs. Animal Health segment profits grew 17% in 2021 reflecting higher sales, partially offset by higher promotional, selling and administrative costs. Animal Health segment profits increased 4% in 2020 driven primarily by higher sales and lower promotional and selling costs, partially offset by higher R&D costs and the unfavorable effect of foreign exchange.
Taxes on Income
The effective income tax rates from continuing operations were 11.0% in 2021, 22.9% in 2020 and 21.8% in 2019. The full year effective income tax rate reflects a favorable mix of income and expense, as well as higher foreign tax credits from ordinary business operations that the Company was able to credit in 2021. The effective income tax rate from continuing operations in 2021 also reflects the beneficial impact of the settlement of a foreign tax matter, as well as a net tax benefit of $207 million related to the settlement of certain federal income tax matters (see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements). The effective income tax rate from continuing operations in 2021 also reflects the unfavorable effect of a charge for the acquisition of Pandion for which no tax benefit was recognized. The effective income tax rate in 2020 reflects the unfavorable impact of a charge for the acquisition of VelosBio for which no tax benefit was recognized. The effective income tax rate in 2019 reflects the favorable impact of a $106 million net tax benefit related to the settlement of certain federal income tax matters (see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements) and the reversal of tax reserves established in connection with the 2014 divestiture of Merck’s Consumer Care (MCC) business due to the lapse in the statute of limitations. In addition, the effective income tax rate in 2019 reflects the unfavorable impact of a charge for the acquisition of Peloton for which no tax benefit was recognized and charges of $117 million related to the finalization of treasury regulations for the transition tax associated with the 2017 enactment of U.S. tax legislation known as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) (see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements).
Net Income (Loss) Attributable to Noncontrolling Interests
Net income (loss) attributable to noncontrolling interests was $13 million in 2021, $4 million in 2020 and $(84) million in 2019. The loss in 2019 was driven primarily by the portion of goodwill impairment charges related to certain businesses in the Healthcare Services segment that were attributable to noncontrolling interests.
Non-GAAP Income and Non-GAAP EPS from Continuing Operations
Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS are alternative views of the Company’s performance that Merck is providing because management believes this information enhances investors’ understanding of the Company’s results as it permits investors to understand how management assesses performance. Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS exclude certain items because of the nature of these items and the impact that they have on the analysis of underlying business performance and trends. The excluded items (which should not be considered non-recurring) consist of acquisition and divestiture-related costs, restructuring costs, income and losses from investments in equity securities and certain other items. These excluded items are significant components in understanding and assessing financial performance.
Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS are important internal measures for the Company. Senior management receives a monthly analysis of operating results that includes non-GAAP EPS. Management uses these measures internally for planning and forecasting purposes and to measure the performance of the Company along with other metrics. In addition, senior management’s annual compensation is derived in part using non-GAAP pretax income. Since non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS are not measures determined in accordance with GAAP, they have no standardized meaning prescribed by GAAP and, therefore, may not be comparable to the calculation of similar measures of other companies. The information on non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS should be considered in addition to, but not as a substitute for or superior to, net income and EPS prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the U.S. (GAAP).
A reconciliation between GAAP financial measures and non-GAAP financial measures (from continuing operations) is as follows:
(1)Amount in 2020 includes a $1.6 billion intangible asset impairment charge related to Zerbaxa. Amount in 2019 includes a $612 million intangible asset impairment charge related to Sivextro. See Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements.
(2)Includes $826 million related to transactions with Seagen. See Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements.
(3) The estimated tax impact on the excluded items is determined by applying the statutory rate of the originating territory of the non-GAAP adjustments.
Acquisition and Divestiture-Related Costs
Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS exclude the impact of certain amounts recorded in connection with acquisitions and divestitures. These amounts include the amortization of intangible assets and amortization of purchase accounting adjustments to inventories, as well as intangible asset impairment charges, and expense or income related to changes in the estimated fair value measurement of liabilities for contingent consideration. Also excluded are integration, transaction, and certain other costs associated with acquisitions and divestitures. Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS also exclude amortization of intangible assets related to collaborations and licensing arrangements.
Restructuring Costs
Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS exclude costs related to restructuring actions (see Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements). These amounts include employee separation costs and accelerated depreciation associated with facilities to be closed or divested. Accelerated depreciation costs represent the difference between the depreciation expense to be recognized over the revised useful life of the asset, based upon the anticipated date the site will be closed or divested or the equipment disposed of, and depreciation expense as determined utilizing the useful life prior to the restructuring actions. Restructuring costs also include asset abandonment, facility shut-down and other related costs, as well as employee-related costs such as curtailment, settlement and termination charges associated with pension and other postretirement benefit plans and share-based compensation costs.
Income and Losses from Investments in Equity Securities
Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS exclude realized and unrealized gains and losses from investments in equity securities either owned directly or through ownership interests in investment funds.
Certain Other Items
Non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS exclude certain other items. These items are adjusted for after evaluating them on an individual basis, considering their quantitative and qualitative aspects. Typically, these consist of items that are unusual in nature, significant to the results of a particular period or not indicative of future operating results. Excluded from non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS are charges for the acquisitions of Pandion, VelosBio, OncoImmune and Peloton, as well as charges related to collaborations, including transactions with Seagen (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements). Also excluded from non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS are charges related to the discontinuation of COVID-19 development programs (see Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements). Additionally, excluded from non-GAAP income and non-GAAP EPS are certain tax items, including net tax benefits related to the settlement of certain federal income tax matters, an adjustment to tax benefits recorded in conjunction with the 2015 acquisition of Cubist Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a tax benefit related to the reversal of tax reserves established in connection with the 2014 divestiture of MCC, and a net tax charge related to the finalization of U.S. treasury regulations related to the TCJA (see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements).
Research and Development
Research Pipeline
The Company currently has several candidates under regulatory review in the U.S. and internationally, as well as in late-stage clinical development. A chart reflecting the Company’s current research pipeline as of February 22, 2022 and related discussion is set forth in Item 1. “Business - Research and Development” above.
Acquisitions, Research Collaborations and License Agreements
Merck continues to remain focused on pursuing opportunities that have the potential to drive both near- and long-term growth. Certain recent transactions are summarized below; additional details are included in Note 4 to the consolidated financial statements. Merck actively monitors the landscape for growth opportunities that meet the Company’s strategic criteria.
In March 2021, Merck and Gilead entered into an agreement to jointly develop and commercialize long-acting treatments in HIV that combine Merck’s investigational NRTTI, islatravir, and Gilead’s investigational capsid inhibitor, lenacapavir. The collaboration will initially focus on long-acting oral formulations and long-acting injectable formulations of these combination products, with other formulations potentially added to the collaboration as mutually agreed. There was no upfront payment made by either party upon entering into the agreement.
In April 2021, Merck acquired Pandion, a clinical-stage biotechnology company developing novel therapeutics designed to address the unmet needs of patients living with autoimmune diseases, for total consideration of $1.9 billion. Pandion is advancing a pipeline of precision immune modulators targeting critical immune control nodes.
In November 2021, Merck acquired Acceleron, a publicly traded biopharmaceutical company, for total consideration of $11.5 billion. Acceleron is evaluating the TGF-beta superfamily of proteins that is known to play a central role in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation and repair. Acceleron’s lead therapeutic candidate,
sotatercept (MK-7962), has a novel mechanism of action with the potential to improve short-term and/or long-term clinical outcomes in patients with PAH. Sotatercept is in Phase 3 trials as an add-on to current standard of care for the treatment of PAH. In addition to sotatercept, Acceleron’s portfolio includes Reblozyl (luspatercept), a first-in-class erythroid maturation recombinant fusion protein that is approved in the U.S., Europe, Canada and Australia for the treatment of anemia in certain rare blood disorders and is being evaluated in clinical trials for additional indications for hematology therapies. Reblozyl is being developed and commercialized through a global collaboration with Bristol Myers Squibb.
Acquired In-Process Research and Development
In connection with business combinations, the Company has recorded the fair value of in-process research projects which, at the time of acquisition, had not yet reached technological feasibility. At December 31, 2021, the balance of IPR&D was $9.3 billion (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements).
The IPR&D projects that remain in development are subject to the inherent risks and uncertainties in drug development and it is possible that the Company will not be able to successfully develop and complete the IPR&D programs and profitably commercialize the underlying product candidates. The time periods to receive approvals from the FDA and other regulatory agencies are subject to uncertainty. Significant delays in the approval process, or the Company’s failure to obtain approval at all, would delay or prevent the Company from realizing revenues from these products. Additionally, if the IPR&D programs require additional clinical trial data than previously anticipated, or if the programs fail or are abandoned during development, then the Company will not realize the future cash flows it has estimated and recorded as IPR&D as of the acquisition date. If such circumstances were to occur, the Company’s future operating results could be adversely affected and the Company may recognize impairment charges, which could be material.
In 2021, 2020, and 2019 the Company recorded IPR&D impairment charges within Research and development expenses of $275 million, $90 million and $172 million, respectively (see Note 9 to the consolidated financial statements).
Additional research and development will be required before any of the remaining programs reach technological feasibility. The costs to complete the research projects will depend on whether the projects are brought to their final stages of development and are ultimately submitted to the FDA or other regulatory agencies for approval.
Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures were $4.4 billion in 2021, $4.4 billion in 2020 and $3.4 billion in 2019. Expenditures in the U.S. were $2.8 billion in 2021, $2.6 billion in 2020 and $1.9 billion in 2019. The Company plans to invest approximately $20 billion in capital projects from 2021-2025 including expanding manufacturing capacity for oncology, vaccine and animal health products.
Depreciation expense was $1.6 billion in 2021, $1.7 billion in 2020 and $1.6 billion in 2019, of which $1.1 billion in 2021, $1.2 billion in 2020 and $1.2 billion in 2019, related to locations in the U.S. Total depreciation expense in 2021, 2020 and 2019 included accelerated depreciation of $91 million, $268 million and $233 million, respectively, associated with restructuring activities (see Note 6 to the consolidated financial statements).
Analysis of Liquidity and Capital Resources
Merck’s strong financial profile enables it to fund research and development, focus on external alliances, support in-line products and maximize upcoming launches while providing significant cash returns to shareholders.
The increase in working capital in 2021 compared with 2020 is primarily related to decreased short-term debt.
Cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations was $13.1 billion in 2021 compared with $7.6 billion in 2020 and $8.9 billion in 2019. The higher cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations in 2021 reflects stronger operating performance. Cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations includes upfront and milestone payments related to collaborations of $435 million in 2021, $2.9 billion in 2020 and $805 million in 2019. Cash provided by operating activities of continuing operations continues to be the Company’s source of funds to finance operating needs, with excess cash serving as the primary source of funds to finance capital expenditures, treasury stock purchases and dividends paid to shareholders.
Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $16.4 billion in 2021 compared with $9.2 billion in 2020. The higher use of cash in investing activities of continuing operations was primarily due to higher cash used for acquisitions, including for the acquisition of Acceleron, and lower proceeds from sales of securities and other investments, partially offset by the 2020 purchase of Seagen common stock. Cash used in investing activities of continuing operations was $9.2 billion in 2020 compared with $2.5 billion in 2019. The increase was driven primarily by lower proceeds from the sales of securities and other investments, higher use of cash for acquisitions, higher capital expenditures and the purchase of Seagen common stock, partially offset by lower purchases of securities and other investments.
Cash provided by financing activities of continuing operations was $3.1 billion in 2021 compared with a use of cash in financing activities of continuing operations of $2.8 billion in 2020. The change was primarily driven by the cash distribution received from Organon in connection with the spin-off (see Note 3 to the consolidated financial statements), higher proceeds from the issuance of debt (see below) and lower purchases of treasury stock, partially offset by a net decrease in short-term borrowings in 2021 compared with a net increase in short-term borrowings in 2020, higher payments on debt (see below) and higher dividends paid to shareholders. Cash used in financing activities of continuing operations was $2.8 billion in 2020 compared with $8.9 billion in 2019. The lower use of cash in financing activities of continuing operations was driven primarily by a net increase in short-term borrowings in 2020 compared with a net decrease in short-term borrowing in 2019, as well as lower purchases of treasury stock, partially offset by higher payments on debt (see below), lower proceeds from the issuance of debt (see below), higher dividends paid to shareholders and lower proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
In December 2021, the Company issued $8.0 billion principal amount of senior unsecured notes consisting of $1.5 billion of 1.70% notes due 2027, $1.0 billion of 1.90% notes due 2028, $2.0 billion of 2.15% notes due 2031, $2.0 billion of 2.75% notes due 2051 and $1.5 billion of 2.90% notes due 2061. Merck used the net proceeds from the offering of the 2027 notes, the 2031 notes, the 2051 notes and the 2061 notes for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of outstanding commercial paper borrowings (including commercial paper borrowings in connection with Merck’s acquisition of Acceleron), and other indebtedness. Merck allocated an amount equal to the net proceeds of the offering of the notes due in 2028 to finance or refinance, in whole or in part, projects and partnerships in the Company’s priority ESG areas.
In June 2020, the Company issued $4.5 billion principal amount of senior unsecured notes consisting of $1.0 billion of 0.75% notes due 2026, $1.25 billion of 1.45% notes due 2030, $1.0 billion of 2.35% notes due 2040 and $1.25 billion of 2.45% notes due 2050. Merck used the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of outstanding commercial paper borrowings and other indebtedness.
In March 2019, the Company issued $5.0 billion principal amount of senior unsecured notes consisting of $750 million of 2.90% notes due 2024, $1.75 billion of 3.40% notes due 2029, $1.0 billion of 3.90% notes due 2039, and $1.5 billion of 4.00% notes due 2049. The Company used the net proceeds from the offering for general corporate purposes, including the repayment of outstanding commercial paper borrowings.
In February 2022, the Company’s $1.25 billion, 2.35% notes matured in accordance with their terms and were repaid. In 2021, the Company’s $1.15 billion, 3.875% notes and the Company’s €1.0 billion, 1.125% notes matured in accordance with their terms and were repaid. In 2020, the Company’s $1.25 billion, 1.85% notes and $700 million floating-rate notes matured in accordance with their terms and were repaid.
The Company has a $6.0 billion credit facility that matures in June 2026. The facility provides backup liquidity for the Company’s commercial paper borrowing facility and is to be used for general corporate purposes. The Company has not drawn funding from this facility.
The Company expects foreseeable liquidity and capital resource requirements to be met through existing cash and cash equivalents and anticipated cash flows from operations, as well as commercial paper borrowings and long-term borrowings if needed. Merck believes that its sources of financing will be adequate to meet its future requirements. The Company’s material cash requirements arising in the normal course of business primarily include:
Debt Obligations and Interest Payments - See Note 10 to the consolidated financial statements for further detail of the Company’s debt obligations and the timing of expected future principal and interest payments.
Tax Liabilities - In connection with the enactment of the TCJA, the Company is required to pay a one-time transition tax, which the Company has elected to pay over a period of eight years through 2025 as permitted under the TCJA. Additionally, the Company has liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits, including interest and penalties. See Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements for further information pertaining to the transition tax and liabilities for unrecognized tax benefits.
Operating Leases - See Note 10 to consolidated financial statements for further details of the Company’s lease obligations and the timing of expected future lease payments.
Contingent Milestone Payments - The Company has accrued liabilities for contingent sales-based milestone payments related to collaborations with AstraZeneca, Eisai, and Bayer where payment has been deemed probable, but remains subject to the achievement of the related sales milestone. See Note 5 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information related to these sales-based milestones.
Purchase Obligations - Purchase obligations are enforceable and legally binding obligations for purchases of goods and services including minimum inventory contracts, research and development and advertising. Purchase obligations also include future inventory purchases the Company has committed to in connection with certain divestitures. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total purchase obligations of $5.3 billion, of which $1.6 billion is estimated to be payable in 2022.
In March 2021, the Company filed a securities registration statement with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) under the automatic shelf registration process available to “well-known seasoned issuers” which is effective for three years.
Effective as of November 3, 2009, the Company executed a full and unconditional guarantee of the then existing debt of its subsidiary Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp. (MSD) and MSD executed a full and unconditional guarantee of the then existing debt of the Company (excluding commercial paper), including for payments of principal and interest. These guarantees do not extend to debt issued subsequent to that date.
The Company believes it maintains a conservative financial profile. The Company places its cash and investments in instruments that meet high credit quality standards, as specified in its investment policy guidelines. These guidelines also limit the amount of credit exposure to any one issuer. The Company does not participate in any off-balance sheet arrangements involving unconsolidated subsidiaries that provide financing or potentially expose the Company to unrecorded financial obligations.
In November 2021, Merck’s Board of Directors increased the quarterly dividend, declaring a quarterly dividend of $0.69 per share on the Company’s outstanding common stock that was paid in January 2022. In January 2022, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly dividend of $0.69 per share on the Company’s common stock for the second quarter of 2022 payable in April 2022.
In October 2018, Merck’s Board of Directors authorized purchases of up to $10 billion of Merck’s common stock for its treasury. The treasury stock purchase authorization has no time limit and will be made over time in open-market transactions, block transactions, on or off an exchange, or in privately negotiated transactions. In May 2021, Merck restarted its share repurchase program, which the Company had temporarily suspended in March 2020. The Company spent $840 million to purchase 11 million shares of its common stock for its treasury during 2021 under this program. As of December 31, 2021, the Company’s remaining share repurchase
authorization was $5.0 billion. The Company purchased $1.3 billion and $4.8 billion of its common stock during 2020 and 2019, respectively, under authorized share repurchase programs.
Financial Instruments Market Risk Disclosures
The Company manages the impact of foreign exchange rate movements and interest rate movements on its earnings, cash flows and fair values of assets and liabilities through operational means and through the use of various financial instruments, including derivative instruments.
A significant portion of the Company’s revenues and earnings in foreign affiliates is exposed to changes in foreign exchange rates. The objectives of and accounting related to the Company’s foreign currency risk management program, as well as its interest rate risk management activities are discussed below.
Foreign Currency Risk Management
The Company has established revenue hedging, balance sheet risk management, and net investment hedging programs to protect against volatility of future foreign currency cash flows and changes in fair value caused by changes in foreign exchange rates.
The objective of the revenue hedging program is to reduce the variability caused by changes in foreign exchange rates that would affect the U.S. dollar value of future cash flows derived from foreign currency denominated sales, primarily the euro, Japanese yen and Chinese renminbi. To achieve this objective, the Company will hedge a portion of its forecasted foreign currency denominated third-party and intercompany distributor entity sales (forecasted sales) that are expected to occur over its planning cycle, typically no more than two years into the future. The Company will layer in hedges over time, increasing the portion of forecasted sales hedged as it gets closer to the expected date of the forecasted sales. The portion of forecasted sales hedged is based on assessments of cost-benefit profiles that consider natural offsetting exposures, revenue and exchange rate volatilities and correlations, and the cost of hedging instruments. The Company manages its anticipated transaction exposure principally with purchased local currency put options, forward contracts, and purchased collar options.
The fair values of these derivative contracts are recorded as either assets (gain positions) or liabilities (loss positions) in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Changes in the fair value of derivative contracts are recorded each period in either current earnings or Other Comprehensive Income (Loss) (OCI), depending on whether the derivative is designated as part of a hedge transaction and, if so, the type of hedge transaction. For derivatives that are designated as cash flow hedges, the unrealized gains or losses on these contracts are recorded in Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss (AOCL) and reclassified into Sales when the hedged anticipated revenue is recognized. For those derivatives which are not designated as cash flow hedges, but serve as economic hedges of forecasted sales, unrealized gains or losses are recorded in Sales each period. The cash flows from both designated and non-designated contracts are reported as operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. The Company does not enter into derivatives for trading or speculative purposes.
Because Merck principally sells foreign currency in its revenue hedging program, a uniform weakening of the U.S. dollar would yield the largest overall potential loss in the market value of these hedge instruments. The market value of Merck’s hedges would have declined by an estimated $648 million and $593 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively, from a uniform 10% weakening of the U.S. dollar. The market value was determined using a foreign exchange option pricing model and holding all factors except exchange rates constant. Although not predictive in nature, the Company believes that a 10% threshold reflects reasonably possible near-term changes in Merck’s major foreign currency exposures relative to the U.S. dollar.
The Company manages operating activities and net asset positions at each local subsidiary in order to mitigate the effects of exchange on monetary assets and liabilities. The Company also uses a balance sheet risk management program to mitigate the exposure of net monetary assets that are denominated in a currency other than a subsidiary’s functional currency from the effects of volatility in foreign exchange. In these instances, Merck principally utilizes forward exchange contracts to offset the effects of exchange on exposures denominated in developed country currencies, primarily the euro, Japanese yen, British pound, Canadian dollar and Swiss franc. For exposures in developing country currencies, including the Chinese renminbi, the Company will enter into forward contracts to offset the effects of exchange on exposures when it is deemed economical to do so based on a cost-benefit analysis that considers the magnitude of the exposure, the volatility of the exchange rate and the cost of the
hedging instrument. The cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Monetary assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than the functional currency of a given subsidiary are remeasured at spot rates in effect on the balance sheet date with the effects of changes in spot rates reported in Other (income) expense, net. The forward contracts are not designated as hedges and are marked to market through Other (income) expense, net. Accordingly, fair value changes in the forward contracts help mitigate the changes in the value of the remeasured assets and liabilities attributable to changes in foreign currency exchange rates, except to the extent of the spot-forward differences. These differences are not significant due to the short-term nature of the contracts, which typically have average maturities at inception of less than one year.
A sensitivity analysis to changes in the value of the U.S. dollar on foreign currency denominated derivatives, investments and monetary assets and liabilities indicated that if the U.S. dollar uniformly weakened by 10% against all currency exposures of the Company at December 31, 2021 and 2020, Income from Continuing Operations Before Taxes would have declined by approximately $125 million and $99 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively. Because the Company was in a net short (payable) position relative to its major foreign currencies after consideration of forward contracts, a uniform weakening of the U.S. dollar will yield the largest overall potential net loss in earnings due to exchange. This measurement assumes that a change in one foreign currency relative to the U.S. dollar would not affect other foreign currencies relative to the U.S. dollar. Although not predictive in nature, the Company believes that a 10% threshold reflects reasonably possible near-term changes in Merck’s major foreign currency exposures relative to the U.S. dollar. The cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
The Company also uses forward exchange contracts to hedge a portion of its net investment in foreign operations against movements in exchange rates. The forward contracts are designated as hedges of the net investment in a foreign operation. The unrealized gains or losses on these contracts are recorded in foreign currency translation adjustment within OCI, and remain in AOCL until either the sale or complete or substantially complete liquidation of the subsidiary. The Company excludes certain portions of the change in fair value of its derivative instruments from the assessment of hedge effectiveness (excluded components). Changes in fair value of the excluded components are recognized in OCI. The Company recognizes in earnings the initial value of the excluded components on a straight-line basis over the life of the derivative instrument, rather than using the mark-to-market approach. The cash flows from these contracts are reported as investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Foreign exchange risk is also managed through the use of foreign currency debt. The Company’s senior unsecured euro-denominated notes have been designated as, and are effective as, economic hedges of the net investment in a foreign operation. Accordingly, foreign currency transaction gains or losses due to spot rate fluctuations on the euro-denominated debt instruments are included in foreign currency translation adjustment within OCI.
Interest Rate Risk Management
The Company may use interest rate swap contracts on certain investing and borrowing transactions to manage its net exposure to interest rate changes and to reduce its overall cost of borrowing. The Company does not use leveraged swaps and, in general, does not leverage any of its investment activities that would put principal capital at risk.
At December 31, 2021, the Company was a party to nine pay-floating, receive-fixed interest rate swap contracts designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate notes in which the notional amounts match the amount of the hedged fixed-rate notes as detailed in the table below.
(1) These interest rate swaps matured in February 2022.
The interest rate swap contracts are designated hedges of the fair value changes in the notes attributable to changes in the benchmark London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) swap rate. The fair value changes in the notes attributable to changes in the LIBOR swap rate are recorded in interest expense along with the offsetting fair value changes in the swap contracts. See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for a discussion of the pending discontinuation of LIBOR as part of reference rate reform. The cash flows from these contracts are reported as operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
The Company’s investment portfolio includes cash equivalents and short-term investments, the market values of which are not significantly affected by changes in interest rates. The market value of the Company’s medium- to long-term fixed-rate investments is modestly affected by changes in U.S. interest rates. Changes in medium- to long-term U.S. interest rates have a more significant impact on the market value of the Company’s fixed-rate borrowings, which generally have longer maturities. A sensitivity analysis to measure potential changes in the market value of Merck’s investments and debt from a change in interest rates indicated that a one percentage point increase in interest rates at December 31, 2021 and 2020 would have positively affected the net aggregate market value of these instruments by $3.2 billion and $2.6 billion, respectively. A one percentage point decrease at December 31, 2021 and 2020 would have negatively affected the net aggregate market value by $3.9 billion and $3.1 billion, respectively. The fair value of Merck’s debt was determined using pricing models reflecting one percentage point shifts in the appropriate yield curves. The fair values of Merck’s investments were determined using a combination of pricing and duration models.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The Company’s consolidated financial statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP and, accordingly, include certain amounts that are based on management’s best estimates and judgments. Estimates are used when accounting for amounts recorded in connection with acquisitions, including initial fair value determinations of assets and liabilities (primarily IPR&D, other intangible assets and contingent consideration), as well as subsequent fair value measurements. Additionally, estimates are used in determining such items as provisions for sales discounts and returns, depreciable and amortizable lives, recoverability of inventories, including those produced in preparation for product launches, amounts recorded for contingencies, environmental liabilities, accruals for contingent sales-based milestone payments and other reserves, pension and other postretirement benefit plan assumptions, share-based compensation assumptions, restructuring costs, impairments of long-lived assets (including intangible assets and goodwill) and investments, and taxes on income. Because of the uncertainty inherent in such estimates, actual results may differ from these estimates. Application of the following accounting policies result in accounting estimates having the potential for the most significant impact on the financial statements.
Acquisitions and Dispositions
To determine whether transactions should be accounted for as acquisitions (or disposals) of assets or businesses, the Company makes certain judgments, which include assessment of the inputs, processes, and outputs associated with the acquired set of activities. If the Company determines that substantially all of the fair value of gross assets included in a transaction is concentrated in a single asset (or a group of similar assets), the assets would not represent a business. To be considered a business, the assets in a transaction need to include an input and a substantive process that together significantly contribute to the ability to create outputs.
In a business combination, the acquisition method of accounting requires that the assets acquired and liabilities assumed be recorded as of the date of the acquisition at their respective fair values with limited exceptions. The fair values of intangible assets are determined utilizing information available near the acquisition date based on expectations and assumptions that are deemed reasonable by management. Given the considerable judgment involved in determining fair values, the Company typically obtains assistance from third-party valuation specialists for significant items. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination that arise from contingencies are generally recognized at fair value. If fair value cannot be determined, the asset or liability is recognized if probable and reasonably estimable; if these criteria are not met, no asset or liability is recognized. Fair value is defined as the exchange price that would be received for an asset or paid to transfer a liability (an exit price) in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability in an orderly transaction between market participants on the measurement date. Accordingly, the Company may be required to value assets at fair value measures that do not reflect the Company’s intended use of those assets. Any excess of the purchase price (consideration transferred)
over the estimated fair values of net assets acquired is recorded as goodwill. Transaction costs and costs to restructure the acquired company are expensed as incurred. The operating results of the acquired business are reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements after the date of the acquisition.
The judgments made in determining estimated fair values assigned to assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination, as well as asset lives, can materially affect the Company’s results of operations.
The fair values of identifiable intangible assets related to currently marketed products and product rights are primarily determined by using an income approach through which fair value is estimated based on each asset’s discounted projected net cash flows. The Company’s estimates of market participant net cash flows consider historical and projected pricing, margins and expense levels; the performance of competing products where applicable; relevant industry and therapeutic area growth drivers and factors; current and expected trends in technology and product life cycles; the time and investment that will be required to develop products and technologies; the ability to obtain marketing and regulatory approvals; the ability to manufacture and commercialize the products; the extent and timing of potential new product introductions by the Company’s competitors; and the life of each asset’s underlying patent and any related patent term extension, if any. The net cash flows are then probability-adjusted where appropriate to consider the uncertainties associated with the underlying assumptions, as well as the risk profile of the net cash flows utilized in the valuation. The probability-adjusted future net cash flows of each product are then discounted to present value utilizing an appropriate discount rate.
The fair values of identifiable intangible assets related to IPR&D are also determined using an income approach, through which fair value is estimated based on each asset’s probability-adjusted future net cash flows, which reflect the different stages of development of each product and the associated probability of successful completion. The net cash flows are then discounted to present value using an appropriate discount rate. Amounts allocated to acquired IPR&D are capitalized and accounted for as indefinite-lived intangible assets, subject to impairment testing until completion or abandonment of the projects. Upon successful completion of each IPR&D project, Merck will make a determination as to the then-useful life of the intangible asset, generally determined by the period in which the substantial majority of the cash flows are expected to be generated, and begin amortization.
Certain of the Company’s business combinations involve the potential for future payment of consideration that is contingent upon the achievement of performance milestones, including product development milestones and royalty payments on future product sales. The fair value of contingent consideration liabilities is determined at the acquisition date using unobservable inputs. These inputs include the estimated amount and timing of projected cash flows, the probability of success (achievement of the contingent event) and the risk-adjusted discount rate used to present value the probability-weighted cash flows. Subsequent to the acquisition date, at each reporting period until the contingency is resolved, the contingent consideration liability is remeasured at current fair value with changes (either expense or income) recorded in earnings. Changes in any of the inputs may result in a significantly different fair value adjustment.
If the Company determines the transaction will not be accounted for as an acquisition of a business, the transaction will be accounted for as an asset acquisition rather than a business combination and, therefore, no goodwill will be recorded. In an asset acquisition, acquired IPR&D with no alternative future use is charged to expense and contingent consideration is not recognized at the acquisition date. In these instances, product development milestones are recognized upon achievement and sales-based milestones are recognized when the milestone is deemed probable by the Company of being achieved.
Revenue Recognition
Recognition of revenue requires evidence of a contract, probable collection of sales proceeds and completion of substantially all performance obligations. Merck acts as the principal in substantially all of its customer arrangements and therefore records revenue on a gross basis. The majority of the Company’s contracts related to the Pharmaceutical and Animal Health segments have a single performance obligation - the promise to transfer goods. Shipping is considered immaterial in the context of the overall customer arrangement and damages or loss of goods in transit are rare. Therefore, shipping is not deemed a separately recognized performance obligation.
The vast majority of revenues from sales of products are recognized at a point in time when control of the goods is transferred to the customer, which the Company has determined is when title and risks and rewards of
ownership transfer to the customer and the Company is entitled to payment. For certain services in the Animal Health segment, revenue is recognized over time, generally ratably over the contract term as services are provided. These service revenues are not material.
The nature of the Company’s business gives rise to several types of variable consideration including discounts and returns, which are estimated at the time of sale generally using the expected value method, although the most likely amount method is used for prompt pay discounts.
In the U.S., sales discounts are issued to customers at the point-of-sale, through an intermediary wholesaler (known as chargebacks), or in the form of rebates. Additionally, sales are generally made with a limited right of return under certain conditions. Revenues are recorded net of provisions for sales discounts and returns, which are established at the time of sale. In addition, if collection of accounts receivable is expected to be in excess of one year, sales are recorded net of time value of money discounts, which have not been material.
The U.S. provision for aggregate customer discounts covers chargebacks and rebates. Chargebacks are discounts that occur when a contracted customer purchases through an intermediary wholesaler. The contracted customer generally purchases product from the wholesaler at its contracted price plus a mark-up. The wholesaler, in turn, charges the Company back for the difference between the price initially paid by the wholesaler and the contract price paid to the wholesaler by the customer. The provision for chargebacks is based on expected sell-through levels by the Company’s wholesale customers to contracted customers, as well as estimated wholesaler inventory levels. Rebates are amounts owed based upon definitive contractual agreements or legal requirements with private sector and public sector (Medicaid and Medicare Part D) benefit providers after the final dispensing of the product to a benefit plan participant. The provision for rebates is based on expected patient usage, as well as inventory levels in the distribution channel to determine the contractual obligation to the benefit providers. The Company uses historical customer segment utilization mix, sales forecasts, changes to product mix and price, inventory levels in the distribution channel, government pricing calculations and prior payment history in order to estimate the expected provision. Amounts accrued for aggregate customer discounts are evaluated on a quarterly basis through comparison of information provided by the wholesalers, health maintenance organizations, pharmacy benefit managers, federal and state agencies, and other customers to the amounts accrued.
The Company continually monitors its provision for aggregate customer discounts. There were no material adjustments to estimates associated with the aggregate customer discount provision in 2021, 2020 or 2019.
Summarized information about changes in the aggregate customer discount accrual related to U.S. sales is as follows:
Accruals for chargebacks are reflected as a direct reduction to accounts receivable and accruals for rebates as current liabilities. The accrued balances relative to these provisions included in Accounts receivable and Accrued and other current liabilities were $207 million and $2.6 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2021 and were $208 million and $2.6 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2020.
Outside of the U.S., variable consideration in the form of discounts and rebates are a combination of commercially-driven discounts in highly competitive product classes, discounts required to gain or maintain reimbursement, or legislatively mandated rebates. In certain European countries, legislatively mandated rebates are calculated based on an estimate of the government’s total unbudgeted spending and the Company’s specific payback obligation. Rebates may also be required based on specific product sales thresholds. The Company applies an estimated factor against its actual invoiced sales to represent the expected level of future discount or rebate obligations associated with the sale.
The Company maintains a returns policy that allows its U.S. pharmaceutical customers to return product within a specified period prior to and subsequent to the expiration date (generally, three to six months before and 12
months after product expiration). The estimate of the provision for returns is based upon historical experience with actual returns. Additionally, the Company considers factors such as levels of inventory in the distribution channel, product dating and expiration period, whether products have been discontinued, entrance in the market of generic or other competition, changes in formularies or launch of over-the-counter products, among others. The product returns provision for U.S. pharmaceutical sales as a percentage of U.S. net pharmaceutical sales was 0.9% in 2021, 0.5% in 2020 and 1.0% in 2019. Outside of the U.S., returns are only allowed in certain countries on a limited basis.
Merck’s payment terms for U.S. pharmaceutical customers are typically 36 days from receipt of invoice and for U.S. animal health customers are typically 30 days from receipt of invoice; however, certain products, including Keytruda, have longer payment terms, some of which are up to 90 days. Outside of the U.S., payment terms are typically 30 days to 90 days, although certain markets have longer payment terms.
Through its distribution programs with U.S. wholesalers, the Company encourages wholesalers to align purchases with underlying demand and maintain inventories below specified levels. The terms of the programs allow the wholesalers to earn fees upon providing visibility into their inventory levels, as well as by achieving certain performance parameters such as inventory management, customer service levels, reducing shortage claims and reducing product returns. Information provided through the wholesaler distribution programs includes items such as sales trends, inventory on-hand, on-order quantity and product returns.
Wholesalers generally provide only the above-mentioned data to the Company, as there is no regulatory requirement to report lot level information to manufacturers, which is the level of information needed to determine the remaining shelf life and original sale date of inventory. Given current wholesaler inventory levels, which are generally less than a month, the Company believes that collection of order lot information across all wholesale customers would have limited use in estimating sales discounts and returns.
Inventories Produced in Preparation for Product Launches
The Company capitalizes inventories produced in preparation for product launches sufficient to support estimated initial market demand. Typically, capitalization of such inventory does not begin until the related product candidates are in Phase 3 clinical trials and are considered to have a high probability of regulatory approval. The Company monitors the status of each respective product within the regulatory approval process; however, the Company generally does not disclose specific timing for regulatory approval. If the Company is aware of any specific risks or contingencies other than the normal regulatory approval process or if there are any specific issues identified during the research process relating to safety, efficacy, manufacturing, marketing or labeling, the related inventory would generally not be capitalized. Expiry dates of the inventory are affected by the stage of completion. The Company manages the levels of inventory at each stage to optimize the shelf life of the inventory in relation to anticipated market demand in order to avoid product expiry issues. For inventories that are capitalized, anticipated future sales and shelf lives support the realization of the inventory value as the inventory shelf life is sufficient to meet initial product launch requirements. Inventories produced in preparation for product launches capitalized at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $256 million and $279 million, respectively.
Contingencies and Environmental Liabilities
The Company is involved in various claims and legal proceedings of a nature considered normal to its business, including product liability, intellectual property and commercial litigation, as well as certain additional matters including governmental and environmental matters (see Note 11 to the consolidated financial statements). The Company records accruals for contingencies when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. These accruals are adjusted periodically as assessments change or additional information becomes available. For product liability claims, a portion of the overall accrual is actuarially determined and considers such factors as past experience, number of claims reported and estimates of claims incurred but not yet reported. Individually significant contingent losses are accrued when probable and reasonably estimable.
Legal defense costs expected to be incurred in connection with a loss contingency are accrued when probable and reasonably estimable. Some of the significant factors considered in the review of these legal defense reserves are as follows: the actual costs incurred by the Company; the development of the Company’s legal defense strategy and structure in light of the scope of its litigation; the number of cases being brought against the Company; the costs and outcomes of completed trials and the most current information regarding anticipated timing, progression, and related costs of pre-trial activities and trials in the associated litigation. The amount of legal defense
reserves as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 of approximately $230 million and $235 million, respectively, represents the Company’s best estimate of the minimum amount of defense costs to be incurred in connection with its outstanding litigation; however, events such as additional trials and other events that could arise in the course of its litigation could affect the ultimate amount of legal defense costs to be incurred by the Company. The Company will continue to monitor its legal defense costs and review the adequacy of the associated reserves and may determine to increase the reserves at any time in the future if, based upon the factors set forth, it believes it would be appropriate to do so.
The Company and its subsidiaries are parties to a number of proceedings brought under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, commonly known as Superfund, and other federal and state equivalents. When a legitimate claim for contribution is asserted, a liability is initially accrued based upon the estimated transaction costs to manage the site. Accruals are adjusted as site investigations, feasibility studies and related cost assessments of remedial techniques are completed, and as the extent to which other potentially responsible parties who may be jointly and severally liable can be expected to contribute is determined.
The Company is also remediating environmental contamination resulting from past industrial activity at certain of its sites and takes an active role in identifying and accruing for these costs. In the past, Merck performed a worldwide survey to assess all sites for potential contamination resulting from past industrial activities. Where assessment indicated that physical investigation was warranted, such investigation was performed, providing a better evaluation of the need for remedial action. Where such need was identified, remedial action was then initiated. As definitive information became available during the course of investigations and/or remedial efforts at each site, estimates were refined and accruals were established or adjusted accordingly. These estimates and related accruals continue to be refined annually.
The Company believes that there are no compliance issues associated with applicable environmental laws and regulations that would have a material adverse effect on the Company. Expenditures for remediation and environmental liabilities were $12 million in 2021 and are estimated to be $24 million in the aggregate for the years 2022 through 2026. In management’s opinion, the liabilities for all environmental matters that are probable and reasonably estimable have been accrued and totaled $40 million and $43 million at December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. These liabilities are undiscounted, do not consider potential recoveries from other parties and will be paid out over the periods of remediation for the applicable sites, which are expected to occur primarily over the next 15 years. Although it is not possible to predict with certainty the outcome of these matters, or the ultimate costs of remediation, management does not believe that any reasonably possible expenditures that may be incurred in excess of the liabilities accrued should exceed approximately $40 million in the aggregate. Management also does not believe that these expenditures should result in a material adverse effect on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations or liquidity for any year.
Share-Based Compensation
The Company expenses all share-based payment awards to employees, including grants of stock options, over the requisite service period based on the grant date fair value of the awards. The Company determines the fair value of certain share-based awards using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model which uses both historical and current market data to estimate the fair value. This method incorporates various assumptions such as the risk-free interest rate, expected volatility, expected dividend yield and expected life of the options. Total pretax share-based compensation expense from continuing operations was $479 million in 2021, $441 million in 2020 and $388 million in 2019. At December 31, 2021, there was $699 million of total pretax unrecognized compensation expense related to nonvested stock option, restricted stock unit and performance share unit awards which will be recognized over a weighted-average period of 1.9 years. For segment reporting, share-based compensation costs are unallocated expenses.
Pensions and Other Postretirement Benefit Plans
Net periodic benefit cost for pension plans totaled $748 million in 2021, $450 million in 2020 and $134 million in 2019. Net periodic benefit credit for other postretirement benefit plans was $83 million in 2021, $59 million in 2020 and $49 million in 2019. Pension and other postretirement benefit plan information for financial reporting purposes is calculated using actuarial assumptions including a discount rate for plan benefit obligations
and an expected rate of return on plan assets. The changes in net periodic benefit cost year over year for pension plans are attributable to settlement charges incurred by certain plans, as well as changes in the discount rate.
The Company reassesses its benefit plan assumptions on a regular basis. For both the pension and other postretirement benefit plans, the discount rate is evaluated on measurement dates and modified to reflect the prevailing market rate of a portfolio of high-quality fixed-income debt instruments that would provide the future cash flows needed to pay the benefits included in the benefit obligation as they come due. The discount rates for the Company’s U.S. pension and other postretirement benefit plans ranged from 2.60% to 3.10% at December 31, 2021, compared with a range of 2.10% to 2.80% at December 31, 2020.
The expected rate of return for both the pension and other postretirement benefit plans represents the average rate of return to be earned on plan assets over the period the benefits included in the benefit obligation are to be paid. In developing the expected rate of return, the Company considers long-term compound annualized returns of historical market data, current market conditions and actual returns on the Company’s plan assets. Using this reference information, the Company develops forward-looking return expectations for each asset category and a weighted-average expected long-term rate of return for a target portfolio allocated across these investment categories. The expected portfolio performance reflects the contribution of active management as appropriate. For 2022, the expected rate of return for the Company’s U.S. pension and other postretirement benefit plans will be 6.70%, compared to a range of 6.50% to 6.70% in 2021.
The Company has established investment guidelines for its U.S. pension and other postretirement plans to create an asset allocation that is expected to deliver a rate of return sufficient to meet the long-term obligation of each plan, given an acceptable level of risk. The target investment portfolio of the Company’s U.S. pension and other postretirement benefit plans is allocated 30% to 45% in U.S. equities, 15% to 30% in international equities, 35% to 45% in fixed-income investments, and up to 5% in cash and other investments. The portfolio’s equity weighting is consistent with the long-term nature of the plans’ benefit obligations. The expected annual standard deviation of returns of the target portfolio, which approximates 11%, reflects both the equity allocation and the diversification benefits among the asset classes in which the portfolio invests. For international pension plans, the targeted investment portfolio varies based on the duration of pension liabilities and local government rules and regulations. Although a significant percentage of plan assets are invested in U.S. equities, concentration risk is mitigated through the use of strategies that are diversified within management guidelines.
Actuarial assumptions are based upon management’s best estimates and judgment. A reasonably possible change of plus (minus) 25 basis points in the discount rate assumption, with other assumptions held constant, would have had an estimated $85 million favorable (unfavorable) impact on the Company’s net periodic benefit cost in 2021. A reasonably possible change of plus (minus) 25 basis points in the expected rate of return assumption, with other assumptions held constant, would have had an estimated $58 million favorable (unfavorable) impact on Merck’s net periodic benefit cost in 2021. Required funding obligations for 2022 relating to the Company’s pension and other postretirement benefit plans are not expected to be material. The preceding hypothetical changes in the discount rate and expected rate of return assumptions would not impact the Company’s funding requirements.
Net loss amounts, which primarily reflect differences between expected and actual returns on plan assets as well as the effects of changes in actuarial assumptions, are recorded as a component of AOCL. Expected returns for pension plans are based on a calculated market-related value of assets. Net loss amounts in AOCL in excess of certain thresholds are amortized into net periodic benefit cost over the average remaining service life of employees.
Restructuring Costs
Restructuring costs have been recorded in connection with restructuring programs designed to streamline the Company’s cost structure. As a result, the Company has made estimates and judgments regarding its future plans, including future termination benefits and other exit costs to be incurred when the restructuring actions take place. When accruing termination costs, the Company will recognize the amount within a range of costs that is the best estimate within the range. When no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount, the Company recognizes the minimum amount within the range. In connection with these actions, management also assesses the recoverability of long-lived assets employed in the business. In certain instances, asset lives have been shortened based on changes in the expected useful lives of the affected assets. Severance and other related costs are reflected within Restructuring costs. Asset-related charges are reflected within Cost of sales, Selling, general and administrative expenses and Research and development expenses depending upon the nature of the asset.
Impairments of Long-Lived Assets
The Company assesses changes in economic, regulatory and legal conditions and makes assumptions regarding estimated future cash flows in evaluating the value of the Company’s property, plant and equipment, goodwill and other intangible assets.
The Company periodically evaluates whether current facts or circumstances indicate that the carrying values of its long-lived assets to be held and used may not be recoverable. If such circumstances are determined to exist, an estimate of the undiscounted future cash flows of these assets, or appropriate asset groupings, is compared to the carrying value to determine whether an impairment exists. If the asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured based on the difference between the asset’s fair value and its carrying value. If quoted market prices are not available, the Company will estimate fair value using a discounted value of estimated future cash flows approach.
Goodwill represents the excess of the consideration transferred over the fair value of net assets of businesses acquired. Goodwill is assigned to reporting units and evaluated for impairment on at least an annual basis, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by first assessing qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Some of the factors considered in the assessment include general macroeconomic conditions, conditions specific to the industry and market, cost factors which could have a significant effect on earnings or cash flows, the overall financial performance of the reporting unit, and whether there have been sustained declines in the Company’s share price. If the Company concludes it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, a quantitative fair value test is performed. If the carrying value of a reporting unit is greater than its fair value, a goodwill impairment charge will be recorded for the difference (up to the carrying value of goodwill).
Other acquired intangible assets (excluding IPR&D) are initially recorded at fair value, assigned an estimated useful life, and amortized primarily on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives. When events or circumstances warrant a review, the Company will assess recoverability from future operations using pretax undiscounted cash flows derived from the lowest appropriate asset groupings. Impairments are recognized in operating results to the extent that the carrying value of the intangible asset exceeds its fair value, which is determined based on the net present value of estimated future cash flows.
IPR&D that the Company acquires in conjunction with the acquisition of a business represents the fair value assigned to incomplete research projects which, at the time of acquisition, have not reached technological feasibility. The amounts are capitalized and accounted for as indefinite-lived intangible assets, subject to impairment testing until completion or abandonment of the projects. The Company evaluates IPR&D for impairment at least annually, or more frequently if impairment indicators exist, by performing a quantitative test that compares the fair value of the IPR&D intangible asset with its carrying value. For impairment testing purposes, the Company may combine separately recorded IPR&D intangible assets into one unit of account based on the relevant facts and circumstances. Generally, the Company will combine IPR&D intangible assets for testing purposes if they operate as a single asset and are essentially inseparable. If the fair value is less than the carrying amount, an impairment loss is recognized in operating results.
The judgments made in evaluating impairment of long-lived intangibles can materially affect the Company’s results of operations.
Taxes on Income
The Company’s effective tax rate is based on pretax income, statutory tax rates and tax planning opportunities available in the various jurisdictions in which the Company operates. An estimated effective tax rate for a year is applied to the Company’s quarterly operating results. In the event that there is a significant unusual or one-time item recognized, or expected to be recognized, in the Company’s quarterly operating results, the tax attributable to that item would be separately calculated and recorded at the same time as the unusual or one-time item. The Company considers the resolution of prior year tax matters to be such items. Significant judgment is required in determining the Company’s tax provision and in evaluating its tax positions. The recognition and measurement of a tax position is based on management’s best judgment given the facts, circumstances and information available at the reporting date. The Company evaluates tax positions to determine whether the benefits of tax positions are more likely than not of being sustained upon audit based on the technical merits of the tax
position. For tax positions that are more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, the Company recognizes the amount of the benefit that is greater than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement in the financial statements. For tax positions that are not more likely than not of being sustained upon audit, the Company does not recognize any portion of the benefit in the financial statements. If the more likely than not threshold is not met in the period for which a tax position is taken, the Company may subsequently recognize the benefit of that tax position if the tax matter is effectively settled, the statute of limitations expires, or if the more likely than not threshold is met in a subsequent period (see Note 16 to the consolidated financial statements).
Tax regulations require items to be included in the tax return at different times than the items are reflected in the financial statements. Timing differences create deferred tax assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets generally represent items that can be used as a tax deduction or credit in the tax return in future years for which the Company has already recorded the tax benefit in the financial statements. The Company establishes valuation allowances for its deferred tax assets when the amount of expected future taxable income is not likely to support the use of the deduction or credit. Deferred tax liabilities generally represent tax expense recognized in the financial statements for which payment has been deferred or expense for which the Company has already taken a deduction on the tax return, but has not yet recognized as expense in the financial statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Standards
For a discussion of recently issued accounting standards, see Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements.
Cautionary Factors That May Affect Future Results
This report and other written reports and oral statements made from time to time by the Company may contain so-called “forward-looking statements,” all of which are based on management’s current expectations and are subject to risks and uncertainties which may cause results to differ materially from those set forth in the statements. One can identify these forward-looking statements by their use of words such as “anticipates,” “expects,” “plans,” “will,” “estimates,” “forecasts,” “projects” and other words of similar meaning, or negative variations of any of the foregoing. One can also identify them by the fact that they do not relate strictly to historical or current facts. These statements are likely to address the Company’s growth strategy, financial results, product approvals, product potential, development programs, environmental or other sustainability initiatives, and include statements related to the expected impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. One must carefully consider any such statement and should understand that many factors could cause actual results to differ materially from the Company’s forward-looking statements. These factors include inaccurate assumptions and a broad variety of other risks and uncertainties, including some that are known and some that are not. No forward-looking statement can be guaranteed and actual future results may vary materially.
The Company does not assume the obligation to update any forward-looking statement. One should carefully evaluate such statements in light of factors, including risk factors, described in the Company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, especially on this Form 10-K and Forms 10-Q and 8-K. In Item 1A. “Risk Factors” of this annual report on Form 10-K the Company discusses in more detail various important risk factors that could cause actual results to differ from expected or historic results. The Company notes these factors for investors as permitted by the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. One should understand that it is not possible to predict or identify all such factors. Consequently, the reader should not consider any such list to be a complete statement of all potential risks or uncertainties.