Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the related notes appearing at the end of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and related financing, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. You should read “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. Risk Factors of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis.
Overview
We are a pharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of products for patients suffering from rare genetic epilepsies and other seizure disorders. On March 18, 2022, the U.S Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved our new drug application (NDA) for the use of ZTALMY® (ganaxolone) oral suspension for the treatment of seizures associated with cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) deficiency disorder (CDD) in patients 2 years of age and older. This is our first FDA-approved product which we plan to commercialize in the United States. We also plan to continue to develop ganaxolone for other rare genetic epilepsies and for a number of additional indications including seizure disorders. While the precise mechanism by which ganaxolone exerts its therapeutic effects in the treatment of seizures associated with CDD is unknown, its anticonvulsant effects are thought to result from positive allosteric modulation of the gamma-aminobutyric acid type A (GABAA) receptor in the Central Nervous System (CNS). Ganaxolone is being developed in formulations for two different routes of administration: intravenous (IV) and oral. Ganaxolone is a synthetic analog of allopregnanolone, an endogenous neurosteroid. The different formulations are intended to maximize potential therapeutic applications of ganaxolone for adult and pediatric patient populations, in both acute and chronic care, and for both in-patient and self-administered settings. Ganaxolone acts at both synaptic and extrasynaptic GABAA receptors, a target known for its anti-seizure, antidepressant and anxiolytic potential.
Our operations to date have consisted primarily of organizing and staffing our company, developing ganaxolone, including conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials, and raising capital. We have funded our operations primarily through sales of equity and debt securities. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $122.9 million. We have no products currently available for sale, have incurred operating losses since inception, have not generated any product sales revenue and have not achieved profitable operations. We incurred a net loss of $98.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2021 was $410.7 million, and we expect to continue to incur substantial losses in future periods. We anticipate that our operating expenses will increase substantially as we continue to advance our clinical-stage product candidate, ganaxolone.
We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
●
conduct multiple later stage clinical trials in targeted indications;
● continue the research, development and scale-up manufacturing capabilities to optimize ganaxolone and dose forms for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
● establish and implement sales, marketing and distribution capabilities to commercialize ganaxolone;
● conduct other preclinical studies and clinical trials to support the filing of NDAs with the FDA, marketing authorization applications (MAAs) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and other marketing authorization filings with regulatory agencies in other countries;
● acquire the rights to other product candidates and fund their development;
● maintain, expand and protect our global intellectual property portfolio;
● hire additional clinical, manufacturing, scientific and commercial personnel; and
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our drug development efforts.
We had cash and cash equivalents of $122.9 million at December 31, 2021. We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents on hand as of December 31, 2021, including the previously received $22 million contingent refundable upfront fee, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements, and maintain the minimum cash balance required under our debt facility into the fourth quarter of 2022. However, we will need to secure additional funding in the future, from one or more equity or debt financings, government funding, collaborations, licensing transactions, other commercial transactions or other sources, such as our Priority Review Voucher, in order to carry out all of our planned research and development activities with respect to ganaxolone.
COVID-19
The continued global spread of COVID-19, including the Omicron variant, has impacted our clinical operations and timelines. For example, our Phase 3 trial, the Randomized Therapy In Status Epilepticus Trial (RAISE trial), a pivotal Phase 3 trial in refractory status epilepticus (RSE) patients, is conducted in hospitals, including intensive care units and academic medical centers, which have experienced high rates of COVID-19 admissions. Several academic medical centers and intensive care units participating in the RAISE trial have experienced COVID-related difficulties, including staff turnover and the need to devote significant resources to patients with COVID-19, which has resulted in site initiation and enrollment delays for the RAISE trial. Given these COVID-19-related challenges and our recent interruption in drug supply, we now expect our top-line data readout for the RAISE trial to be available in the second half of 2023. In addition, our ganaxolone clinical trials in the outpatient setting may be negatively impacted if patients and their caregivers do not want to participate while the COVID-19 pandemic persists. The duration and severity of the pandemic and its long-term impact on our business are uncertain at this time.
Reverse stock split
On September 23, 2020, we effected a 1-for-4 reverse split of shares of our common stock (Reverse Split), as approved by our board of directors and stockholders. The par value per share of our common stock was not adjusted as a result of the Reverse Split, and our authorized shares of common stock was reduced to 150,000,000. All of the share and per share amounts included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K have been adjusted to reflect the Reverse Split.
Financial Overview
Federal Contract Revenue
In September 2020, we entered into a contract (BARDA Contract) with the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA), a division of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response. Under the BARDA Contract, we received an award of up to an estimated $51 million for development of RSE. The BARDA Contract provides for funding to include support, on a cost-sharing basis, for completion of the RAISE trial, funding of pre-clinical studies to evaluate IV-administered ganaxolone as an effective treatment for RSE due to chemical nerve gas agent exposure, and funding of certain ganaxolone manufacturing scale-up and regulatory activities.
The BARDA Contract consists of an approximately two-year base period-during which BARDA will provide approximately $21 million of funding for the RAISE trial on a cost share basis and funding of additional preclinical studies of ganaxolone in nerve agent exposure models. Following successful completion of the RAISE trial and preclinical studies in the base period, the BARDA Contract provides for approximately $30 million of additional BARDA funding for three options in support of ganaxolone manufacturing, supply chain, clinical, regulatory and toxicology activities. Under the BARDA Contract, we will be responsible for cost sharing in the amount of
approximately $33 million and BARDA will be responsible for approximately $51 million, if all development options are completed. The contract period-of-performance (base period plus option exercises) is up to approximately five years.
We recognize federal contract revenue from the BARDA Contract in the period in which the allowable research and development expenses are incurred. We expect federal contract revenue to increase as the costs associated with our RAISE trial increase.
License and Collaboration Revenue
In July 2021, we entered into a collaboration agreement (Orion Collaboration Agreement) with Orion Corporation (Orion). Under the terms of the Orion Collaboration Agreement, we granted Orion an exclusive, royalty-bearing, sublicensable license to certain our intellectual property rights with respect to commercializing biopharmaceutical products incorporating ganaxolone (Licensed Products) in the European Economic Area, the United Kingdom and Switzerland (collectively, the Territory) for the diagnosis, prevention and treatment of certain human diseases, disorders or conditions (Field), initially in the indications of CDD, tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) and RSE.
Under the terms of the Orion Collaboration Agreement, we received a €25.0 million ($29.6 million) upfront payment from Orion in July 2021. In connection with the upfront fee, we agreed to provide Orion with the results of a planned genotoxicity study on the M2 metabolite of ganaxolone, a “Combined Micronucleus & Comet study in vivo.” In the event that the results of such study were positive, based on the criteria set forth in the study’s protocol, Orion would have had the right to terminate the Orion Collaboration Agreement within ninety (90) days after its receipt of the final report of such study, in which case we would have been required to refund Orion seventy-five percent (75%) of the upfront fee. In February 2022, the verified draft study report showed that no genotoxicity was found, as measured by formation of micronuclei in the bone marrow or comet morphology in the liver. As such, but subject to confirmation of such results in the final study report expected by the end of the second quarter of 2022, we will not be required to refund Orion any of the upfront fee and Orion will not have a right to terminate the Orion Collaboration Agreement as a result of the study’s findings.
We are eligible to receive up to an additional €97 million in R&D reimbursement and cash milestone payments based on specific clinical and commercial achievements. Also, as part of the overall arrangement, we have agreed to supply the Licensed Products to Orion at an agreed upon price.
We identified the following commitments under the arrangement: (i) exclusive rights to develop, use, sell, have sold, offer for sale and import any product comprised of Licensed Product (License); (ii) development and regulatory activities (Development and Regulatory Activities); and (iii) requirement to supply Orion with the Licensed Product at an agreed upon price (Supply of Licensed Product). We determined that these three commitments represent distinct performance obligations for purposes of recognizing revenue and will recognize license and collaboration revenue or a reduction of expense as we fulfill each performance obligation.
Research and Development Expenses
Our research and development expenses consist primarily of costs incurred for the development of ganaxolone, which include:
● employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, travel and stock-based compensation expense;
● expenses incurred under agreements with clinical research organizations (CROs) and investigative sites that conduct our clinical trials and preclinical studies;
● the cost of acquiring, developing and manufacturing clinical trial materials;
● facilities, depreciation and other expenses, which include direct and allocated expenses for rent and maintenance of facilities, insurance and other supplies;
● costs associated with preclinical activities and regulatory operations; and
● costs associated with developing new formulations and prodrugs of ganaxolone.
We expense research and development costs when we incur them. We record costs for some development activities, such as clinical trials, based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations and information our vendors provide to us.
We have and will incur substantial costs beyond our present and planned clinical trials in order to file an NDA and Supplemental New Drug Applications (NDAs), or an MAA outside the US, for ganaxolone for various clinical indications, and in each case, the nature, design, size and cost of further clinical trials and other studies will depend in large part on the outcome of preceding studies and trials and discussions with regulators. It is difficult to determine with certainty the costs and duration of our current or future clinical trials and preclinical studies, or if, when or to what extent we will generate revenue from the commercialization and sale of ganaxolone if we obtain regulatory approval. We may never succeed in achieving regulatory approval for ganaxolone. The duration, costs and timing of clinical trials and development of ganaxolone will depend on a variety of factors, including the uncertainties of future clinical trials and preclinical studies, uncertainties in clinical trial enrollment rate and significant and changing government regulation.
In addition, the probability of success for our clinical programs will depend on numerous factors, including competition, manufacturing capability and commercial viability. See “Risk Factors.” Our commercial success depends upon attaining significant market acceptance, if approved, among physicians, patients, healthcare payers and the medical community. We will determine which programs to pursue and how much to fund each program in response to the scientific and clinical success, as well as an assessment of commercial potential.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist principally of salaries and related costs for executive and other administrative personnel and consultants, including stock-based compensation and travel expenses. Other general and administrative expenses include professional fees for legal, patent review, consulting and accounting services. General and administrative expenses are expensed when incurred. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future as a result of employee hiring and our scaling-up of operations commensurate with supporting more advanced clinical trials and for commercial infrastructure. These increases will likely include increased costs for insurance, hiring of additional personnel, outside consultants, and legal counsel and accountants, among other expenses.
Cost of collaboration revenue
Cost of collaboration revenue represents a one-time fee paid to Purdue Neuroscience Company related to our license agreement. This fee was paid in conjunction with the Orion Collaboration Agreement.
Interest Income
Interest income consists principally of interest income earned on cash and cash equivalent and investment balances.
Interest Expense
Interest expense consists of interest expense and amortization of debt discount related to our Notes Payable.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income and expense consists principally of gains or losses on disposal of fixed assets held for sale, foreign currency translation, and fair value adjustments.
Results of Operations
Federal contract revenue
We recognized $6.4 million and $1.7 million in federal contract revenue in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively, as a result of the BARDA Contract.
License Revenue
License revenue was $9.0 million in the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of recognizing a portion of the Orion upfront payment not subject to certain return provisions based on results of additional pre-clinical testing as defined within the agreement. We did not recognize any license revenue in the year ended December 31, 2020.
Research and Development Expenses
We allocate direct research and development expenses, consisting principally of external costs, such as fees paid to investigators, consultants, central laboratories and CROs in connection with our clinical trials, and costs related to manufacturing or purchasing clinical trial materials, to specific product development programs. We do not allocate employee and contractor-related costs, costs associated with our facility expenses, including depreciation or other indirect costs, to specific product programs because these costs are deployed across multiple product programs under research and development and, as such, are separately classified. The table below shows our research and development expenses incurred with respect to each active program, in thousands. The primary drivers of our research and development expenditures are currently in our product development programs in RSE, CDD, TSC and PCDH19-Related Epilepsy (PCDH19-RE). We expect our research and development expenses for ganaxolone will continue to increase during subsequent periods. We did not allocate research and development expenses to any other specific product development programs during the periods presented (in thousands):
Note: Certain prior year expenses have been reclassified to conform to current year presentation.
(1) The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to an increase in regulatory and statistical analysis expenses associated with our NDA filing, partially offset by reduced clinical trial activity as 2020 costs associated with our Phase 3 Marigold study exceeded 2021 costs associated with our on-going open label extension
(2) The decrease in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to 2020 including more active clinical development work associated with our Phase 2 Violet study and 2021 including more limited costs associated with our on-going open label extension.
(3) The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to increased trial activity in 2021 from the Phase 2 TSC trial and start-up activities for the Phase 3 TSC trial, as compared to more limited Phase 2 start-up activities, including enrollment, in 2020.
(4) The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was the result of increased manufacturing costs associated with scale up for the NDA submission and preparation for commercialization.
(5) The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020 was due primarily to start-up activities, including drug manufacturing, associated with the on-going Phase 3 RAISE trial and planned Phase 2 established status epilepticus (ESE) clinical trial.
(6) Other research and development expenses include external expenses associated with preclinical and clinical development of ganaxolone, including safety studies, stability studies, preclinical studies, including animal toxicology and pharmacology studies, and other professional fees, as well as a reduction in expense related to our Development and Regulatory Activities obligation under the Orion Collaboration Agreement. The increase in the year ended December 31, 2021 was due primarily to safety studies.
(7) The increase is related to increased personnel costs in support of our increased activity in preclinical, clinical, and manufacturing activities including increased noncash stock-based compensation.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased to $37.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $18.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The primary drivers of the increase were $6.5 million in increased personnel costs, $4.7 million in increased noncash stock-based compensation, $4.9 million in increased commercialization preparation, $1.1 million contract acquisition costs related to the Orion Collaboration Agreement, $0.6 million in increased legal fees and $1.0 million of other administrative expenses. Of the increased noncash stock-based compensation, $2.1 million was due to modifications of stock options recorded in the first quarter of 2021 in connection with a severance agreement with our former Chief Financial Officer.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Since inception, we have incurred net losses and negative cash flows from our operations. We incurred a net loss of $98.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Our cash used in operating activities was $55.5 million for year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $60.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Historically, we have financed our operations principally through the sale of common stock, notes payable, preferred stock and convertible debt. At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $122.9 million.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents on hand as of December 31, 2021, including the previously received $22 million contingent refundable upfront fee received in connection with the Orion Agreement, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements, and maintain the minimum cash balance required under our debt facility into the fourth quarter of 2022. As a result, there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern through the one-year period from the date of filing of this 10-K. However, we will need to secure additional funding in the future, from one or more equity or debt financings, government funding, collaborations, licensing transactions, other commercial transactions or other sources, such as our Priority Review Voucher, in order to carry out all of our planned commercialization and research and development activities with respect to ganaxolone.
European Commercialization Agreement
On July 30, 2021, we entered into the Orion Collaboration Agreement, whereby Orion received exclusive rights to commercialize the oral and IV dose formulations of ganaxolone in the European Economic Area, United Kingdom and Switzerland in multiple seizure disorders, including CDD, TSC and RSE. Under the agreement, we received a €25 million ($29.6 million) upfront fee and are eligible to receive up to an additional €97 million in R&D reimbursement and
cash milestone payments based on specific clinical and commercial achievements, as well as tiered royalty payments based on net sales ranging from the low double digits to the high teens for the oral programs and the low double-digits to the low twenties for the IV programs. In connection with the upfront fee, we agreed to provide Orion with the results of an ongoing genotoxicity study on the M2 metabolite of ganaxolone, a “Combined Micronucleus & Comet study in vivo.” In the event that the results of such study were positive, based on the criteria set forth in the study’s protocol, Orion would have had the right to terminate the Orion Collaboration Agreement within ninety (90) days after its receipt of the final report of such study, in which case we would have been required to refund Orion seventy-five percent (75%) of the upfront fee. In February 2022, the verified draft study report showed that no genotoxicity was found, as measured by formation of micronuclei in the bone marrow or comet morphology in the liver. As such, but subject to confirmation of such results in the final study report expected by the end of the second quarter of 2022, we will not be required to refund Orion any of the upfront fee and Orion will not have a right to terminate the Orion Collaboration Agreement as a result of the study’s findings.
Oaktree Credit Agreement
On May 11, 2021 (Closing Date), we entered into a Credit Agreement and Guaranty (as amended by that certain letter agreement on May 17, 2021, the Credit Agreement) with Oaktree Fund Administration, LLC, as administrative agent and the lenders party thereto that provides for a five-year senior secured term loan facility in an aggregate original principal amount of up to $125.0 million available to us in five tranches (collectively, the Term Loans):
● $15.0 million of tranche A-1 term loans advanced on the Closing Date.
● Through December 31, 2021, $30.0 million of tranche A-2 term loans subject to written acceptance by the FDA of an NDA filing relating to the use of ganaxolone in the treatment of CDD. This $30.0 million tranche was drawn in September 2021 after formal acceptance of the NDA filing.
● Through December 31, 2022, $30.0 million of tranche B term loans have become available for draw as a result of FDA approval of ZTALMY for CDD in March 2022 (FDA Approval).
● Through June 30, 2023, $25.0 million of tranche C term loans subject to the completion of one or more financings, including through the issuance of common stock, convertible debt, subordinated debt, a synthetic royalty or a sublicense in which we receive gross proceeds in an aggregate amount of at least $40.0 million and net proceeds in an aggregate amount of at least $36.0 million. In addition, the availability of this tranche is subject to either our current Phase 3 trial in RSE or a Phase 3 trial in TSC achieving statistical significance (p value < 0.05) across all primary endpoints and ganaxolone must be generally well tolerated, with a safety profile generally consistent with previous clinical trials.
● Through December 31, 2023, $25 million of tranche D term loans subject us earning an aggregate of at least $50 million in net product revenue in the United States for a trailing six consecutive months.
The Term Loans will bear interest at a fixed per annum rate (subject to increase during an event of default) of 11.50% and are scheduled to mature on the fifth anniversary of the Closing Date (Maturity Date). In addition, at the time of funding of any tranche of the Term Loans, we are required to pay an upfront fee of 2.0% of the aggregate principal amount being funded. We are required to make quarterly interest payments until the Maturity Date. We are also required to make principal payments, which are payable in quarterly installments beginning on the last day of the first quarter ending after the third anniversary of the Closing Date in an amount equal to 5.0% of the aggregate amount of the Term Loans outstanding on the date of the first such quarterly principal payment and continuing until the Maturity Date, on which date all outstanding Term Loans and other amounts owed under the Credit Agreement will be required to be paid in full. A commitment fee of 75 basis points per annum will accrue on each of the tranche B, C and D commitments for the period beginning 120 days after the funding date of the tranche A-2 term loans until the applicable tranche is either funded or terminated.
BARDA Contract
In September 2020, we entered into the BARDA Contract with BARDA. Under the BARDA Contract, we received an award of up to an estimated $51 million for development of IV-administered ganaxolone for the treatment of RSE. The BARDA Contract provides for funding to support, on a cost-sharing basis, the completion of a Phase 3 clinical trial of IV-administered ganaxolone in patients with RSE, which covers the RAISE trial, funding of pre-clinical studies to evaluate IV-administered ganaxolone as an effective treatment for RSE due to chemical nerve gas agent exposure, and funding of certain ganaxolone manufacturing scale-up and regulatory activities.
The BARDA Contract consists of an approximately two-year base period during which BARDA will provide up to approximately $21 million of funding for the RAISE trial on a cost share basis and funding of additional preclinical studies of ganaxolone in nerve agent exposure models. Following successful completion of the RAISE trial and preclinical studies in the base period, the BARDA Contract provides for approximately $30 million of additional BARDA funding for three options in support of ganaxolone manufacturing, supply chain, clinical, regulatory and toxicology activities. Under the BARDA Contract, we will be responsible for cost sharing in the amount of approximately $33 million and BARDA will be responsible for approximately $51 million, if all development options are completed. The contract period-of-performance (base period plus option exercises) is up to approximately five years.
Equity Financings
In connection with the closing of an equity financing in December 2020, we issued a total of 5,000,000 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering resulting in aggregate net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions in the public offering and other estimated offering expenses, of $64.8 million.
In connection with the closing of an equity financing in June 2020, we issued a total of 4,600,000 shares of common stock in an underwritten public offering resulting in aggregate net proceeds, after underwriting discounts and commissions in the public offering and other estimated offering expenses, of $43.0 million.
Cash Flows
Operating Activities. Cash used in operating activities decreased to $55.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $60.9 million for the same period in 2020. The decrease was driven by the upfront payment related to our Orion Collaboration Agreement, increase in stock-based compensation expenses, and increase in the change in accounts payable, accrued expenses and other long term-liabilities, offset by increase in net loss.
Investing Activities. Cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 represents the maturities of $1.5 million of short-term investments, offset by $2.9 million related to investments in property and equipment. Cash used by investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 represents the maturities of $8.2 million of short-term investments, offset by $8.9 million in in purchases of short-term investments.
Financing Activities. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 includes $40.3 million in proceeds from notes payable net of issuance costs, and $1.2 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2020 includes $108.2 million in net proceeds from follow-on public offerings, the sale of common stock in connection with an equity distribution agreement and $1.0 million in proceeds from the exercise of stock options.
Funding Requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception, and we expect to continue to incur net losses for the foreseeable future. We expect our cash expenditures to increase in the near term as we fund the commercialization of ZTALMY and our continuing and planned clinical trials for ganaxolone.
We believe that our existing cash and cash equivalents on hand as of December 31, 2021, including the previously received $22 million contingent refundable upfront fee, will be sufficient to fund our operating expenses, capital expenditure requirements, and maintain the minimum cash balance required under our debt facility into the fourth quarter of 2022. However, we will need to secure additional funding in the future, from one or more equity or debt financings, government funding, collaborations, licensing transactions, other commercial transactions or other sources, such as our Priority Review Voucher, in order to carry out all of our planned research and development activities with respect to ganaxolone. In order to meet these additional cash requirements, we may seek to sell additional equity or convertible debt securities that may result in dilution to our stockholders. If we raise additional funds through the issuance of convertible debt securities, these securities could have rights senior to those of our common stock and could contain covenants that restrict our operations. There can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain additional equity or debt financing on terms acceptable to us, if at all. Further, the continued spread of COVID-19 has also led to severe disruption and volatility in the global capital markets, which could increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our ability to access the capital markets in the future. Our failure to obtain sufficient funds on acceptable terms when needed could have a negative impact on our business, results of operations, and financial condition.
Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business, the medical community and the global economy;
● the results of our preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the development, formulation and commercialization activities related to ganaxolone;
● the scope, progress, results and costs of researching and developing ganaxolone or any other future product candidates, and conducting preclinical studies and clinical trials;
● the timing of, and the costs involved in, obtaining regulatory approvals for ganaxolone or any other future product candidates;
● the cost of commercialization activities if ganaxolone or any other future product candidates are approved for sale, including marketing, sales and distribution costs;
● the cost of manufacturing and formulating ganaxolone, or any other future product candidates, to internal and regulatory standards for use in preclinical studies, clinical trials and, if approved, commercial sale;
● our ability to establish and maintain strategic collaborations, licensing or other arrangements and the financial terms of such agreements;
● our ability to receive funding under the BARDA Contract;
● our expectations regarding the amount and timing of milestone and royalty payments pursuant to our exclusive license agreement with Orion for the commercialization of ganaxolone in Europe;
● our obligation to reimburse the upfront payment under the Collaboration Agreement to Orion in the event of a positive genotoxicity study;
● our eligibility for additional debt tranches under the Credit Agreement with Oaktree;
● any product liability, infringement or other lawsuits related to our product candidates and, if approved, products;
● capital needed to attract and retain skilled personnel;
● the costs involved in preparing, filing, prosecuting, maintaining, defending and enforcing patent claims, including litigation costs and the outcome of such litigation; and
● the timing, receipt and amount of sales of, or royalties on, future approved products, if any.
Please see “Risk Factors” for additional risks associated with our substantial capital requirements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
We base this management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations on our financial statements, which we have prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those related to accrued clinical trial expenses on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events and various other factors that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. You should consider your evaluation of our financial condition and results of operations with these policies, judgments and estimates in mind.
While we describe our significant accounting policies in the notes to our financial statements appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe the following accounting policies are the most critical to the judgments and estimates we use in the preparation of our financial statements.
Clinical Trial Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our clinical trial expenses. Our clinical trial accrual process seeks to account for expenses resulting from our obligations under contracts with vendors, consultants and CROs and clinical site agreements in connection with conducting clinical trials. The financial terms of these contracts are subject to negotiations, which vary from contract to contract and may result in payment flows that do not match the periods over which materials or services are provided to us under such contracts. Our objective is to reflect the appropriate clinical trial expenses in our financial statements by matching the appropriate expenses with the period in which services and efforts are expended. We account for these expenses according to the progress of the trial as measured by subject progression and the timing of various aspects of the trial.
We determine accrual estimates based on estimates of the services received and efforts expended that take into account discussion with applicable personnel and outside service providers as to the progress or state of completion of trials. During the course of a clinical trial, we adjust our clinical expense recognition if actual results differ from our estimates. We make estimates of our accrued expenses and prepaid assets as of each balance sheet date in our financial statements based on the facts and circumstances known to us at that time. Our clinical trial accrual and prepaid assets are dependent, in part, upon the receipt of timely and accurate reporting from CROs and other third-party vendors. Although we do not expect our estimates to differ materially from amounts we actually incur, our understanding of the status and timing of services performed relative to the actual status and timing of services performed may vary and may result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low for any particular period.
Orion Collaboration Agreement
The recognition of revenue related to the Orion Collaboration Agreement requires significant judgement and estimates. As discussed in Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements, we are required to identify distinct performance obligations and subsequently allocate a portion of the transaction price to each performance obligation. We will recognize such revenue or expense, as applicable, as we fulfill these performance obligations. We identified three commitments in the Orion Collaboration Agreement that represent distinct performance obligations for purposes of recognizing revenue or reducing expense: (i) exclusive rights to develop, use, sell, have sold, offer for sale and import any product comprised of Licensed Product (License) (ii) development and regulatory activities (Development and
Regulatory Activities), and (iii) requirement to supply Orion with the Licensed Product at an agreed upon price (Supply of Licensed Product). We allocated the transaction price to the three performance obligations based on the estimated stand-alone selling prices at contract inception and we reevaluate the transaction price and the total estimated costs expected to be incurred to satisfy the performance obligations and adjust the deferred revenue at the end of each reporting period. Such changes will result in a change to the amount of collaboration revenue recognized and deferred revenue.
Significant estimates were used in the determination of the stand-along selling prices. The stand-alone selling price of the License was based on a discounted cash flow approach and considered several factors including, but not limited to, discount rate, development timeline, regulatory risks, estimated market demand and future revenue potential using an adjusted market approach. The stand-alone selling price of the Development and Regulatory Activities and the Supply of Licensed Product was estimated using the expected cost-plus margin approach.