ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Our actual results and timing of certain events may differ materially from the results discussed, projected, anticipated, or indicated in any forward-looking statements. We caution you that forward-looking statements are not guarantees of future performance and that our actual results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate may differ materially from the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report. In addition, even if our results of operations, financial condition and liquidity, and the development of the industry in which we operate are consistent with the forward-looking statements contained in this Annual Report, they may not be predictive of results or developments in future periods.
The following information and any forward-looking statements should be considered in light of factors discussed elsewhere in the Annual Report on Form 10-K, including those risks identified under Part II, Item 1A. Risk Factors.
We caution readers not to place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements made by us, which speak only as of the date they are made. We disclaim any obligation, except as specifically required by law and the rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission, or SEC, to publicly update or revise any such statements to reflect any change in our expectations or in events, conditions or circumstances on which any such statements may be based, or that may affect the likelihood that actual results will differ from those set forth in the forward-looking statements.
For our discussion and analysis of the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019, please refer to “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, as filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021.
Overview
We are a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on developing antibody drug conjugates, or ADCs, that offer a clinically meaningful benefit for cancer patients with significant unmet need. We have leveraged over 20 years of industry learning in the ADC field to develop proprietary and differentiated technology platforms that enable us to develop ADCs designed to have improved efficacy, safety and tolerability relative to existing ADC therapies.
We believe that our innovative platforms, including Dolaflexin and Dolasynthen, delivering our proprietary auristatin DolaLock payload, as well as Immunosynthen, which delivers our novel proprietary stimulator of interferon genes, or STING, agonist ImmunoLock payload, together comprise a highly efficient product engine that has enabled a robust discovery pipeline for us and our partners. Our ADCs in preclinical studies and clinical trials include first-in-class molecules that target multiple tumor types with high unmet medical need. Our belief is that our novel ADCs may have more favorable safety and efficacy compared to more traditional existing ADCs developed using first-generation technology.
Our goal is to become a leading oncology company by leveraging the potential of our innovative and differentiated ADC technologies and the experience and competencies of our management team to identify, acquire and develop promising ADC product candidates and to commercialize cancer therapeutics that are improvements over existing treatments.
UpRi (upifitamab rilsodotin), our first-in-class ADC targeting the sodium-dependent phosphate transport protein NaPi2b, utilizes the Dolaflexin platform to deliver about 10 DolaLock payload molecules per antibody. We believe the NaPi2b antigen is broadly expressed in ovarian cancer and other cancers with limited expression in normal tissue. We are currently evaluating UpRi in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer in a single-arm registrational trial, which we refer to as UPLIFT, for which we expect to complete enrollment in the third quarter of 2022. We are also conducting a Phase 1/2 umbrella combination trial, which we refer to as UPGRADE. The first combination we are exploring is the combination of UpRi with carboplatin, a standard platinum chemotherapy broadly used in the treatment of platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer. We may explore other combinations in the future. We expect to report interim data from UPGRADE in the second half of 2022. In the second quarter of 2022, we expect to initiate enrollment in a randomized placebo-controlled Phase 3 trial, which we refer to as UP-NEXT, to evaluate UpRi as single agent maintenance treatment in patients with platinum-sensitive ovarian cancer that have high NaPi2b expression. Together, data from these trials have the potential to establish the safety and efficacy of UpRi across a wide range of ovarian cancer patients, from those who are platinum-resistant and heavily pre-treated to those in earlier lines of the disease.
XMT-1592 was created using our Dolasynthen platform and also targets NaPi2b. XMT-1592 comprises the same proprietary NaPi2b antibody and auristatin DolaLock payload with controlled bystander effect as in UpRi, with the additional features that our Dolasynthen platform offers, including homogeneity, site-specific bioconjugation and precise drug-to-antibody ratio, or DAR. We are conducting a Phase 1 dose exploration trial of XMT-1592 in patients with ovarian cancer and non-small cell lung cancer, NSCLC, adenocarcinoma, which we expect to complete in the second half of 2022.
Our early-stage programs include XMT-1660, a B7-H4-targeted Dolasynthen ADC, as well as XMT-2056, a STING-agonist ADC developed using our novel Immunosynthen platform and targeting a novel epitope of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2, or HER2. Our goal is to rapidly progress these candidates through investigational new drug, or IND, -enabling studies. We expect to initiate a Phase 1 clinical trial of each of XMT-1660 and XMT-2056 in mid-2022. We believe that these development candidates provide significant opportunities in areas of high unmet need such as breast cancer and other tumors. We also have two earlier stage preclinical candidates, which we refer to as XMT-2068 and XMT-2175, both of which leverage our Immunosynthen platform and target tumor-associated antigens.
In addition, we have established strategic research and development partnerships with Janssen Biotech, Inc., or Janssen, and Merck KGaA for the development and commercialization of additional ADC product candidates leveraging our proprietary Dolasynthen and Dolaflexin platform technologies against a limited number of targets selected by our partners. We believe the potential of our ADC technologies, supported by our scientific and technical expertise and enabled by our intellectual property strategy, all support our independent and collaborative efforts to discover and develop life-changing ADCs for patients fighting cancer.
In February 2022, we entered into a research collaboration and license agreement with Janssen to collaborate on the discovery and research of Dolasynthen ADCs for up to three antigen targets utilizing Janssen’s antibodies, with Janssen leading development, manufacturing and commercialization worldwide. We refer to this as the Janssen Collaboration. Upon execution of the agreement we received an upfront payment of $40 million. Our primary objective in entering into the Janssen Collaboration was to collaborate with a leading global pharmaceutical company to further validate the potential of our Dolasynthen platform, to enable the development of novel ADC product candidates, to provide near term non-dilutive funding and to drive significant long-term value.
Since inception, our operations have focused on building our platforms, identifying potential product candidates, producing drug substance and drug product material for use in preclinical studies, conducting preclinical and toxicology studies, manufacturing clinical trial material and conducting clinical trials, establishing and protecting our intellectual property, staffing our company and raising capital. We do not have any products approved for sale and have not generated any revenue from
product sales. We have funded our operations primarily through our strategic partnerships, private placements of our convertible preferred stock, public offerings of our common stock and an at-the-market, or ATM, equity offering program.
Since inception, we have incurred significant cumulative operating losses. Our net losses were $170.1 million and $88.0 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $450.5 million. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and operating losses over the next several years. We anticipate that our expenses will increase significantly in connection with our ongoing activities, as we:
•continue clinical development activities for our clinical product candidates, UpRi, including UPLIFT, UPGRADE and UP-NEXT, and XMT-1592;
•continue diagnostic development efforts with respect to the NaPi2b biomarker;
•complete IND-enabling studies and commence clinical trials for our preclinical development candidates XMT-1660 and XMT-2056;
•continue activities to discover, validate and develop additional product candidates, including XMT-2068 and XMT-2175;
•maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio; and
•hire additional research, development and general and administrative personnel.
Impact of COVID-19 on Our Business
We are continuing to monitor the impact of the coronavirus, or COVID-19, pandemic on our operations and ongoing clinical and preclinical development, as well as discovery efforts. Mitigation activities to minimize COVID-19-related operation disruptions are ongoing and include:
•We are currently enrolling patients at clinical sites in different geographic areas around the world in our ongoing clinical trials, though staffing constraints have become an increasing challenge for the clinical sites with which we work. If staffing challenges persist, we may experience associated delays in trial enrollment. We are in the process of initiating additional clinical sites both inside and outside the United States to increase enrollment, which we believe could also mitigate this potential risk. Consistent with FDA guidance, we allow for remote patient monitoring and remote testing, when reasonably possible.
•To the best of our knowledge, our contract research and manufacturing partners continue to operate their operations at or near normal levels, though staffing constraints and sourcing of raw and other materials have become an increasing challenge for our vendors. If staffing and/or material sourcing challenges continue, we may experience associated delays in our laboratory, clinical or manufacturing services. We believe we currently have appropriate service support and sufficient inventory of UpRi and XMT-1592 to support our ongoing clinical trials, and we currently expect to have sufficient inventory of XMT-1660 and XMT-2056 to commence Phase 1 clinical trials in 2022. We have planned research, clinical and manufacturing activities to address all currently anticipated future needs. We continue to monitor the research clinical and manufacturing operations of our vendors.
The ultimate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business operations is highly uncertain and subject to change and will depend on future developments, which cannot be accurately predicted. While the pandemic did not materially affect our financial results and business operations in the year ended December 31, 2021, we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results in future periods due to numerous uncertainties. Management continues to actively monitor the situation and the possible effects on our financial condition, operations, suppliers, vendors, our workforce and the overall industry. For additional information about risks and uncertainties related to the COVID-19 pandemic that may impact our business, our financial condition or our results of operations, see “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from the sale of products. All of our revenue has been generated from strategic partnerships.
In June 2014, we entered into an agreement with Merck KGaA for the development and commercialization of ADC product candidates utilizing Fleximer for up to six target antigens. Merck KGaA is responsible for generating antibodies against the target antigens and we are responsible for generating Fleximer and our proprietary payloads and conjugating this to the antibody to create the ADC product candidates. Merck KGaA has the exclusive right to and is responsible for the further development and commercialization of these ADC product candidates. In May 2018, we entered into a supply agreement with Merck KGaA for the supply of materials that could be used for IND-enabling studies and clinical trials.
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we recognized revenue of an immaterial amount and $0.8 million, respectively, related to the Merck KGaA agreements.
For the foreseeable future, we expect substantially all of our revenue to be generated from our collaboration agreements with Janssen, Merck KGaA and Asana BioSciences. Given the uncertain nature and timing of clinical development, we cannot predict when or whether we will receive further milestone payments or any royalty payments under these collaborations.
For information about our revenue recognition policy, see the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Expenses
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses include our drug discovery efforts, manufacturing, and the development of our product candidates, which consist of:
•employee-related expenses, including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation expense;
•costs of funding research and development performed by third parties that conduct research, preclinical activities, manufacturing and clinical trials on our behalf;
•laboratory supplies;
•facility costs, including rent, depreciation and maintenance expenses; and
•upfront and milestone payments under our third-party licensing agreements.
Research and development costs are expensed as incurred. Costs of certain activities, such as manufacturing, preclinical studies and clinical trials, are generally recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks. Costs for certain development activities, such as clinical trials, are recognized based on an evaluation of the progress to completion of specific tasks using data such as patient enrollment, clinical site activations and information provided to us by the third parties with whom we contract.
Research and development activities are central to our business model. Product candidates in later stages of clinical development generally have higher development costs than those in earlier stages of clinical development, primarily due to the increased size and duration of later-stage clinical trials and manufacturing costs. We expect that our future research and development costs will continue to increase over current levels, depending on the progress of our clinical development programs. There are numerous factors associated with the successful development and commercialization of any of our product candidates, including future trial design and various regulatory requirements, many of which cannot be determined with accuracy at our current stage of development. Additionally, future commercial and regulatory factors beyond our control may impact our clinical development programs and plans.
A significant portion of our research and development costs have been external costs, which we track on a program-by-program basis following IND submission. We have not historically tracked all of our internal research and development expenses on a program-by-program basis as they are deployed across multiple projects under development. The following table summarizes our external research and development expenses, by program, following IND submission for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. All external research and development expenses not attributable to the UpRi and XMT-1592 programs are captured within preclinical and discovery costs. These costs relate to XMT-1592 prior to its IND submission in early 2020, as well as our preclinical development candidates XMT-1660, XMT-2056, XMT-2068 and XMT-2175, and additional earlier discovery stage programs and certain unallocated costs. Our internal research and development costs are primarily personnel-related costs, stock-based compensation costs, and facility costs, including depreciation, and lab consumables.
The successful development of our product candidates is highly uncertain. As such, we cannot reasonably estimate or know the nature, timing and estimated costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the remainder of the development of our product candidates. We are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will generate revenue from commercialization and sale of any of our product candidates that obtain regulatory approval. This is due to the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•successful completion of preclinical studies and IND-enabling studies;
•successful enrollment in and completion of clinical trials;
•receipt of marketing approvals from applicable regulatory authorities;
•establishing commercial manufacturing capabilities or making arrangements with third-party manufacturers;
•obtaining and maintaining patent and trade secret protection and regulatory exclusivity for our product candidates;
•commercializing the product candidates, if and when approved, whether alone or in collaboration with others;
•continued acceptable safety profile of the drugs following approval; and
•our ability to overcome existing and emerging competitive threats to the successful commercialization of our products.
A change in the outcome of any of these variables with respect to the development, manufacture or commercialization of any of our product candidates would significantly change the costs, timing and viability associated with the development of that product candidate.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist primarily of salaries and other employee-related costs, including stock-based compensation, for personnel in executive, finance, accounting, business development, legal, information technology and human resources functions. Other significant costs include facility costs not otherwise included in research and development expenses, legal fees relating to patent and corporate matters, and fees for accounting and consulting services.
We anticipate that our general and administrative expenses will increase in the future to support continued research and development activities, including increased costs related to the hiring of additional personnel, fees to outside consultants and patent costs, among other expenses.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) consists primarily of interest income earned on cash equivalents and marketable securities. Interest expense is related to borrowings under the credit facilities. These borrowings bear a floating per annum rate interest, as well as a final payment of either 4.25% on the Prior Credit Facility or 5.5% on the New Credit Facility, as defined below, of the amounts drawn, that is being recorded as interest expense over the term through the maturity date using the effective-interest method. Also included in interest expense is the amortization of the deferred financing costs and the accretion of debt discount relating to the credit facilities.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, together with the changes in those items:
Collaboration Revenue
Collaboration revenue was less than $0.1 million during the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.8 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we recognized $0.8 million of revenue as a result of the completion of research services associated with a target included in the Merck KGaA Agreement.
Research and Development Expense
Research and development expense was $132.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $67.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The overall increase of $65.0 million was primarily attributable to the following:
•an increase of $28.7 million related to manufacturing and clinical development activities for UpRi;
•an increase of $14.7 million related to preclinical and discovery stage programs including XMT-1660 and XMT-2056;
•an increase of $10.8 million related to employee compensation (excluding stock-based compensation), primarily due to an increase in headcount supporting the growth of our research and development activities;
•an increase of $5.3 million related to manufacturing and clinical development activities for XMT-1592; and
•an increase of $0.8 million related to other research services and supplies costs.
These increased costs were partially offset by the following:
•a decrease of $1.3 million related to the favorable resolution of an outstanding payable balance.
Stock-based compensation expense included in research and development expenses increased by $6.0 million primarily as a result of increased headcount.
We expect our research and development expenses to increase as we continue our clinical development of UpRi and XMT-1592 and continue to advance our preclinical product candidate pipeline and invest in improvements in our ADC technologies.
General and Administrative Expense
General and administrative expense increased by $15.0 million from $21.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $36.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase in general and administrative expense was primarily attributable to an increase of $4.1 million related to employee compensation (excluding stock-based compensation), related to
an increase in headcount, and an increase of $5.7 million related to consulting and professional fees. Stock-based compensation increased by $5.1 million also primarily as a result of increased headcount.
We expect that our general and administrative expense will increase in future periods as we expand our operations. These increases will likely include legal, auditing fees, additional insurance premiums and general compliance and consulting expenses.
Total Other Income (Expense), Net
Total other expense, net, was $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and total other income, net, was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. In each period, other expense consisted primarily of interest on our borrowings under the credit facilities, offset by interest income on cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities. For the year ended December 31, 2021, other expense included a $0.4 million loss on extinguishment related to the repayment of the Prior Credit Facility, as defined below.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Liquidity
We have financed our operations primarily with the proceeds from our initial public offering, our follow-on public offerings in 2019 and 2020, the use of our ATM equity offering program and our strategic partnerships. In July 2018 we established an ATM, or the 2018 ATM, pursuant to which we were able to offer and sell up to $75.0 million of our common stock from time to time at prevailing market prices. During the year ended December 31, 2020, we sold approximately 10.9 million shares of common stock and received net proceeds of $63.0 million under our 2018 ATM. In addition, in June 2020, we sold 9.2 million shares of common stock in a follow-on public offering and received net proceeds of approximately $164.0 million.
In May 2020, we terminated the 2018 ATM and established a new ATM, or the 2020 ATM, pursuant to which we are able to sell up to $100.0 million of our common stock from time to time at prevailing market prices. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold approximately 4.0 million shares of common stock under the 2020 ATM for net proceeds of $43.1 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had $55.9 million of availability under the 2020 ATM. Subsequent to December 31, 2021 and through February 25, 2022, we sold 9.5 million shares of common stock resulting in net proceeds of $45.6 million under the 2020 ATM offerings. Approximately $9.4 million remains unsold and available for sale under the 2020 ATM.
On May 8, 2019, we entered into a term loan agreement with Silicon Valley Bank, or SVB, which was subsequently amended on June 29, 2019, August 28, 2020, and August 27, 2021, as amended, the Prior Credit Facility. Pursuant to the Prior Credit Facility we were permitted, subject to certain conditions, to borrow term loans in an aggregate amount of up to $30.0 million, of which $5.2 million were funded upon execution of the 2020 amendment to the Prior Credit Facility.
On October 29, 2021, we entered into a Loan and Security Agreement, or the New Credit Facility, with Oxford Finance LLC as the collateral agent and a lender, and SVB as a lender, together the Lenders, which was further amended on February 17, 2022. The New Credit Facility provides in aggregate up to $100 million, which includes $60 million available immediately, $20 million in one tranche that is subject to meeting certain development milestones, and an additional tranche of $20 million, which is subject to conditional approval from the Lenders. Upon the closing date, we drew $25 million, of which $5.5 million was used to repay in full the existing balance and satisfy our existing obligations to SVB under the Prior Credit Facility. The New Credit Facility is secured by substantially all of our personal property owned or later acquired, excluding intellectual property (but including the right to payments and proceeds from intellectual property), and a negative pledge on intellectual property, which ensures that the Lender’s rights to repayment would be senior to the rights of the holders of our common stock in the event of liquidation. Upon entering into the New Credit Facility, we terminated all commitments by SVB to extend further credit under the Prior Credit Facility and all guarantees and security interests granted by us to SVB under the Prior Credit Facility.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $177.9 million. In addition to our existing cash and cash equivalents, we are eligible to earn milestone and other payments under our collaboration agreements with Janssen, Merck KGaA and Asana. Our ability to earn the milestone payments and the timing of earning these amounts are dependent upon the timing and outcome of our development, regulatory and commercial activities and, as such, are uncertain at this time.
Cash Flows
The following table provides information regarding our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019:
Net Cash Used in Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $140.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 and primarily consisted of a net loss of $170.1 million adjusted for changes in our net working capital and other non-cash items including stock-based compensation of $18.4 million and depreciation of $0.9 million. Net cash used in operating activities was $74.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 and primarily consisted of a net loss of $88.0 million adjusted for non-cash items including stock-based compensation of $7.2 million and depreciation of $1.0 million.
Net Cash Provided by (Used in) Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by investing activities of $37.0 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. Net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 consisted primarily of the purchase of property and equipment. Net cash provided by investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted primarily of maturities of marketable securities.
Net Cash Provided by Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $63.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to net cash provided by financing activities of $230.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. During the year ended December 31, 2021 cash provided by financing activities consisted primarily of the proceeds from the use of the 2020 ATM of $43.1 million and issuance of debt, net of issuance costs, of $24.0 million under the New Credit Facility, as well as proceeds from exercise of stock options of $1.8 million, partially offset by repayment of debt of $5.5 million to repay the Prior Credit Facility. During the year ended December 31, 2020, cash provided by financing activities consisted primarily of $164.0 million related to the follow-on public offering and the proceeds from the use of the 2018 ATM of $63.0 million, as well as proceeds from exercise of stock options of $3.1 million.
Funding Requirements
We expect our cash expenditures to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development of, initiate clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for our product candidates. In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to drug sales, marketing, manufacturing and distribution to the extent that such sales, marketing and distribution are not the responsibility of potential collaborators.
As of December 31, 2021 we had cash and cash equivalents of $177.9 million and, subsequently, we received a $40 million upfront payment under the Janssen Collaboration and $45.6 million of net proceeds received from sales of our common stock under our 2020 ATM. In addition, we currently have the option to borrow $35 million under the New Credit Facility. Taken together, we believe that our current cash and cash equivalents plus the available borrowings under the New Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan commitments into the second half of 2023. Our forecast of the period of time through which our financial resources will be adequate to support our operations is a forward-looking statement and involves risks and uncertainties, and actual results could vary as a result of a number of factors. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we could utilize our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. Our future capital requirements will depend on many factors, including:
•the scope, progress, results and costs of drug discovery, preclinical development, laboratory testing and clinical trials for our product candidates;
•the scope, prioritization and number of our research and development programs;
•the costs, timing and outcome of regulatory review of our product candidates;
•our ability to establish and maintain collaborations on favorable terms, if at all;
•the achievement of milestones or occurrence of other developments that trigger payments under any collaboration agreements we obtain;
•the extent to which we are obligated to reimburse, or entitled to reimbursement of, clinical trial costs under future collaboration agreements, if any;
•the costs of preparing, filing and prosecuting patent applications, maintaining and enforcing our intellectual property rights and defending intellectual property-related claims;
•the extent to which we acquire or in-license other product candidates and technologies;
•the costs of securing manufacturing arrangements for clinical and commercial production; and
•the costs of establishing or contracting for sales and marketing capabilities if we obtain regulatory approvals to market our product candidates.
Identifying potential product candidates and conducting preclinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes many years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve drug sales. In addition, our product candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of drugs that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if at all. Accordingly, we will need to continue to rely on additional financing to achieve our business objectives. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues, we expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of equity offerings, debt financings, strategic partnerships and licensing arrangements. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, the ownership interests of our common stockholders will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect the rights of our common stockholders. We currently have access to the New Credit Facility, as described above, along with funds to potentially be earned in connection with our agreements with Janssen, Merck KGaA and Asana BioSciences, if research and development activities are successful under those agreements. Future additional debt financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends.
If we raise funds through additional strategic partnerships or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or to grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our drug development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of payment due date by period at December 31, 2021:
__________________________________
(1)Represents future minimum lease payments under our non-cancelable operating and finance leases, which expire through February 2024. The minimum lease payments above do not include any related common area maintenance charges or real estate taxes.
(2)Represents future debt principal plus interest and final payments under the term loan under the New Credit Facility, which is payable in full on October 1, 2026. Refer to Note 7, Debt, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We enter into agreements in the normal course of business with third parties to assist us with preclinical, clinical, manufacturing, and other products and services for operating purpose. Certain of these agreements include termination rights subject to termination fees or wind down costs. Under such agreements, we are contractually obligated to make certain payments to the parties with whom we contract upon termination, primarily to reimburse them for their unrecoverable outlays incurred prior to cancellation and for wind-down activities. The exact amounts of such obligations are dependent on the timing of termination and the exact terms of the relevant agreement and cannot be reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2021, we had cancellable open purchase orders of $138.7 million in total under agreements for preclinical, clinical, manufacturing, and other products and services for operating purposes. These amounts represent only our estimate of those items for which we had a contractual commitment to pay at December 31, 2021, assuming we would not cancel these agreements. The actual amounts we expect to pay in the future to the third parties under such agreements may differ from the cancellable open purchase order amounts.
In July 2015, we entered into a license agreement with Recepta Biopharma S.A., or Recepta, as amended, for the NaPi2b antibody. We refer to this as the Recepta License. Under the Recepta License, we paid Recepta an upfront payment of $1.0 million and are obligated to pay Recepta up to $65.5 million in development, regulatory and commercial milestones and tiered royalties in the low-single digit percentages on net sales of products outside of Brazil until the expiration of the royalty term. Upon the expiration of each royalty term in each country for each applicable product, the exclusive licenses granted to each party under the Recepta License will become fully-paid up and royalty-free. We have incurred $4.0 million and paid $2.8 million in development milestone payments to date under the Recepta License.
In January 2019, we entered into a commercial license agreement with Synaffix B.V., or Synaffix, which we amended and restated in November 2021 to expand our relationship with Synaffix. We refer to the amended and restated agreement as the Synaffix License. Under the Synaffix License, we have the right to develop, manufacture and commercialize ADCs directed to targets using Synaffix’s proprietary site-specific conjugation technology for up to twelve targets. Through December 31, 2021, we have licensed two targets from Synaffix in connection with our development of XMT-1592 and XMT-1660, for which we have paid $1.5 million in license fees, and $0.8 million in milestone payments. We are required to make milestone payments to Synaffix of up to an aggregate of $28.0 million in development and regulatory milestones and up to $20.0 million in one-time sales milestones based on the achievement of annual sales objectives for each of these two targets. Additionally, we paid upfront fees of $2.5 million at the time of amending and restating the Synaffix License in November 2021, which may be applied to reservation and license fees associated with our selection of the next three targets. Upon licensing any future targets, we will be obligated to pay in the range of $48.0 million to $117.0 million for issuance, development, regulatory and one-time sales milestones. We further amended the Synaffix License in February 2022 in connection with the Janssen Collaboration and agreed to pay Synaffix an additional fee of $1.5 million which may be applied to future reservation and license fees, as well as certain portions of potential future development milestones.
Upon commencement of commercial sales of any ADC product directed to a licensed target, if any, we are required to pay to Synaffix tiered royalties in the low-single digit percentages on net sales of the respective products. The Synaffix License remains in effect on a country-by-country and licensed product-by-licensed product basis until the expiration of the last-to-expire valid claim in a patent licensed under the Synaffix License covering such product in such country. Upon the expiration of the Synaffix License for each licensed product in each country, the licenses granted to us for such product in such country will become fully paid-up and perpetual. We may terminate the Synaffix License in its entirety or on a licensed product-by-licensed product basis at any time. Either party may terminate the Synaffix License, subject to a specified notice and cure period, for a breach by the other party of a material provision of the agreement or upon an insolvency-related event experienced by the other party.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgements and Estimates
Our management's discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make judgments and estimates that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements. We base our estimates on historical experience, known trends and events, and various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our judgments and estimates in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience. The effects of material revisions in estimates, if any, will be reflected in the financial statements prospectively from the date of change in estimates.
We believe that our most critical accounting policies are those relating to revenue recognition and accrued research and development expenses as discussed in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Revenue Recognition
We enter into collaboration agreements which are within the scope of Accounting Standards Update 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, or Topic 606, under which we license rights to our technology and certain of our product candidates and perform research and development services for third parties. The terms of these arrangements typically include payment of one or more of the following: non-refundable, up-front fees; reimbursement of research and development costs; development, regulatory and commercial milestone payments; and royalties on net sales of licensed products.
Under Topic 606, an entity recognizes revenue when its customer obtains control of promised goods or services, in an amount that reflects the consideration which the entity expects to receive in exchange for those goods or services. To determine the appropriate amount of revenue to be recognized for arrangements determined to be within the scope of Topic 606, we perform the following five steps: (i) identification of contract(s) with a customer; (ii) determination of whether the promised goods or services are performance obligations; (iii) measurement of the transaction price, including the constraint on variable consideration; (iv) allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations; and (v) recognition of revenue when (or as) we satisfy each performance obligation. We only apply the five-step model to contracts when it is probable that the entity will collect consideration it is entitled to in exchange for the goods or services it transfers to the customer.
The promised good or services in our arrangements typically consist of license rights to our intellectual property and research and development services. We also have optional additional items in contracts, which are considered marketing offers and are accounted for as separate contracts with the customer if such option is elected by the customer, unless the option provides a material right which would not be provided without entering into the contract. Performance obligations are promised goods or services in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer. Promised goods or services are considered distinct when (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service on its own or together with other readily available resources or (ii) the promised good or service is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. In assessing whether promised goods or services are distinct, we consider factors such as the stage of development of the underlying intellectual property, the capabilities of the customer to develop the intellectual property on their own or whether the required expertise is readily available.
We estimate the transaction price based on the amount expected to be received for transferring the promised goods or services in the contract. The consideration may include both fixed consideration and variable consideration. At the inception of each arrangement that includes variable consideration and at each reporting period, we evaluate the amount of potential payment and the likelihood that the payments will be received. We utilize either the most likely amount method or expected amount method to estimate the amount expected to be received based on which method better predicts the amount expected to be received. If it is probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the variable consideration is included in the transaction price.
Our contracts often include development and regulatory milestone payments. At contract inception and at each reporting period, we evaluate whether the milestones are considered probable of being reached and estimate the amount to be included in the transaction price using the most likely amount method. If it is not probable that a significant revenue reversal would not occur, the associated milestone value is included in the transaction price. Milestone payments that are not within our control or the licensee’s control, such as regulatory approvals, are not included in the transaction price. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the probability of achievement of such development milestones and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price.
For arrangements that include sales-based royalties, including milestone payments based on the level of sales, and the license is deemed to be the predominant item to which the royalties relate, we recognize revenue at the later of (i) when the related sales occur, or (ii) when the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied).
We allocate the transaction price based on the estimated standalone selling price of the underlying performance obligations or in the case of certain variable consideration to one or more performance obligations. We must develop assumptions that require judgment to determine the standalone selling price for each performance obligation identified in the contract. We utilize key assumptions to determine the standalone selling price, which may include other comparable transactions, pricing considered in negotiating the transaction and the estimated costs to complete the respective performance obligation. Certain variable consideration is allocated specifically to one or more performance obligations in a contract when the terms of the variable
consideration relate to the satisfaction of the performance obligation and the resulting amounts allocated to each performance obligation are consistent with the amounts we would expect to receive for each performance obligation.
For performance obligations consisting of licenses and other promises, we utilize judgment to assess the nature of the combined performance obligation to determine whether the combined performance obligation is satisfied over time or at a point in time and, if over time, the appropriate method of measuring progress for purposes of recognizing revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees. We evaluate the measure of progress each reporting period and, if necessary, adjust the measure of performance and related revenue recognition. If the license to our intellectual property is determined to be distinct from the other performance obligations identified in the arrangement, we will recognize revenue from non-refundable, up-front fees allocated to the license when the license is transferred to the customer and the customer is able to use and benefit from the license.
Collaborative Arrangements
We record the elements of our collaboration agreements that represent joint operating activities in accordance with ASC Topic 808, Collaborative Arrangements. Accordingly, the elements of the collaboration agreements that represent activities in which both parties are active participants and to which both parties are exposed to the significant risks and rewards that are dependent on the commercial success of the activities, are recorded as collaborative arrangements. We consider the guidance in Topic 606 in determining the appropriate treatment for the transactions between us and our collaborative partners and the transactions between us and third parties. Generally, the classification of transactions under the collaborative arrangements is determined based on the nature and contractual terms of the arrangement along with the nature of the operations of the participants. To the extent revenue is generated from a collaboration, we will recognize our share of the net sales on a gross basis if we are deemed to be the principal in the transactions with customers, or on a net basis if we are instead deemed to be the agent in the transactions with customers, consistent with the guidance in Topic 606.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We record our expenses related to research and development activities based upon our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed, enrollment of subjects, number of sites activated and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrued or prepaid expense balance accordingly. Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, we may report amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences from our estimates to the amounts actually incurred. Significant judgement is involved in making the above estimates.
Recent accounting pronouncements
See Note 2, Recently Adopted Accounting Pronouncements, in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our business.