Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and related notes included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those discussed under Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors.” These risks and uncertainties may cause actual results to differ materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a leading supplier of infrastructure semiconductor solutions, spanning the data center core to network edge. We are a fabless semiconductor supplier of high-performance standard and semi-custom products with core strengths in developing and scaling complex System-on-a-Chip architectures, integrating analog, mixed-signal and digital signal processing functionality. Leveraging leading intellectual property and deep system-level expertise, as well as highly innovative security firmware, our solutions are empowering the data economy and enabling the data center, carrier infrastructure, enterprise
networking, consumer, and automotive/industrial end markets.
Net revenue in fiscal 2022 was $4.5 billion and was 50% higher than net revenue of $3.0 billion in fiscal 2021. This was due to an increase in sales from all our end markets. Revenue increased from the data center end market by 71%, from the carrier infrastructure end market by 37%, from the enterprise networking end market by 43%, from the consumer end market by 22%, and from the automotive/industrial end market by 112% compared to fiscal 2021.
On April 20, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Inphi in a cash and stock transaction. Inphi is a global leader in high-speed data movement enabled by optical interconnects. The consolidated financial statements include the operating results of Inphi for the period from the date of acquisition through our year ended January 29, 2022. In conjunction with the acquisition, Marvell Technology Group Ltd. and Inphi became wholly owned subsidiaries of the new parent company, Marvell Technology, Inc. on April 20, 2021. The parent company is domiciled in and subject to taxation in the United States.
On October 5, 2021, we completed our acquisition of Innovium, a leading provider of networking solutions for cloud and edge data centers, in an all-stock transaction. The consolidated financial statements include the operating results of Innovium for the period from the date of acquisition through our year ended January 29, 2022. See “Note 4 - Business Combinations” and “Note 5 - Goodwill and Acquired Intangible Assets, Net” for more information.
In response to increased demand from customers for our products, our operations team is continuing to ramp production with our global supply chain partners. However, we are experiencing a number of industry-wide supply constraints affecting the type of high complexity products we provide for data infrastructure. These supply challenges are currently limiting our ability to fully satisfy the increase in demand for some of our products. To secure additional capacity, we entered into capacity reservation arrangements with certain foundries and test & assembly partners. See “Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Securing capacity for growth remains a high priority for our operations team, even as this supply expansion comes with an increase in input costs. As we have done throughout the supply constraints, we are working with our customers to adjust prices to offset the impact of these cost increases, which lets us jointly benefit from sustained growth.
We continue to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our business. While many of our offices around the world remain open to enable critical on-site business functions in accordance with local government guidelines, the majority of our employees continue to work from home. We expect COVID-19 to continue to impact our business and for a further discussion of the uncertainties and business risks associated with the COVID-19 pandemic, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” including but not limited to the risk detailed under the caption “We face risks related to the COVID-19 pandemic which currently has, and may continue in the future to, significantly disrupt and adversely impact our manufacturing, research and development, operations, sales and financial results.”
We expect that the U.S. government's export restrictions on certain Chinese customers will continue to impact our revenue in fiscal year 2023. Moreover, concerns that U.S. companies may not be reliable suppliers as a result of these and other actions has caused, and may in the future cause, some of our customers in China to amass large inventories of our products well in advance of need or cause some of our customers to replace our products in favor of products from other suppliers. Customers in China may also choose to develop indigenous solutions, as replacements for products that are subject to U.S. export controls. In addition, there may be indirect impacts to our business that we can not easily quantify such as the fact that some of our other customers' products which use our solutions may also be impacted by export restrictions.
Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period ending on the Saturday closest to January 31. Accordingly, every fifth or sixth fiscal year will have a 53-week period. The additional week in a 53-week year is added to the fourth quarter, making such quarter consist of 14 weeks. Fiscal 2022, fiscal 2021 and fiscal 2020 each had a 52-week period.
Restructuring. We continuously evaluate our existing operations to increase operational efficiency, decrease costs and increase profitability.
In the first quarter of fiscal 2022, a restructuring plan was initiated in order to realign the organization and enable further investment in key priority areas as part of our integration of the acquisitions as described in “Note 4 - Business Combinations.”
During fiscal 2022, we recorded restructuring and other related charges of $31.6 million. See “Note 10 - Restructuring” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Capital Return Program. We remain committed to delivering stockholder value through our stock repurchase and dividend programs. On October 16, 2018, we announced that our Board of Directors authorized a $700 million addition to the balance of our existing stock repurchase program. Under the program authorized by our Board of Directors, we may repurchase shares of stock in the open-market or through privately negotiated transactions. The extent to which we repurchase our stock and the timing of such repurchases will depend upon market conditions, legal rules and regulations, and other corporate considerations, as determined by our management team. The stock repurchase program was temporarily suspended in late March 2020 to preserve cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. We are focusing on reducing our debt and de-levering our balance sheet. As a result, we did not repurchase any stock during fiscal 2022. We will continue to evaluate business conditions to decide when to restart the stock repurchase program. As of January 29, 2022, there was $564.5 million remaining available for future stock repurchases. See “Note 12 - Stockholders’ Equity” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
We returned $191.0 million to stockholders in fiscal 2022 in cash dividends.
Cash and Short-Term Investments. Our cash and cash equivalents were $613.5 million at January 29, 2022, which were $135.0 million lower than our balance at our fiscal year ended January 30, 2021 of $748.5 million. We had cash flow provided by operations of $819.4 million during fiscal 2022.
Sales and Customer Composition.
We continuously monitor the creditworthiness of our customers and distributors and believe these distributors’ sales to diverse end customers and geographies further serve to mitigate our exposure to credit risk.
Most of our sales are made to customers located outside of the United States, primarily in Asia, and majority of our products are manufactured outside the United States. Sales shipped to customers with operations in Asia represented approximately 78% of our net revenues in fiscal 2022, 80% of our net revenue in fiscal 2021 and 82% of our net revenue in fiscal 2020. Because many manufacturers and manufacturing subcontractors of our customers are located in Asia, we expect that most of our net revenue will continue to be represented by sales to our customers in that region. For risks related to our global operations, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” including but not limited to the risk detailed under the caption “We face additional risks due to the extent of our global operations since a majority of our products, and those of our customers, are manufactured and sold outside of the United States. The occurrence of any or a combination of the additional risks described below would significantly and negatively impact our business and results of operations.”
The development process for our products is long, which may cause us to experience a delay between the time we incur expenses and the time revenue is generated from these expenditures. We anticipate that the rate of new orders may vary significantly from quarter to quarter. For risks related to our sales cycle, see Part I, Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” including but not limited to the risk detailed under the caption, “We are subject to order and shipment uncertainties. If we are unable to accurately predict customer demand, we may hold excess or obsolete inventory, which would reduce our gross margin. Conversely, we may have insufficient inventory, which would result in lost revenue opportunities and potential loss of market share as well as damaged customer relationships.”
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of consolidated financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates, judgments and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to revenue recognition, income taxes, goodwill and other intangible assets, and business combinations. We base our estimates of the carrying value of certain assets and liabilities on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances when these carrying values are not readily available from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates, and such differences could affect the results of operations reported in future periods. In the current macroeconomic environment affected by COVID-19, our estimates could require increased judgment and carry a higher degree of variability and volatility. We continue to monitor and assess our estimates in light of developments, and as events continue to evolve and additional information becomes available, our estimates may change materially in future periods. We believe the following critical accounting policies affect our more significant judgments and estimates used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. For further information on our significant accounting policies, see “Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Revenue Recognition. We recognize revenue upon transfer of control of promised products or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to receive in exchange for those products or services. Under the revenue recognition standard, we apply the following five step approach: (1) identify the contract with a customer, (2) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (3) determine the transaction price, (4) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (5) recognize revenue when a performance obligation is satisfied.
We enter into contracts that may include various combinations of products and services that are capable of being distinct and accounted for as separate performance obligations. To date, the majority of the revenue has been generated by sales of products as revenue from services has been insignificant. Performance obligations associated with product sales transactions are generally satisfied when control passes to customers upon shipment. Accordingly, product revenue is recognized at a point in time when control of the asset is transferred to the customer. We recognize revenue when we satisfy a performance obligation by transferring control of a product to a customer in an amount that reflects the consideration to which we expect to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. For product revenue, the performance obligation is deemed to be the delivery of the product and therefore, the revenue is generally recognized upon shipment to customers, net of accruals for estimated sales returns and rebates. These estimates are based on historical returns, analysis of credit memo data and other known factors. Actual returns could differ from these estimates. We account for rebates by recording reductions to revenue for rebates in the same period that the related revenue is recorded. The amount of these reductions is based upon the terms agreed to with the customer. Some of our sales are made to distributors under agreements allowing for price protection, price discounts and limited rights of stock rotation on products unsold by the distributors. Control passes to the distributor upon shipment, and terms and payment by our distributors is not contingent on resale of the product. Product revenue on sales made to distributors is recognized upon shipment, net of estimated variable consideration. Variable consideration primarily consists of price discounts, price protection, rebates, and stock rotation programs and is estimated based on a portfolio approach using the expected value method derived from historical data, current economic conditions, and contractual terms. Actual variable consideration could differ from these estimates.
A portion of our net revenue is derived from sales through third-party logistics providers who maintain warehouses in close proximity to our customer’s facilities. Revenue from sales through these third-party logistics providers is not recognized until the product is pulled from stock by the customer.
Our products are generally subject to warranty, which provides for the estimated future costs of replacement upon shipment of the product. Our products carry a standard one-year warranty, with certain exceptions in which the warranty period can extend to more than one year based on contractual agreements. The warranty accrual is estimated primarily based on historical claims compared to historical revenues and assumes that we will have to replace products subject to a claim. From time to time, we become aware of specific warranty situations, and we record specific accruals to cover these exposures. Warranty expenses were not material for the periods presented.
Inventories. We value our inventory at the lower of cost or net realizable value, cost being determined under the first-in, first-out method. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record a reduction to the total carrying value of our inventory for any difference between cost and estimated net realizable value of inventory that is determined to be excess, obsolete or unsellable inventory based primarily on our estimated forecast of product demand and production requirements. The estimate of future demand is compared to our inventory levels, including open purchase commitments, to determine the amount, if any, of obsolete or excess inventory. Demand for our products can fluctuate significantly from period to period. A significant decrease in demand could result in an increase in the amount of excess inventory on hand. In addition, our industry is characterized by rapid technological change, frequent new product development and rapid product obsolescence that could result in an increase in the amount of obsolete inventory quantities on hand. Additionally, our estimates of future product demand and judgement to determine excess inventory may prove to be inaccurate, in which case we may have understated or overstated the reduction to the total carrying value of our inventory for excess and obsolete inventory. In the future, if our inventory is determined to be overvalued, we would be required to recognize such costs in our cost of goods sold at the time of such determination. Likewise, if our inventory is determined to be undervalued, we may have over-reported our cost of goods sold in previous periods and would be required to recognize additional gross margin at the time the related inventory is sold. Therefore, although we make every effort to ensure the accuracy of our forecasts of future product demand, any significant unanticipated changes in demand or technological developments could have a significant impact on the value of our inventory and our results of operations.
Accounting for Income Taxes. We estimate our income taxes in each of the jurisdictions in which we operate. This process involves estimating our actual tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from the differing treatment of certain items for tax return and financial statement purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance sheets.
We recognize income taxes using an asset and liability approach. This approach requires the recognition of taxes payable or refundable for the current year, and deferred tax liabilities and assets for the future tax consequences of events that have been recognized in our consolidated financial statements or tax returns. The measurement of current and deferred taxes is based on provisions of the enacted tax law and the effects of future changes in tax laws or rates are not anticipated.
Evaluating the need for a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets requires judgment and analysis of all the positive and negative evidence available, including recent earnings history and cumulative losses in recent years, reversals of deferred tax liabilities, projected future taxable income, and tax planning strategies to determine whether all or some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. Forming a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed is difficult when there is negative evidence such as cumulative losses in recent years, and as a result, in jurisdictions with cumulative losses, we have provided for a full valuation allowance on deferred tax assets. Using available evidence and judgment, we establish a valuation allowance for deferred tax assets, when it is determined that it is more likely than not that they will not be realized. Valuation allowances have been provided primarily against the U.S. and state research and development credits and certain acquired net operating losses and deferred tax assets of foreign subsidiaries. A change in the assessment of the realizability of deferred tax assets may materially impact our tax provision in the period in which a change of assessment occurs. Taxes due on Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) exclusions in U.S. are recognized as a current period expense when incurred.
As a multinational corporation, we conduct our business in many countries and are subject to taxation in many jurisdictions. The taxation of our business is subject to the application of various and sometimes conflicting tax laws and regulations as well as multinational tax conventions. Our effective tax rate is highly dependent upon the geographic distribution of our worldwide earnings or losses, tax laws and regulations in various jurisdictions, tax incentives, the availability of tax credits and loss carryforwards, and the effectiveness of our tax planning strategies, which includes our estimates of the fair value of our intellectual property. The application of tax laws and regulations is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment and uncertainty. Tax laws themselves are subject to change as a result of changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, and the evolution of regulations and court rulings and tax audits. There can be no assurance that we will accurately predict the outcome of audits, and the amounts ultimately paid on resolution of audits could be materially different than the amounts previously included in our income tax expense and therefore, could have a material impact on our tax provision, results of operations, and cash flows. Consequently, taxing authorities may impose tax assessments or judgments against us that could materially impact our tax liability and/or our effective income tax rate.
We are subject to income tax audits by the respective tax authorities in the jurisdictions in which we operate. We recognize the effect of income tax positions only if these positions are more likely than not to be sustained. Recognized income tax positions are measured at the largest amount that is more than 50% likely to be realized. Changes in recognition or measurement with respect to our uncertain tax positions are reflected in the period in which a change in judgment occurs. We record interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits in income tax expense. The calculation of our tax liabilities involves the inherent uncertainty associated with complex tax laws. We believe we have adequately provided for in our financial statements additional taxes that we estimate to be required as a result of such examinations. While we believe that we have adequately provided for all tax positions, amounts asserted by tax authorities could be greater or less than our accrued position. Any unpaid tax liabilities, including the interest and penalties, are released pursuant to a final settlement with tax authorities, completion of audit or expiration of various statutes of limitation. The material jurisdictions in which we are subject to potential examination by tax authorities throughout the world include China, India, Israel, Singapore, Germany, and the United States.
The recognition and measurement of current taxes payable or refundable, and deferred tax assets and liabilities require that we make certain estimates and judgments. Changes to these estimates or judgments may have a material effect on our income tax provision in a future period.
Long-lived Assets and Intangible Assets. We assess the impairment of long-lived assets and intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying value of such assets may not be recoverable. Circumstances which could trigger a review include, but are not limited to the following:
•significant decreases in the market price of the asset;
•significant adverse changes in the business climate or legal factors;
•accumulation of costs significantly in excess of the amount originally expected for the acquisition or construction of the asset;
•current period cash flow or operating losses combined with a history of losses or a forecast of continuing losses associated with the use of the asset; and
•current expectation that the asset will more likely than not be sold or disposed of significantly before the end of its estimated useful life.
Whenever events or changes in circumstances suggest that the carrying amount of long-lived assets and intangible assets may not be recoverable, we estimate the future cash flows expected to be generated by the asset from its use or eventual disposition. If the sum of the expected future cash flows is less than the carrying amount of those assets, we recognize an impairment loss based on the excess of the carrying amount over the fair value of the assets. Significant management judgment is required in the forecasts of future operating results that are used in the discounted cash flow method of valuation. These significant judgments may include future expected revenue, expenses, capital expenditures and other costs, discount rates and whether or not alternative uses are available for impacted long-lived assets.
Goodwill. We record goodwill when the consideration paid for a business acquisition exceeds the fair value of net tangible and intangible assets acquired. We review goodwill for impairment annually on the last business day of our fiscal fourth quarter, and more frequently, if an event occurs or circumstances change that indicate the fair value of the reporting unit may be below its carrying amount. We have identified that our business operates as a single operating segment and as a single reporting unit for the purpose of goodwill impairment testing.
When testing goodwill for impairment, we first assess qualitative factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying value or we may determine to proceed directly to the quantitative impairment test.
Factors we consider important in the qualitative assessment which could trigger a goodwill impairment review include;
•significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future operating results;
•significant changes in the manner of our use of the acquired assets or the strategy for our overall business;
•significant negative industry or economic trends;
•a significant decline in our stock price for a sustained period; and
•a significant change in our market capitalization relative to our net book value.
If we assess qualitative factors and conclude that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount, or if we determine not to use qualitative assessment, then a quantitative impairment test is performed. The quantitative impairment test requires comparing the fair value of the reporting unit to its carrying value, including goodwill. An impairment exists if the fair value of the reporting unit is lower than its carrying value. We would record an impairment loss in the fiscal quarter in which an impairment determination is made. Determining the fair value of a reporting unit involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions.
As of the last day of the fourth quarter of fiscal 2022, we performed our annual impairment assessment for testing goodwill. A step one assessment was performed. Based on our assessment, we determined there was no goodwill impairment.
Business Combinations. We allocate the fair value of the purchase consideration of a business acquisition to the tangible assets, liabilities, and intangible assets acquired, including in-process research and development (“IPR&D”), based on their estimated fair values. The excess of the fair value of purchase consideration over the fair values of these identifiable assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. IPR&D is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. When an IPR&D project is completed, the IPR&D is reclassified as an amortizable purchased intangible asset and amortized over the asset’s estimated useful life. Our valuation of acquired assets and assumed liabilities requires significant estimates, especially with respect to intangible assets. The valuation of intangible assets, in particular, requires that we use valuation techniques such as the income approach. The income approach includes the use of a discounted cash flow model, which includes discounted cash flow scenarios and requires the following significant estimates: future expected revenue, expenses, capital expenditures and other costs, and discount rates. We estimate the fair value based upon assumptions we believe to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable and, as a result, actual results may differ from estimates. Estimates associated with the accounting for acquisitions may change as additional information becomes available regarding the assets acquired and liabilities assumed. Acquisition-related expenses and related restructuring costs are recognized separately from the business combination and are expensed as incurred.
Results of Operations
Years Ended January 29, 2022 and January 30, 2021
The following table sets forth information derived from our consolidated statements of operations expressed as a percentage of net revenue:
Net Revenue
Our net revenue for fiscal 2022 increased by $1.5 billion compared to net revenue for fiscal 2021. This was due to an increase in sales from all our end markets. Revenue increased from the data center end market by 71%, from the carrier infrastructure end market by 37%, from the enterprise networking end market by 43%, from the consumer end market by 22%, and from the automotive/industrial end market by 112% compared to fiscal 2021. Average selling prices increased 20% compared to fiscal 2021, and unit shipments were 30% higher compared to fiscal 2021, for an overall increase in net revenue of 50%. This was primarily driven by organic growth of our business and the acquisition of Inphi, which increased our unit shipments, and relatively higher sales of our products where we supply more content and features to our customers, which increased our average selling prices.
Cost of Goods Sold and Gross Profit
Cost of goods sold as a percentage of net revenue increased for fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to increased costs associated with the Inphi and Innovium acquisitions including amortization of inventory fair value adjustment and amortization of acquired intangible assets. As a result, gross margin for fiscal 2022 decreased 3.8 percentage points compared to fiscal 2021.
Research and Development
Research and development expense increased by $351.6 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to additional costs from our acquisition of Inphi and Innovium, including $268.0 million of higher personnel-related costs, $39.3 million of higher computer-aided design software related costs, $20.8 million of higher depreciation and amortization costs and $18.7 million of higher engineering design and supplies costs. The increase was partially offset by $55.6 million of higher non-recurring engineering credits recognized in the current period compared to fiscal 2021.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expense increased by $488.0 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was due primarily to additional costs from our acquisitions of Inphi and Innovium, including $264.5 million of higher amortization of acquired intangible assets, $140.2 million of higher employee personnel-related costs and $95.4 million higher merger and integration costs.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense increased by $236.0 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was mainly due to additional equity awards assumed upon the Inphi and Innovium acquisitions as described in “Note 4 - Business Combinations” and “Note 13 - Employee Benefit Plans” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Legal Settlement
*Not meaningful
In connection with a dispute, we recorded a charge of $36 million in fiscal year 2021. Refer to “Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of this settlement.
Restructuring Related Charges
We recorded total restructuring related charges of $32.3 million in fiscal 2022 as we integrated the acquired businesses and continued to evaluate our existing operations to increase operational efficiency, decrease costs and improve profitability. See “Note 10 - Restructuring” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Interest Income
Interest income decreased by $1.8 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021 primarily due to lower interest rates on our invested cash.
Interest Expense
Interest expense increased by $70.1 million in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021. The increase was primarily due to the interest expense on the 2020 Term Loans in addition to the new 2026, 2028, and 2031 Senior Notes issued in the first quarter of fiscal 2022, as well as the write-off of issuance costs related to the bridge loan when the loan was terminated in the first quarter of fiscal 2022. See “Note 8 - Debt” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Other Income, net
Other income, net was relatively flat in fiscal 2022 compared to fiscal 2021.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
The income tax benefit for fiscal 2022 differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to tax benefits of stock-based compensation, offset by foreign income inclusions in the U.S. and non-deductible compensation. The income tax benefit for fiscal 2021 differed from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21% primarily due to pretax losses of subsidiaries with income tax rates that differed from the U.S. statutory tax rate, combined with a net reduction of unrecognized tax benefits inclusive of interest and penalties, offset by tax expenses attributable to non-deductible compensation. We continue to evaluate potential changes to our legal entity structure in response to guidelines and requirements in various international tax jurisdictions where we conduct business, as well as changes to our business, and acquisitions and divestitures.
Our provision for incomes taxes may be affected by changes in the geographic mix of earnings with different applicable tax rates, acquisitions, changes in the realizability of deferred tax assets, accruals related to contingent tax liabilities and period-to-period changes in such accruals, the results of income tax audits, the expiration of statutes of limitations, the implementation of tax planning strategies, tax rulings, court decisions, settlements with tax authorities and changes in tax laws and regulations. It is also possible that significant negative evidence may become available that causes us to conclude that a valuation allowance is needed on certain of our deferred tax assets, which would adversely affect our income tax provision in the period of such change in judgment. Additionally, please see the information in “Item 1A: Risk Factors” under the caption “Changes in existing taxation benefits, rules or practices may adversely affect our financial results.”
Our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended January 30, 2021 includes a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended February 1, 2020 and year-to-year comparisons between the fiscal years ended January 30, 2021 and February 1, 2020 in Item 7 of Part II, “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.”
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our principal source of liquidity as of January 29, 2022 consisted of approximately $613.5 million of cash and cash equivalents, of which approximately $498.0 million was held by subsidiaries outside of the United States. We manage our worldwide cash requirements by, among other things, reviewing available funds held by our foreign subsidiaries and the cost effectiveness by which those funds can be accessed in the United States. See “Note 14 - Income Taxes” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
In April 2021, we assumed $15.7 million in principal of Inphi’s 0.75% convertible senior notes due 2021 and $506 million in principal of Inphi’s 0.75% convertible senior notes due 2025 from Inphi. We also acquired capped call assets in relation to the convertible debt. See “Note 8 - Debt” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. As of January 29, 2022, the Inphi convertible notes have been settled.
In December 2020, to fund the Inphi acquisition, we executed a debt agreement to obtain a $875 million 3-year term loan and a $875 million 5-year term loan. During the year ended January 29, 2022, the Company repaid $140 million and $21.9 million of the principal outstanding of the 3-year term loan and 5-year term loan, respectively. We also executed a debt agreement to obtain a $750 million revolving credit facility. In April 2021, we completed an offering and issued (i) $500 million of senior notes with a 5-year term due in 2026, (ii) $750 million of senior notes with a 7-year term due in 2028, and (iii) $750 million of senior notes with a 10-year term due in 2031 (collectively, the “Senior Notes”). On October 8, 2021, the Senior Notes were exchanged for new notes. The terms of the new notes issued in the exchange are substantially identical to the Senior Notes issued in April 2021, except that the new notes are registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and the transfer restrictions and registration rights applicable to the Senior Notes issued in April 2021 do not apply to the new notes. In addition, in May 2021, in conjunction with the U.S. domiciliation, we exchanged certain of our existing senior notes due in 2023 (“MTG 2023 Notes”) and 2028 (“MTG 2028 Notes”) (collectively, the “MTG Senior Notes”) that were previously issued by the former Bermuda-based parent with like notes that were issued by the new parent domiciled in Delaware (the “MTI Senior Notes”). On December 16, 2021, the MTI Senior Notes were exchanged for new notes. The terms of the new notes issued in the exchange are substantially identical to the MTI Senior Notes issued in May 2021, except that the new notes are registered under the Securities Act of 1933 and the transfer restrictions and registration rights applicable to the MTI Senior Notes issued in May 2021 do not apply to the new notes. See “Note 8 - Debt” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
For a description of our contractual obligations including debt, leases, and purchase commitments, see “Note 8 - Debt,” “Note 9 - Leases,” and “Note 11 - Commitments and Contingencies” in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. In addition, see “Note 14 - Income Taxes” regarding tax related contingencies and uncertain tax positions in the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. We generally expect to satisfy these commitments with cash on hand and cash provided by operating activities.
We believe that our existing cash, cash equivalents, together with cash generated from operations, and funds from our 2020 Revolving Credit Facility will be sufficient to cover our working capital needs, capital expenditures, investment requirements and any declared dividends, repurchase of our common stock and commitments for at least the next twelve months. Our capital requirements will depend on many factors, including our rate of sales growth, market acceptance of our products, costs of securing access to adequate manufacturing capacity, the timing and extent of research and development projects and increases in operating expenses, which are all subject to uncertainty.
To the extent that our existing cash and cash equivalents together with cash generated by operations, and funds available under our 2020 Revolving Credit Facility are insufficient to fund our future activities, we may need to raise additional funds through public or private debt or equity financing. We may also acquire additional businesses, purchase assets or enter into other strategic arrangements in the future, which could also require us to seek debt or equity financing. Additional equity financing or convertible debt financing may be dilutive to our current stockholders. If we elect to raise additional funds, we may not be able to obtain such funds on a timely basis or on acceptable terms, if at all. In addition, the equity or debt securities that we issue may have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock.
Future payment of a regular quarterly cash dividend on our common stock and our planned repurchases of common stock will be subject to, among other things, the best interests of the Company and our stockholders, our results of operations, cash balances and future cash requirements, financial condition, developments in ongoing litigation, statutory requirements under Delaware law, U.S. securities laws and regulations, market conditions and other factors that our Board of Directors may deem relevant. Our dividend payments and repurchases of common stock may change from time to time, and we cannot provide assurance that we will continue to declare dividends or repurchase stock at all or in any particular amounts. Our stock repurchase program was temporarily suspended in late March 2020 to preserve cash during the COVID-19 pandemic. We are focusing on reducing our debt and de-levering our balance sheet. We will continue to evaluate business conditions to decide when to restart the stock repurchase program.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $819.4 million for fiscal 2022 compared to net cash provided by operating activities of $817.3 million for fiscal 2021. The cash inflows from operations for fiscal 2022 were primarily due to $421.0 million of net loss adjusted for $1.9 billion of non-cash items and a net decrease from changes in working capital of $662.9 million. The cash outflow from working capital for fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by an increase in accounts receivable, an increase in inventories and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets. Such increases were partially offset by cash inflows due to an increase in accounts payable, an increase in accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities and an increase in accrued employee compensation. The increase in accounts receivable was driven primarily by the increase in revenue and stable collections. The increase in inventories is due to strong organic revenue growth and business acquisitions during the year as well as higher materials and manufacturing prices. The increase in prepaid expenses and other assets was due to payments for capacity reservation agreements and an increase in ship and debit reserve. The increase in accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities was mainly due to an increase in ship and debit claim reserve due to price increase and stock replenishment. The increase in accounts payable was mainly due to timing of payments. The increase in accrued employee compensation was due to the increase in our bonus accrual.
Net cash provided by operating activities was $817.3 million for fiscal 2021. The cash inflows from operations for fiscal 2021 were primarily due to $277.3 million of net loss adjusted for $1.0 billion of non-cash items and a net increase from changes in working capital of $67.9 million. The cash inflow from working capital for fiscal 2021 was primarily driven by an increase in accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities, an increase in accounts payable, and an increase in accrued employee compensation, as well as a decrease in inventories. Such increase was partially offset by cash outflows due to an increase in accounts receivable and an increase in prepaid expenses and other assets. The increase in accrued liabilities and other non-current liabilities was mainly due to an increase in legal reserves. The increase in accounts payable was mainly due to timing of payments. The increase in accrued employee compensation was due to the increase in our bonus accrual and increase in employee contributions to the employee stock purchase plan. The decrease in inventories was due to improved supply chain management. The increase in accounts receivable was driven primarily by the increase in revenue and stable collections. The increase in prepaid expenses and other assets was due to an increase in ship and debit reserve.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities of $3.7 billion in fiscal 2022 was primarily driven by the net cash consideration for business acquisitions of $3.6 billion, purchases of property and equipment of $169.3 million and purchases of technology licenses of $17.8 million.
Net cash used in investing activities of $119.6 million in fiscal year 2021 was primarily driven by purchases of property and equipment of $106.8 million, and purchases of technology licenses of $12.7 million.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities of $2.8 billion in fiscal 2022 was primarily attributable to proceeds from issuance of debt of $3.9 billion, $160.3 million proceeds from capped calls and $84.5 million proceeds from the issuance of our common stock under our equity inventive plans. The increases were partially offset by $526.9 million repayment of debt principal, $305.7 million for withholding tax paid on behalf of employees for net share settlement, $191.0 million payment for our quarterly dividends, $181.2 million payment for repurchases and settlement of convertible notes, $134.4 million payments for technology license obligations and $11.9 million payments for debt financing and equity issuance costs associated with the Inphi acquisition.
Net cash used in financing activities of $596.8 million in fiscal year 2021 was primarily attributable to $250.0 million repayment of debt principal, $160.6 million payment for our quarterly dividends, $100.0 million payment for technology license obligations and $38.0 million payments for debt financing and equity issuance costs associated with the Inphi acquisition.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Please see “Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies - Recent Accounting Pronouncements” in our Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements set forth in Part II, Item 8 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Related Party Transactions
None.