ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read together with our consolidated financial statements and related notes appearing elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Some of the information contained in this discussion and analysis or set forth elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K, including information with respect to our plans and strategy for our business and financing needs, includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties and should be read together with the “Risk Factors” section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for a discussion of important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from the results described in or implied by the forward-looking statements contained in the following discussion and analysis. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of various factors, including those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report and in other reports we file with the SEC, particularly those under “Risk Factors.” Dollars in tabular format are presented in thousands, except per share data, or otherwise indicated.
Overview
Marizyme is a multi-technology life science company dedicated to the acceleration, development and commercialization of medical technologies that promote patient health and present potential for rapid revenue growth.
Key elements of our strategy include:
● Advancing development of three medical technology platforms - DuraGraft, MATLOC and Krillase - each of which is clinically tested and backed by a portfolio of patented or patent-pending assets;
● Advancing DuraGraft - our endothelial damage inhibitor, or “EDI”, and MATLOC 1 - our “CKD” screening and diagnostic device, for the Food and Drug Administration De Novo classification process and 510(k) application, respectively. We filed a pre-submission letter for DuraGraft with the FDA in November 2021 and we expect to submit the DuraGraft De Novo request to the FDA in 2022;
● Progressing the development of Krillase through planning an animal clinical study which will be conducted in 2022 and we expect will facilitate our entry into the pet health market and generate revenue through the sale of Krillase-based canine dental hygiene products.
We have incurred losses for each period from inception. Our net loss was approximately $11.25 million and $5.85 million for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses over the next several years. Accordingly, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. We will seek to fund our operations through public or private equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third-party funding, collaborations and licensing arrangements. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our failure to raise capital as and when needed would impact our going concern and would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy and continue as a going concern. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
Our three primary products and medical devices, DuraGraft, MATLOC and Krillase, and other aspects of our business, are described in the section “Item 1 - Business” of this Annual Report.
Key Highlights of Fiscal Year 2021
Acquisition of My Health Logic
On November 1, 2021, Marizyme entered into a definitive arrangement agreement with Health Logic Interactive Inc. pursuant to which the Company will acquire all of the issued and outstanding common shares of My Health Logic Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of HLII, in exchange for common shares of Marizyme (the “Marizyme Shares”) in an arm’s length all-share transaction. My Health Logic is a company focused on developing an innovative point-of-care lab-on-chip digital diagnostic device technologies for chronic kidney disease.
On December 22, 2021, Marizyme received the necessary regulatory, court and stock exchange approval to complete the acquisition of MHL resulting in a total of 4,600,000 Marizyme Shares issued to HLII.
The acquisition provided Marizyme with access to consumer-focused handheld point-of-care diagnostic devices that connect to patients’ smartphones and digital continued care platforms, developed by MHL. My Health Logic Inc. plans to use its patent pending lab-on-chip technology to provide rapid results and facilitate the transfer of that data from the diagnostic device to the patient’s smartphone. MHL expects this data collection will allow it to better assess patient risk profiles and provide better patient outcomes. My Health Logic Inc.’s mission is to empower people with the ability to get early detection anytime, anywhere with actionable digital management for chronic kidney disease.
With the completion of the transaction, the Company acquired MHL’s digital diagnostic device MATLOC1. MATLOC 1 is the proprietary diagnostic platform technology in development for the testing of different biomarkers, with a current focus on the urine-based biomarkers albumin and creatinine for chronic kidney disease screening and eventual diagnosis. The Company anticipates MATLOC 1 device will be submitted for FDA approval in late 2022 and the management is optimistic that the approval will be received by mid-2023. Upon FDA approval, we will seek rapid revenue growth using multiple strategic partners and revenue channels.
Financing
In May 2021, the Company offered up to 4,000,000 units (the “Units Offering”), comprised of convertible notes and warrants, with the intent to raise up to $10,000,000 on a rolling basis. The certain terms and conditions of the Units Offering were amended during the year ended December 31, 2021. As a result, during the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued an aggregate of 4,260,594 units for net proceeds of $6,692,765. The proceeds from the Units Offering will be used to sustain the Company’s growth and meet its capital obligations.
In addition, the Company entered into an agreement with a new investor for an investment of $6,000,000. Pursuant to the agreement, the investor agreed to up to two additional closings in which it would invest (i) $2,000,000 upon the Company’s filing of a registration statement on Form S-1 with the SEC (filed on February 14, 2022), and (ii) an additional $2,000,000 upon the Company’s responding in a satisfactory manner to the first round of SEC comments relating to the filed Form S-1 (no comments were received from SEC on the filed S-1 form). As of date of this Annual Form one closing for $2,000,000 has been completed and the other closing is in process of completion.
Operational
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Marizyme has been undergoing a corporate restructuring, whereby the key officers, directors, and management team has changed in order to accelerate Company’s progress toward meeting its key objectives and deliver on its strategy.
Component of Results of Operations
Revenue
Revenue represents gross product sales less service fees and product returns. For our Distribution Partner channel, we recognize revenue for product sales at the time of delivery of the product to our Distribution Partner. As our products have an expiration date, if a product expires, we will replace the product at no charge. Currently, all of our revenue is generated from the sale of DuraGraft in European and Asian markets where the product has the required regulatory approvals.
Direct Costs of Revenue
Direct costs of revenue include primarily product costs, which include all costs directly related to the purchase of raw materials, charges from our contract manufacturing organizations, and manufacturing overhead costs, as well as shipping and distribution charges. Direct costs of revenue also include losses from excess, slow-moving or obsolete inventory and inventory purchase commitments, if any.
Research and Development
All research and development costs are expensed in the period incurred and consist primarily of salaries, payroll taxes, and employee benefits, those individuals involved in research and development efforts, external research and development costs incurred under agreements with contract research organizations and consultants to conduct and support the Company’s ongoing clinical trials of Duragraft, and costs related to manufacturing Duragraft for clinical trials. The Company has entered into various research and development contracts with various organizations and other companies.
Professional Fees
Professional fees include legal fees relating to intellectual property development, due diligence and corporate matters, and consulting fees for accounting, finance, and valuation services. We anticipate increased expenses related to audit, legal, regulatory, and tax-related services associated with maintaining compliance with exchange listing and SEC requirements.
Salaries and Stock-Based Compensation
Salaries consists of compensation and related personnel costs. Stock-based compensation represents the fair value of equity-settled share awards on stock options granted by the Company to its employees, officers, directors, and consultants. The fair value of awards is calculated using the Black-Scholes option pricing model, which considers the following factors: exercise price, current market price of the underlying shares, expected life, risk-free interest rate, expected volatility, dividend yield, and forfeiture rate.
Other General and Administrative Expenses
Other general and administrative expenses consist principally of marketing and selling expenses, facility costs, administrative and office expenses, director and officer insurance premiums, and investor relations costs associated with operating a public company.
Other Expenses
Other expenses consist of mark to market adjustments on contingent liabilities assumed on the acquisition of Somah and interest and accretion expenses related to our convertible notes issued pursuant to the Unit Purchase Agreement. Additionally, other expenses include loss on debt extinguishment as a result of the amendment of the Company’s Unit Purchase Agreements.
Results of Operations
Comparison of the Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The following table summarizes our results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Revenue
We recognized revenue of $0.21 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.20 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The revenue generated came from sales of the DuraGraft product, which was acquired as part of the Somah Transaction. No revenue growth can be attributed to the supply chain and manufacturing delays as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Direct Costs of Revenue
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we incurred $0.08 million in direct costs of revenue, representing increase of $0.02 million if compared to $0.06 million in the direct cost of revenue incurred during the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of sales grew at a higher rate if compared to the revenue growth, predominantly due to shortage of the raw materials as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic which directly impacted the costs of finding, securing, and acquiring alternative high-quality materials.
Professional Fees
Professional fees increased by $1.12 million or 97% to $2.27 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $1.15 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The Company has undergone a number of corporate transactions, including acquisition of the Somah entities and My Health Logic entity and a corporate restructuring, which resulted in legal fees significantly increasing year over year. The increase in professional fees was also a result of the Company’s preparations for the FDA approval and other advancement and development of intellectual property. Additionally, Marizyme relied on number of external consulting firms to oversee multiple facets of the business, including finance and accounting functions of the Company. During the year ended December 31, 2021, Marizyme also initiated the Units Offering transaction, which further contributed to the professional fees increase during the year.
Salary Expenses
Salary expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $2.89 million, a $1.97 million or 215% increase from the comparative year. The increase in salary cost is attributable to the restructuring and growth of the organization as the Company continues to expand into new markets and work towards commercialization of DuraGraft in the United States. As the result of the corporate restructuring, in November 2021 Marizyme appointed a new Chief Executive Officer which further contributed to the salary increases.
Research and Development Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, Marizyme incurred $1.68 million in research and development expenses compared to $0.69 million in the previous year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in the research and development expenses can be attributed to the Company’s focus on development and advancement of our products - DuraGraft and Krillase including several clinical trials, and related research and analysis to advance our technologies during the year.
Other General and Administrative Expenses
Other general and administrative expenses increased $0.41 million or 55% to $1.17 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. The increase was due to the Company’s restructuring, growth, and increased marketing and public relations expenses associated with product branding and costs attributed to running a public company. Due to the planned continued buildout of administrative and commercial functions we expect general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods.
Other Expenses
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company initiated the Units Offering transaction, which was completed in tranches on a rolling basis. Due to the substantial modification of the Units Offering agreements in December 2021, the Company recorded a loss of $0.66 million on the extinguishment of the convertible notes issued as part of the Units Offering. Other expenses also include $0.13 million of interest and accretion costs associated with convertible notes issued at discount as part of the Units Offering agreements.
Additionally, the company recognized $1.39 million of fair value loss from mark to market adjustments on the contingent liabilities assumed on the acquisition of Somah.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
To date, we have incurred significant net losses and negative cash flows from operations. As of December 31, 2021, we had available cash of $4,072,339 and accumulated deficit of $47,823,563. We fund our operations through capital raises.
Private Placements
May 2021 Unit Purchase Agreement
On May 27, 2021, Marizyme entered into a Unit Purchase Agreement to sell up to 4,000,000 units (the ‘Units’) at a price per Unit of $2.50. Each Unit is comprised of (i) a convertible promissory note convertible into common stock of the Company, (ii) a warrant to purchase one share of common stock of the Company (the ‘Class A Warrant’); and (iii) a second warrant to purchase common stock of the Company (the “Class B Warrant”).
In May 2021, the Company issued and sold 29,978 Units at a price of $2.50 per Unit for gross proceeds of $74,945, consisting of Notes of $74,945, Class A Warrants for the purchase of 29,978 shares of common stock and Class B Warrants for the purchase of 29,978 shares of common stock. The Company incurred related issuance costs of $6,745 which will be amortized over the term of the Notes.
In July 2021, the Company issued and sold 440,000 Units under the Unit Purchase Program for gross proceeds of $1,100,000. The Units included Notes for $1,100,000, Class A Warrants for 440,000 shares of common stock and Class B Warrants for 440,000 shares of common stock.
September 2021 Amended Unit Purchase Agreement
On September 29, 2021, due to a lower common stock price, the Company, with the consent of all Unit holders, amended the May 2021 Unit Agreements. By rescinding their investment, the Unit holders agreed to amend the Unit Purchase Agreement resulted in the following significant changes to the offering:
(i) Decreased the offering price under the Unit Purchase Agreement from $2.50 per Unit to $2.25 per Unit for all future sales under the Unit Purchase Agreement. No proceeds from the initial investment were returned.
(ii) Decreased the conversion price from $2.50 per share to $2.25 per share for all current Unit holders and all future investors
(iii) Cancelled all Class A Warrants and Class B Warrants and replaced them with Class C Warrants.
December 2021 Unit Purchase Agreement
On December 21, 2021, the Company entered into a Unit Purchase Agreement (the “December UPA”) to sell up to 9,714,286 Units at a price per unit of $1.75. Each Unit is comprised of (i) a convertible promissory note convertible into common stock of the Company at an initial conversion price of $1.75 and, (ii) a warrant to purchase two shares of Common Stock at an initial purchase price of $2.25 per share (the new Class C Warrant). Under this December UPA, the Company issued and sold 3,438,572 Units at a per unit purchase price of $1.75, for gross proceeds of $6,000,000. Coinciding with this December UPA, the Company also entered into an Exchange Agreement with the existing Unit holders (the December 2021 Exchange Agreements, as further described below).
December 2021 Exchange Agreements
On December 21, 2021, in conjunction with a $6.0 million investment, the Company and the existing Unit holders agreed to exchange the original securities (“Old Securities”) held by the current investors/unit holders for New Securities, consisting of (i) a New Note in the principal amount equal to the original principal amount of the Original Note, plus all accrued interest through the day prior to December 21, 2021, and (ii) a New Warrant (new Class C Warrants) in exchange for the original Class C Warrants. The Exchange of the Original Securities for the New Securities included the following significant changes:
(i) Decreased the offering price under the Unit Purchase Agreement from $2.25 per Unit to $1.75 per Unit. Outstanding principal and accrued interest were used to purchase Units at the new per unit price.
(ii) Extended the maturity date of the notes to December 21, 2023 for all existing notes.
(iii) Decreased the conversion price from $2.25 per share to $1.75 per share for the New Units.
(iv) Original Class C Warrants were exchanged for New Class C warrants with an exercise price of $2.25 per share (unchanged) and a five-year life measured from the date of the Exchange Agreement. The decrease in the Unit price also resulted in additional number of New Class C Warrants being issued in exchange for the Original Class C Warrants due to the 200% warrant coverage provided for in the Unit Purchase Agreement.
The Company determined that the terms of the New Securities were substantially different from the Original Securities, and, as such the exchange of the Original Securities for the New Securities was accounted for as an extinguishment of debt on December 21, 2021, and the New Securities accounted for as a new debt issuance.
As a result of this substantial modification, the total of 621,087 Units previously issued were replaced with an aggregate of 832,022 pro-rata Units and a loss on debt extinguishment of $917,499 was recorded in consolidated statements of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 (2020 - $Nil).
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company issued a total of 4,260,594 units for the net proceeds of $6.69 million.
The Company intends to raise up to $10,000,000 on a rolling basis. The proceeds from this offering will be used to sustain the Company’s growth and meet its capital obligations.
Funding Requirements and Other Liquidity Matters
Marizyme expects to continue to incur expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future. We anticipate that our expenses will increase as a result of the following operational and business development efforts:
● Increase our expertise and knowledge through hiring and retaining qualified operational, financial and management personnel, who will build efficient infrastructure to support development and commercialization of therapies and devices,
● Increase in research and development and legal expenses as we continue to develop our products, conduct clinical trials and pursue FDA approvals,
● Expand our product portfolio through the identification and acquisition of additional life science assets, and
● Seek to increase awareness about our products to boost sales and distributions internationally.
Until such time, if ever, as we can generate substantial product revenues to support our cost structure, the Company will continue to have to raise funds beyond its current working capital balance in order to finance future development of products, potential acquisitions, and meet its debt obligations until such time as future profitable revenues are achieved.
We expect to finance our cash needs through a combination of private and public equity offerings, debt financings, government or other third-party funding, and collaborations arrangements or acquisitions. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of common stock, convertible securities or other equity securities, the ownership interest of our stockholders may be materially diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect your rights of our common stockholders. Debt financing and preferred equity financing, if available, would result in increased fixed payment obligations and may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends, that could adversely impact our ability to conduct our business. Securing additional financing could require a substantial amount of time and attention from our management and may divert a disproportionate amount of their attention away from day-to-day activities, which may adversely affect our management’s ability to oversee the development or acquisition of product.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, strategic alliances or marketing, distribution, or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or product candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development or future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market product candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Cash Flows
The following table sets forth a summary of the net cash flow activity for each of the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was approximately $5.79 million and $3.22 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The net cash used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021, was due to approximately $2.23 million spent on professional fees, $2.56 million spent on salaries and related compensation expenses and $1.68 million spent on research and development activities. The net change in operating assets and liabilities primarily related to a $1.84 million increase in accounts payable, accrued expenses, and amounts due to related parties in support of the growth of our operating activities.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to $0.26 million obtained from the issuance of promissory notes to related parties of the Company and $6.69 million of proceeds received from the Units Offering transaction.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
Royalties and Other Commitments
Upon receiving the FDA approval for the DuraGraft and other key intellectual products, the Company will:
● Grant of performance warrants to Somahlution, for 4,000,000 restricted common shares of the Company, with a strike price determined based on the average of the closing prices of the common shares for the 30 calendar days following the date of the public announcement of FDA approval;
● Pay royalties on all net sales of the product acquired from Somah of 6% on the first $50 million of international net sales (and 5% on the first $50 million of U.S. net sales), 4% for greater than $50 million up to $200 million, and 2% for greater than $200 million;
● Pay 10% of cash value of the rare pediatric voucher sales following the FDA approval and subsequent sale to an unaffiliated third party of a rare pediatric voucher based on Somah’s DuraGraft product;
● Grant of rare pediatric voucher warrants to purchase an aggregate of 250,000 commons shares with a term of five years and a strike price determined based on the average of the closing prices of the common shares for the 30 calendar days following the date of the public announcement of FDA approval, and
● Pay a liquidation preference, up to a maximum of $20 million upon the sale by the Company of all or substantially all of the assets relating to the Somah products. Upon the sale of either or both of the DuraGraft or Somah derived solid organ transplant products, the Company will pay 15% of the net sale proceeds towards the liquidation preference maximum amount.
The Company has entered into arrangements for office and laboratories spaces. As at December 31, 2021, minimum lease payments in relation to lease commitments are payable as follows:
We enter into contracts in the normal course of business for our contract research services, contract manufacturing services, professional services and other services and products for operating purposes. These contracts generally provide for termination after a notice period, and, therefore, are cancelable contracts and not included in the discussion above.
Going Concern
The Company had a net loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 of $11.3 million, working capital as of December 31, 2021 of $1.3 million, and had cash used in operations of $5.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Without further funding, these conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in conformity with U.S. GAAP, which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern and the realization of assets and satisfaction of liabilities in the normal course of business. The ability of the Company to continue its operations is dependent on the execution of management’s plans, which include the raising of capital through the debt and/or equity markets, until such time that funds provided by operations are sufficient to fund working capital requirements. If the Company were not to continue as a going concern, it would likely not be able to realize its assets at values comparable to the carrying value or the fair value estimates reflected in the balances set out in the preparation of the consolidated financial statements.
There can be no assurances that the Company will be successful in generating additional cash from the equity/debt markets or other sources to be used for operations. The consolidated financial statements do not include any adjustments relating to the recoverability of assets and classification of assets and liabilities that might be necessary. Based on the Company’s current resources, the Company will not be able to continue to operate without additional immediate funding. Should the Company not be successful in obtaining the necessary financing to fund its operations, the Company would need to curtail certain or all operational activities and/or contemplate the sale of its assets, if necessary.
The Company has been impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, and some of its earlier plans to further diversify its operations and expand its operating subsidiaries have been paused due to the economic uncertainty.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on its financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States, or GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities in our financial statements and accompanying notes. We evaluate these estimates and judgments on an ongoing basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 1 to our financial statements, we believe that the following accounting policies are the most critical for fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations.
Revenue Recognition
Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers (“Topic 606” or the “new revenue standard”).
We recognize revenue when control of the promised goods or services is transferred to our customers, in an amount that reflects the consideration we expect to be entitled to in exchange for those goods or services. For enforceable contracts with our customers, we first identify the distinct performance obligations - or accounting units - within the contract. Performance obligations are commitments in a contract to transfer a distinct good or service to the customer.
At contract inception, the Company assesses the goods or services promised within each contract and assess whether each promised good or service is distinct and determine those that are performance obligations. The Company then recognizes as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation when the performance obligation is satisfied.
We have identified one performance obligation which is related to our DuraGraft product sales. For our Distribution Partner channel, we recognize revenue for product sales at the time of delivery of the product to our Distribution Partner (customer). The customer is invoiced, and Payment Terms are Net 30. As our products have an expiration date, if a product expires, we will replace the product at no charge.
Accrued Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our personnel to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We base our expenses related to research and development activities on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expense. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in us reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
In-Process Research and Development
We evaluate whether acquired intangible assets are a business under applicable accounting standards. Additionally, we evaluate whether the acquired assets have a future alternative use. Intangible assets that do not have future alternative use are considered acquired in-process research and development. When the acquired in-process research and development assets are not part of a business combination, the value of the consideration paid is expensed on the acquisition date. Future costs to develop these assets are recorded to research and development expense as they are incurred.
Fair Value of Derivative and Contingent Liabilities
Our derivative and contingent liabilities are revalued at each reporting period with changes in the fair value of the liabilities recorded as a component of other income (expense) in the statements of operations. There are significant judgments and estimates inherent in the determination of the fair value of these liabilities. If we had made different assumptions including, among others, those related to the timing and probability of various corporate scenarios, discount rates, volatilities and exit valuations, the carrying values of our derivative and contingent liabilities, and our net loss and net loss per common share could have been significantly different.
Determination of Purchase Price Allocations
Estimates are made in determining the fair value of assets and liabilities, including the valuation of separately identifiable intangibles acquired as part of an acquisition. Management exercises judgment in estimating the probability and timing of when cash flows are expected to be achieved, which is used as the basis for estimating fair value. Future performance results that differ from management’s estimates could result in changes to liabilities recorded, which are recorded as they arise through profit or loss. The fair value of identified intangible assets is determined using appropriate valuation techniques which are generally based on a forecast of the total expected future net cash flows of the acquiree. Valuations are highly dependent on the inputs used and assumptions made by management regarding the future performance of these assets and any changes in the discount rate applied. Consideration paid for an asset acquisition is allocated to the individual identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their relative fair values. Asset acquisitions do not give rise to goodwill.
Leases
At the inception of any contractual arrangements we may enter into, we determine whether the contract contains a lease by assessing whether there is an identified asset and whether the contract conveys the right to control the use of the identified asset in exchange for consideration over a period of time. If both criteria are met, we record the associated lease liability and corresponding right-of-use asset upon commencement of the lease using either the implicit rate or a discount rate based on our credit-adjusted secured borrowing rate commensurate with the term of the lease. Additionally, we evaluate leases at their inception to determine if they are to be accounted for as an operating lease or a finance lease. We assess if a lease is accounted for as a finance lease if it meets one of the following five criteria: the lease has a purchase option that is reasonably certain of being exercised, the present value of the future cash flows is substantially all of the fair market value of the underlying asset, the lease term is for a significant portion of the remaining economic life of the underlying asset, the title to the underlying asset transfers at the end of the lease term, or if the underlying asset is of such a specialized nature that it is expected to have no alternative uses to the lessor at the end of the term. We account for leases that do not meet the finance lease criteria as operating leases, representing our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term. We also recognize operating lease liabilities as our obligation to make lease payments arising from the lease. We recognize operating lease liabilities with a term greater than one year and their corresponding right-of-use assets on the balance sheet at the commencement date of the lease based on the present value of lease payments over the expected lease term. As needed, we make certain adjustments to the right-of-use asset for items such as initial direct costs paid or incentives received. Because our leases do not typically provide an implicit rate, we utilize the rate of interest that we would have to pay to borrow on a collateralized basis over a similar term and in a similar economic environment. We recognize lease costs on a straight-line basis over the lease term and variable lease payments as operating expenses in the period in which the obligation for those payments is incurred. Variable lease payments primarily include common area maintenance, utilities, real estate taxes, insurance, and other operating costs that are passed on from the lessor in proportion to the space we lease.
Stock-Based Compensation Expense
Stock-based compensation expense for employees and directors is recognized in the Statement of Operations based on estimated amounts, including the grant date fair value and the expected service period. For stock options, we estimate the grant date fair value using a Black-Scholes valuation model, which requires the use of multiple subjective inputs including estimated future volatility, expected forfeitures and the expected term of the awards. We estimate the expected future volatility based on the stock’s historical price volatility. The stock’s future volatility may differ from the estimated volatility at the grant date. For restricted stock unit (“RSU”) equity awards, we estimate the grant date fair value using our closing stock price on the date of grant. We recognize the effect of forfeitures in compensation expense when the forfeitures occur. The estimated forfeiture rates may differ from actual forfeiture rates which would affect the amount of expense recognized during the period. We recognize the value of the awards over the awards’ requisite service or performance periods. The requisite service period is generally the time over which our share-based awards vest.
New Accounting Pronouncements
See Note 1 to the Financial Statements included in Item 8 of this Annual Report.