ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
Overview
MSC is a leading North American distributor of a broad range of metalworking and MRO products and services. We help our customers drive greater productivity, profitability and growth with approximately 2.1 million products, inventory management and other supply chain solutions, and deep expertise from more than 80 years of working with customers across industries. We continue to implement our strategies to gain market share, generate new customers, increase sales to existing customers, and diversify our customer base.
﻿
Our experienced team of approximately 7,000 associates works with our customers to help drive results for their businesses, from keeping operations running efficiently today to continuously rethinking, retooling and optimizing for a more productive tomorrow. We offer approximately 2.1 million active, saleable SKUs through our catalogs; our brochures; our eCommerce channels, including the MSC website; our inventory management solutions; and our customer care centers, customer fulfillment centers, regional inventory centers and warehouses. We service our customers from six customer fulfillment centers, 10 regional inventory centers and 38 warehouses. Many of our products are carried in stock, and orders for these in-stock products are typically fulfilled the day on which the order is received.
Our business model focuses on providing overall procurement cost reduction and just-in-time delivery to meet our customers’ needs. We focus on offering inventory, process and procurement solutions that reduce MRO supply chain costs and improve plant floor productivity for our customers. We will seek to continue to achieve cost reductions throughout our business through cost-saving strategies and increased leverage from our existing infrastructure, and continue to provide additional procurement cost-savings solutions to our customers through technology such as our CMI, VMI and vending programs. Our field sales and service associate headcount was 2,536 at September 3, 2022 compared to 2,398 at August 28, 2021 and 2,263 at August 29, 2020.
The chart below displays a two-year comparison of our net sales from fiscal year 2021 through fiscal year 2022:
(1)Pricing and other is comprised of changes in customer and product mix, discounting and other items.
(2)Fiscal year 2022 includes a 53rd week during the reporting period, including the net sales of acquisitions during the 53rd week.
Highlights
Highlights during fiscal year 2022 include the following:
We generated $246.2 million of cash from operations compared to $224.5 million in fiscal year 2021.
We repurchased and immediately retired $22.1 million of MSC’s Class A Common Stock compared to $67.5 million in fiscal year 2021.
We paid out $167.4 million in regular cash dividends compared to $362.7 million in cash dividends in fiscal year 2021, comprised of special and regular cash dividends of $195.4 million and $167.3 million, respectively.
In June 2022, we acquired Engman-Taylor for aggregate consideration of $24.8 million.
In July 2022, the sale of our Long Island CSC closed, resulting in a gain on sale of $10.1 million.
In August 2022, we acquired Tower Fasteners for aggregate consideration of $33.9 million, which includes a post-closing working capital adjustment of approximately $1.0 million that is subject to finalization.
We incurred $15.8 million in restructuring and other costs compared to $31.4 million in fiscal year 2021. Restructuring and other costs primarily consisted of consulting-related costs associated with the optimization of the Company’s operations, associate severance and separation costs, and equity award acceleration costs. The prior fiscal year also included operating lease asset impairment charges, net of gains related to settlement of lease liabilities, and other exit-related costs associated with our internal restructuring due to our sales workforce realignment and enhanced customer support model.
Recent Developments
Progress on Mission Critical
As previously disclosed, we initiated a company-wide project, which we refer to as “Mission Critical,” to accelerate market share capture and improve profitability over the period through fiscal year 2023. Among the Mission Critical initiatives to realize growth, we began and expect to continue investing in our market-leading metalworking business by adding to our metalworking specialist team, introducing value-added services to our customers, expanding our vending, VMI and in-plant solutions programs, building out our sales force, and diversifying our customers and end-markets. We also are focused on improving profitability through the implementation of various pricing strategies and critical structural cost reductions in order to improve return on invested capital. We anticipate that the cost reductions will be comprised of savings in the areas of sales and service, supply chain and general and administrative expenses, and include initiatives to optimize our distribution center network and real estate footprint, renegotiate supplier contracts, and redesign our talent acquisition and retention approach.
Relocation and Sale of Long Island CSC
In December 2020, we announced plans to relocate our Long Island CSC to a smaller facility. In connection with the announcement, we signed a 10-year lease to occupy approximately 26,000 square feet in an office building in Melville, New York, which commenced in September 2021. In furtherance of these plans, we entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement to sell our Long Island CSC. This transaction closed during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022.
Impact of COVID-19 and Other Economic Trends
In recent years, the COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the Company’s operations; however, demand from our traditional manufacturing end markets has recovered as most restrictions implemented earlier in the pandemic have been lifted. In conjunction with the lifting of pandemic restrictions and the ensuing economic recovery, the United States experienced and continues to experience disruptions in the supply of certain products and services and disruptions in labor availability. These disruptions have contributed to a highly inflationary environment which has affected the price and, at times, the availability of certain products and services necessary for the Company’s operations, including fuel, labor and certain products the Company sells or the inputs for such products. Such disruptions have impacted, and may continue to impact in the future, the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations. These disruptions are also impacting our customers and their ability to conduct their business or purchase our products and services.
As a result of recent high inflation, increasing freight, labor and fuel costs, and supply chain disruptions, the Company has implemented price realization strategies in response to increased costs the Company faces. Furthermore, in light of disruptions to availability and increased or uncertain shipping times, the Company is maintaining higher purchasing levels to ensure sufficient inventory supply to meet customer demand. The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic and the
evolving macroeconomic environment will continue to impact the Company’s business, financial condition and results of operations is highly uncertain.
Acquisitions of Engman-Taylor and Tower Fasteners
In June 2022, the Company acquired certain assets and assumed certain liabilities of Engman-Taylor, a Menomonee Falls, Wisconsin-based distributor of metalworking tools and supplies, for aggregate consideration of $24.8 million. Engman-Taylor will continue to go to market under its current name as an MSC company.
In August 2022, the Company acquired 100% of the outstanding equity of Tower Fasteners, a Holtsville, New York-based distributor of OEM fasteners and components, for aggregate consideration of $33.9 million, which includes a post-closing working capital adjustment of approximately $1.0 million that is subject to finalization. The acquisition, which was made through the Company’s subsidiary, AIS, complements and expands the Company’s presence in the OEM fastener market. Tower Fasteners will continue to go to market under its current name as an MSC company.
Our Strategy
Our primary objective is to grow sales profitably while offering our customers highly technical and high-touch solutions to solve their most complex challenges on the plant floor. Our strategy is to complete the transition from being a spot-buy supplier to a mission-critical partner to our customers. We will selectively pursue strategic acquisitions that expand or complement our business in new and existing markets or further enhance the value and offerings we provide.
Business Environment
We utilize various indices when evaluating the level of our business activity, including the Metalworking Business Index (the “MBI”) and the Industrial Production (“IP”) index. Approximately 70% of our revenues came from sales in the manufacturing sector during the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022. Through statistical analysis, we have found that trends in our customers’ activity have correlated to changes in the MBI and the IP index. The MBI is a sentiment index developed from a monthly survey of the U.S. metalworking industry, focusing on durable goods manufacturing. For the MBI, a value below 50.0 generally indicates contraction and a value above 50.0 generally indicates expansion. The IP index measures short-term changes in industrial production. Growth in the IP index from month to month indicates growth in the manufacturing, mining and utilities industries. The MBI and the IP index over the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022 and the fourth quarter and fiscal year averages were as follows:
During fiscal year 2022, the MBI average exceeded 50.0, which indicated growth in manufacturing during the period, albeit declining in recent months. The IP index averaged 103.0 during the same period, an improvement from the 2021 revised average of 98.6. The recent trending in these indices is primarily supported by the recovery in economic conditions related to the gradual lifting of government-imposed restrictions on economic activity and the abatement of the COVID-19 pandemic. See “Impact of COVID-19 and Other Economic Trends” above. Beginning in the second half of calendar year 2021 and continuing throughout calendar year 2022, the United States has experienced supply chain disruptions and significant levels of inflation, which has included higher prices for labor, freight, fuel and the products that the Company sells. The Company has implemented price realization strategies in response to increased costs the Company faces. We will continue to monitor the current economic conditions for the impact on our customers and markets and assess both risks and opportunities that may affect our business and operations.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended September 3, 2022 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended August 28, 2021
The table below summarizes the Company’s results of operations both in dollars (in thousands) and as a percentage of net sales for the periods indicated:
Net Sales
Net sales increased 13.8%, or $448.7 million, from the prior fiscal year. The $448.7 million increase in net sales was comprised of approximately $179.3 million of higher sales volume, approximately $159.4 million from improved pricing, inclusive of changes in customer and product mix, discounting and other items, approximately $77.6 million in sales attributable to an extra week in fiscal year 2022, and approximately $35.4 million of net sales from recent acquisitions, partially offset by approximately $3.0 million of unfavorable foreign exchange impact. Of the $448.7 million increase in net sales during the fiscal year ended September 3, 2022, national account customer sales increased by approximately $218.1 million, sales to our core and other customers increased by approximately $207.8 million and sales from recent acquisitions were approximately $35.4 million, partially offset by a decrease in our government customer sales by approximately $12.6 million.
The table below shows, among other things, the annual 2022 average daily sales (“ADS”) by total company and by customer type compared to the same periods in the prior fiscal year:
We believe that our ability to transact business with our customers through various electronic portals and directly through the MSC website gives us a competitive advantage over smaller suppliers. Sales made through our eCommerce platforms, including sales made through EDI systems, VMI systems, XML ordering-based systems, vending, hosted systems and other electronic portals, represented 61.7% of consolidated net sales for fiscal year 2022, compared to 60.0% of consolidated net sales for fiscal year 2021. These percentages of consolidated net sales do not include eCommerce sales from our recent acquisitions.
Gross Profit
Gross profit margin was 42.2% in fiscal year 2022, as compared to 41.1% in fiscal year 2021. The increase in gross profit margin was the result of improved price realization and positive spread between sales price and cost of goods sold. In addition, results for fiscal year ended August 28, 2021 include the prior year PPE-related inventory write-downs of $30.1 million, which reduced the carrying value of certain PPE-related inventory to their estimated net realizable value. No such inventory write-downs occurred for the fiscal year ended September 3, 2022.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses increased 9.0% to $1.1 billion in fiscal year 2022, as compared to $994.5 million in fiscal year 2021. Operating expenses were 29.4% of fiscal year 2022 net sales, as compared to 30.7% for fiscal year 2021. The increase in operating expenses was primarily attributable to an increase in payroll and payroll-related costs and freight costs associated with higher sales volumes.
Payroll and payroll-related costs were approximately 57.5% of total operating expenses for fiscal year 2022, as compared to approximately 56.9% for fiscal year 2021. Payroll and payroll-related costs, which include salary, incentive compensation, sales commission, and fringe benefit costs, increased by $57.6 million for fiscal year 2022. All of these components of payroll and payroll-related costs increased compared to the prior fiscal year.
Freight expense was $155.5 million for fiscal year 2022, as compared to $133.7 million for fiscal year 2021. The primary drivers of this increase were increased sales volume and higher fuel-related charges due to increased commodity costs.
Travel and entertainment expense was $7.3 million for fiscal year 2022, as compared to $3.6 million for fiscal year 2021. This increase was due to the Company’s easing of travel restrictions resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Impairment Loss, Net
In September 2020, the Company prepaid approximately $26.7 million for the purchase of nitrile gloves to be sourced from manufacturers in Asia and experienced significant delays in obtaining possession of this PPE. The Company evaluated the potential recoverability of these assets and, as a result, recorded an impairment charge of $26.7 million in the first quarter of fiscal year 2021 to reflect the fact that the Company would not ultimately obtain this PPE or recover its related prepayment. During fiscal year 2021, the Company entered into a legal settlement agreement with a vendor and, as a result, received $20.8 million of loss recovery related to this prepayment, which resulted in a net impairment charge of $5.9 million for fiscal year 2021. The Company continues to pursue its legal avenues for recovery of the remaining loss. We also incurred $1.6 million of legal costs associated with this matter during fiscal year 2021 that are included in Operating expenses.
Restructuring and Other Costs
For fiscal year 2022, we incurred approximately $15.8 million in restructuring and other costs related to the optimization of the Company’s operations. These charges primarily consisted of consulting-related costs associated with the optimization of the Company’s operations, associate severance and separation costs, and equity award acceleration costs. The prior fiscal year also included operating lease asset impairment charges, net of gains related to settlement of lease liabilities, and other exit-related costs associated with our internal restructuring due to our sales workforce realignment and enhanced customer support model. See Note 13, “Restructuring and Other Costs” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Gain on Sale of Property
During fiscal year 2021, the Company entered into a Purchase and Sale Agreement to sell its 170,000-square foot Long Island CSC in Melville, New York. During the fourth quarter of fiscal year 2022, the Company disposed of the building with a sale price of $25.5 million, which resulted in a gain on sale of property of $10.1 million after the settlement of certain closing costs and fees, which is included in the Consolidated Statement of Income for the fiscal year ended September 3, 2022.
Income from Operations
Income from operations increased 55.3% to $468.7 million in fiscal year 2022, as compared to $301.8 million in fiscal year 2021. This increase was primarily attributable to the increase in sales and gross margin as well as impacts of the prior year impairment loss, PPE-related inventory write-down within gross margin and impairment charges for operating lease assets within restructuring and other costs as discussed above, which did not recur in fiscal year 2022.
Provision for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate for fiscal year 2022 was 24.5%, as compared to 24.4% in fiscal year 2021. See Note 7, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
Net Income
The factors which affected net income for fiscal year 2022, as compared to the prior fiscal year, have been discussed above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of September 3, 2022, we had $43.5 million in cash and cash equivalents, substantially all with well-known financial institutions. Historically, our primary financing needs have been to fund our working capital requirements
necessitated by our sales growth and the costs of acquisitions, new products, new facilities, facility expansions, investments in vending solutions, technology investments, and productivity investments. Cash generated from operations, together with borrowings under our credit facilities and net proceeds from the private placement notes, have been used to fund these needs, to repurchase shares of the Company’s Class A Common Stock from time to time, and to pay dividends to our shareholders.
As of September 3, 2022, total borrowings outstanding, representing amounts due under our credit facilities and notes, as well as all finance leases and financing arrangements, were $794.6 million, net of unamortized debt issuance costs of $1.4 million, as compared to total borrowings of $786.0 million, net of unamortized debt issuance costs of $1.9 million, as of August 28, 2021. The increase was driven by higher net borrowings under our committed credit facility. See Note 9, “Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about these balances.
We believe, based on our current business plan, that our existing cash, financial resources and cash flow from operations will be sufficient to fund necessary capital expenditures and operating cash requirements for at least the next 12 months. We will continue to evaluate our financial position in light of future developments, particularly those relating to changes in macroeconomic conditions, including variations in foreign currency exchange rates, commodity and energy prices, labor and supply costs, inflation, and interest rates, and to take appropriate action as it is warranted.
The table below summarizes information regarding the Company’s cash flows for the periods indicated:
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities for fiscal years 2022 and 2021 was $246.2 million and $224.5 million, respectively. The increase was primarily due to the following:
an increase in net income as described above; partially offset by
an increase in the change in accounts receivable primarily attributable to higher sales volume; and
a decrease in the change in accounts payable and accrued liabilities due to a greater increase in accounts payable in fiscal year 2021 from fiscal year 2020 levels due to the COVID-19 pandemic that did not repeat in fiscal year 2022.
The table below summarizes certain information regarding the Company’s operations:
(1) Working Capital is calculated as current assets less current liabilities.
(2) Current Ratio is calculated by dividing total current assets by total current liabilities.
(3) Days’ Sales Outstanding is calculated by dividing accounts receivable by net sales, using trailing two months sales data.
(4) Inventory Turnover is calculated by dividing total cost of goods sold by inventory, using a 13-month trailing average inventory.
Working capital increased compared to August 28, 2021 while the current ratio declined slightly. The increase in working capital presented in the table above was primarily due to increases in both accounts receivable and inventories, partially offset by an increase in the current portion of debt and accounts payable. The current ratio declined slightly, primarily due to the increase in the current portion of debt.
The increase in inventories of $91.5 million from August 28, 2021 to September 3, 2022 was primarily due to an increasing sales trend as well as higher supplier costs and ongoing challenges in the supply chain requiring earlier purchasing to meet customer demand. Higher inventory purchasing levels also drove the $31.0 million increase in accounts payable during this period. Accounts receivable increased $127.2 million due to increased sales levels during fiscal year 2022. These balances were also impacted by fiscal year 2022 acquisitions. See Note 5, “Business Combinations” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about these acquired balances.
The increase in days’ sales outstanding as of September 3, 2022 as compared to August 28, 2021 was primarily due to the receivables portfolio consisting of a greater percentage of our national account program sales, which typically have longer payment terms.
Inventory turnover as of September 3, 2022 declined relative to August 28, 2021 due to increasing inventory levels as a result of higher supplier costs, ongoing challenges in the supply chain and to meet customer demand.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities for fiscal years 2022 and 2021 was $94.5 million and $75.7 million, respectively. The use of cash for fiscal year 2022 included expenditures for property, plant and equipment and the acquisitions of Engman-Taylor and Tower Fasteners, partially offset by the net proceeds received from the sale of the Long Island CSC. The use of cash for fiscal year 2021 included expenditures for property, plant and equipment and the acquisitions of Wm. F. Hurst Co., LLC and the outsourcing and logistics businesses of TAC Insumos Industriales, S. de R.L. de C.V. and certain of its affiliates.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for fiscal years 2022 and 2021 was $148.1 million and $233.7 million, respectively.
The major components contributing to the use of cash for fiscal year 2022 were primarily the following:
$167.4 million of regular dividends paid during fiscal year 2022 compared to $362.7 million of regular and special dividends paid during fiscal year 2021;
$27.4 million in aggregate repurchases of our Class A Common Stock during fiscal year 2022 compared to $71.3 million in aggregate repurchases of our Class A Common Stock during fiscal year 2021;
net borrowings under our credit facilities of $9.5 million during fiscal year 2022 compared to net borrowings of $184.3 million during fiscal year 2021; and
proceeds from the exercise of common stock options of $34.7 million during fiscal year 2022 compared to $29.7 million in fiscal year 2021.
Debt
Credit Facilities
In April 2017, the Company entered into a $600.0 million revolving credit facility which was subsequently amended and extended in August 2021. As of September 3, 2022, the Company also had three uncommitted credit facilities, totaling $208.0 million of maximum uncommitted availability. See Note 9, “Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about our credit facilities. As of September 3, 2022, we were in compliance with the operating and financial covenants of our credit facilities.
Subsequent to fiscal year 2022, the Company made additional payments of $45.0 million through October 3, 2022 on its revolving credit facility. The current unused balance of $394.7 million from the revolving credit facility, which is reduced by outstanding letters of credit, is available for working capital purposes if necessary. ﻿ See Note 9, “Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about these balances.
Private Placement Debt and Shelf Facility Agreements
In July 2016, we completed the issuance and sale of unsecured senior notes. In January 2018, we entered into two note purchase and private shelf facility agreements (together, the “Shelf Facility Agreements”). In June 2018 and March 2020, we entered into additional note purchase agreements. Pursuant to the terms of the Shelf Facility Agreements, no new
unsecured senior notes may be issued and sold after January 12, 2021. See Note 9, “Debt” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information about these transactions.
Leases and Financing Arrangements
As of September 3, 2022, certain of our operations were conducted on leased premises. These leases are for varying periods, the longest extending to fiscal year 2031. In addition, we are obligated under certain equipment and automobile operating and finance leases, which expire on varying dates through fiscal year 2026.
From time to time, we enter into financing arrangements with vendors to purchase certain information technology equipment or software.
Capital Expenditures
We continue to invest in sales productivity initiatives, eCommerce and vending platforms, customer fulfillment centers and distribution network, and other infrastructure and technology.
Future Liquidity Outlook
Our future contractual obligations as of September 3, 2022 (in thousands) are as follows:
(1)Certain of our operations are conducted on leased premises. These leases (most of which require us to provide for the payment of real estate taxes, insurance and other operating costs) are for varying periods, the longest extending to fiscal year 2031. In addition, we are obligated under certain equipment and automobile operating leases, which expire on varying dates through fiscal year 2025. See Note 10, “Leases” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our operating lease arrangements.
(2)As of September 3, 2022, the Company has entered into various finance leases for certain IT equipment, which expire on varying dates through fiscal year 2026. See Note 10, “Leases” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on our finance lease arrangements.
(3)Excludes debt issuance costs.
(4)Interest payments for long-term debt are based on principal amounts and coupons or contractual rates at fiscal year-end.
As of September 3, 2022, the Company had recorded a non-current liability of $8.0 million for tax uncertainties and interest. This amount is excluded from the table above, as the Company cannot make reliable estimates of these cash flows by period. See Note 7, “Income Taxes” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements and there are no commitments or obligations (including, but not limited to, guarantees; retained or contingent interests in assets transferred; contractual arrangements that support the credit, liquidity or market risk for transferred assets; or risk related to derivatives or other financial products related to our equity securities), including contingent obligations, with unconsolidated entities or persons that had during the periods presented herein or are reasonably likely to have a material impact on the financial statements.
Critical Accounting Estimates
We make estimates, judgments and assumptions in determining the amounts reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying notes. Estimates are based on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. The estimates are used to form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities and the amount of revenues and expenses reported that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates. Our significant accounting policies are described in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. The accounting policies described below are impacted by our critical accounting estimates. More information on the critical accounting estimates can be found in Note 1, “Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Allowance for Credit Losses
We perform periodic credit evaluations of our customers’ financial condition, and collateral is generally not required. The Company considers several factors to estimate the allowance for credit losses in accounts receivable, including the age of the receivables and the historical ratio of actual write-offs to the age of the receivables, and also reflects the
adoption of the new accounting standard related to current expected credit losses in the most recent fiscal year. See Note 1, “Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Inventories
Inventory is reflected at the lower of weighted average cost or net realizable value considering future demand, market conditions and physical condition of the inventory. We write-down inventories for shrinkage and slow-moving or obsolete inventory. The analysis includes inventory levels, sales information, historical write-down information, and the on-hand quantities relative to the sales history for the product.
Goodwill and Other Indefinite-Lived Intangible Assets
The purchase price of an acquired company is allocated between the intangible assets and the net tangible assets of the acquired business with the residual of the purchase price recorded as goodwill. The determination of the value of the intangible assets acquired involves certain judgments and estimates. These judgments can include, but are not limited to, the cash flows that an asset is expected to generate in the future and the appropriate weighted average cost of capital. The Company annually reviews goodwill at the reporting unit level and intangible assets that have indefinite lives for impairment in its fiscal fourth quarter and when events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying values of these assets might exceed their current fair values.
Income Taxes
The Company recognizes deferred tax assets and liabilities for the expected future tax consequences of events that have been included in the financial statements or tax returns. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the differences between the financial reporting and tax basis of assets and liabilities, using enacted tax rates in effect for the year in which the differences are expected to reverse. The tax balances and income tax expense recognized by the Company are based on management’s interpretations of the tax laws of multiple jurisdictions. Income tax expense reflects the Company’s best estimates and assumptions regarding, among other items, the level of future taxable income, interpretation of tax laws and uncertain tax positions.
Other
Other significant accounting policies, not involving the same level of measurement uncertainties as those discussed above, are nevertheless important to an understanding of the financial statements. Policies such as revenue recognition, depreciation, intangibles, accruals related to self-insured associate health costs, long-lived assets and warranties require judgments on complex matters that are often subject to multiple external sources of authoritative guidance such as the Financial Accounting Standards Board and the SEC. Possible changes in estimates or assumptions associated with these policies are not expected to have a material effect on the financial condition or results of operations of the Company. More information on these additional accounting policies can be found in Note 1, “Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Refer to Note 1, “Business and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
‎