ITEM 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on December 23, 2019 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar Business Combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Units, the proceeds of the sale of our shares in connection with a Business Combination (pursuant to the forward purchase agreement with Nomura and pursuant to forward purchase agreements or backstop agreements, shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
Recent Developments
On July 11, 2021, we entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “MIPA”) with Lionheart II Holdings, LLC, our newly formed wholly owned subsidiary (“Purchaser”), each limited liability company set forth on Schedule 2.1(a) thereto (the “MSP Purchased Companies”), the members of the MSP Purchased Companies listed on Schedule 2.1(b) thereto (the “Members”), and John H. Ruiz, as the representative of the Members. See Note 10 to Item 1 above for a description of the MIPA and the transactions contemplated thereby.
On January 27, 2022, the Company held a special meeting of the Company’s stockholders (the “Extension Meeting”).
At the Extension Meeting, the Company’s stockholders approved to extend the date by which the Company must consummate its initial business combination from February 18, 2022 to August 18, 2022. As part of the meeting, Stockholders holding 10,946,369 shares of the Company’s Class A common stock exercised their right to redeem such shares for a pro rata portion of the funds in the Company’s trust account, amounting to approximately $109,469,789 removed from the Company’s trust account to pay such stockholders.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from December 23, 2019 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and, subsequent to the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for a Business Combination, in particular activities in connection with the potential acquisition of the MSP Purchased Companies. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the Initial Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $3,206,635, which consists of the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $6,976,750 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $15,188, offset by operating and formation costs of $3,785,303.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $2,061,769, which consists of operating and formation costs of $1,472,168, and transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $837,355, offset by the change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $236,500 and interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $11,254.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
On August 18, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 20,000,000 Units at a price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $200,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 650,000 Private Placement Units at a price of $10.00 per Private Placement Unit in a private placement to our stockholders, generating gross proceeds of $6,500,000.
On August 24, 2020, in connection with the underwriters’ election to fully exercise of their option to purchase additional Units, we consummated the sale of an additional 3,000,000 Units, generating total gross proceeds of $30,000,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the full exercise of the over-allotment option by the underwriters’ and the sale of the Private Placement Units, a total of $230,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account and we had $1,421,063 of cash held outside of the Trust Account, after payment of costs related to the Initial Public Offering, and available for working capital purposes. We incurred $13,128,937 in transaction costs, including $4,600,000 of underwriting fees, $8,050,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $478,937 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $847,669, Net income of $3,206,635 was affected by the change in fair value of warrant liability of $6,976,750 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $15,188. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $2,937,634 of cash from operating activities.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $434,376, Net loss of $2,061,769 was affected by the change in fair value of warrant liability of $236,500, transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $837,355, interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $11,254 and changes in operating assets and liabilities, which provided $1,037,792 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $230,013,074. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay franchise and income taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we have withdrawn $13,368 of interest earned on the Trust Account for the payment of franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $177,386 outside of the Trust Account. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to complete our disclosed Business Combination as agreed upon in our Membership Interest Purchase Agreement.
In addition, the Sponsor, an affiliate of the Sponsor, or our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that a Business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,000,000 of such loans may be convertible into units, at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. The units would be identical to the Private Placement Units. The terms of such loans by our officers and directors, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The loans would be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, on February 21, 2021, the Sponsor, Lionheart Equities, LLC, committed up to $750,000 in loans to the Company for continuing operations to consummate a business combination. The Sponsor committed up to an additional $250,000 in loans to the Company for continuing operations to consummate a business combination on July 29, 2021, for an aggregate commitment of $1,000,000. The loans are non-interest bearing, unsecured, and to be repaid upon the consummation of a business combination. In the event that a business combination does not occur, then all loaned amounts under this commitment will be forgiven except to the extent that the Company has funds available to it outside the trust account.
We will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. Based off our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence, and negotiating a Business Combination, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our Business Combination. If we are unable to complete our Business Combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the Trust Account. In addition, following our Business Combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Proposed Business Combination
On July 11, 2021, the Company entered into a Membership Interest Purchase Agreement (the “MIPA”) by and among the Company, Lionheart II Holdings, LLC, a newly formed wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“Purchaser”), each limited liability company set forth on Schedule 2.1(a) thereto (the “MSP Purchased Companies”), the members of the MSP Purchased Companies listed on Schedule 2.1(b) thereto (the “Members”),
and John H. Ruiz, as the representative of the Members.
Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the MIPA, including the approval of the Company’s stockholders, the parties thereto will enter into a business combination transaction (the “Business Combination”), pursuant to which, among other things, the Members will sell and assign all of their membership interests in the MSP Purchased Companies to Purchaser in exchange for non-economic voting shares of Class V common stock, par value $0.0001, of the Company (“Class V Common Stock”) and non-voting economic Class B Units of Purchaser (“Class B Units,” and each pair consisting of one share of Class V Common Stock and one Class B Unit, an “Up-C Unit”), with Up-C Units being exchangeable on a one-for-one basis for shares of the Company’s Class A common stock. Following the closing of the Business Combination (the “MIPA Closing”), the Company will own all of the voting Class A Units of Purchaser and the Members or their designees will own all of the non-voting economic Class B Units of Purchaser. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in the MIPA, the aggregate consideration to be paid to the Members (or their designees) will consist of a number of (i) Up-C Units equal to (a) $32.5 billion divided by (b) $10.00 and (ii) rights to receive payments under the Tax Receivable Agreement (as defined below). Of the Up-C Units to be issued to certain Members at the MIPA Closing, 6,000,000 (the “Escrow Units”) will be deposited into an escrow account with Continental Stock Transfer and Trust, to satisfy potential indemnification claims brought pursuant to the MIPA. Additionally, in connection with the Business Combination, the Company intends, subject to compliance with applicable law, to declare a dividend comprising approximately 1,029,000,000 newly issued warrants, each to purchase one share of Class A common stock for an exercise price of $11.50 per share, conditioned upon the consummation of any redemptions by the Company’s stockholders and the MIPA, to the holders of record of Class A common stock as of the close of business on the date of the MIPA Closing, after giving effect to the waiver of the right to participate in such dividend by the Members.
The MIPA contains customary representations, warranties and covenants by the parties thereto and the closing is subject to certain conditions as further described in the MIPA.
On November 10, 2021, the Company filed with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) in preliminary form a registration statement on Form S-4 (the “Registration Statement”) which contains a preliminary proxy statement/prospectus, in connection with the proposed business combination between the Company and MSP Recovery announced on July 12, 2021. While the Registration Statement has not yet become effective and the information contained therein is subject to change, it provides important information about MSP Recovery, LCAP, and the proposed business combination.
Going Concern
We have until August 18, 2022 to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that we will have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company until the liquidation date and/or through twelve months from the issuance of this report. Additionally, it is uncertain that we will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. The Company may not have sufficient liquidity to fund the working capital needs of the Company until August 18, 2022, the liquidation date, and/or through twelve months from the issuance of this report. If an initial business combination is not consummated by the liquidation date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. Management has determined that the mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should we be required to liquidate after August 18, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021.
Contractual obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the Sponsor a monthly fee of $15,000 for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Company. We began incurring these fees on August 14, 2020 and will continue to incur these fees monthly until the earlier of the completion of the Business Combination and the Company’s liquidation.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,050,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
We account for the warrants issued in connection with our Initial Public Offering in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815 under which the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, we classify the warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statements of operations.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our common stock subject to possible conversion in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share”. Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stocks outstanding for the period. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stocks is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
The calculation of diluted income (loss) per share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) Initial Public Offering, and (ii) the private placement since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. The warrants are exercisable to purchase 11,825,000 Class A common stocks in the aggregate. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not have any dilutive securities or other contracts that could, potentially, be exercised or converted into common stocks and then share in the earnings of the Company. As a result, diluted net loss per common stock is the same as basic net loss per common stock for the periods presented.
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.