Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Report.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on September 11, 2020 for the purpose of effecting an initial business combination. We intend to effectuate our an initial business combination using cash from the proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete an initial business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On August 12, 2021, we entered into a Business Combination Agreement (the “Business Combination Agreement”) with Memic Innovative Surgery Ltd., a private company organized under the laws of the State of Israel (“Memic”), and Maestro Merger Sub, Inc., a Delaware corporation and a direct, wholly-owned subsidiary of Memic (“Merger Sub”).
Pursuant to the Business Combination Agreement, subject to the terms and conditions set forth therein, upon the closing of the transactions contemplated thereby, Merger Sub will merge with and into us, with us surviving as a wholly-owned subsidiary of Memic (the “Merger”).
For more information about the Business Combination Agreement and related agreements, see Item 1. Business of this Report.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and after the Initial Public Offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination, including Memic. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance) as well as identifying and evaluating targets for an initial business combination.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $4,767,283, which consists of a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,744,000 and interest income on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $63,997, offset by general and administrative expenses of $3,040,714. General and administrative expenses increased by $2,932,221 primarily due to an increase in expenses related to the Business Combination Agreement.
For the period from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $711,389, which consists of general and administrative expenses of $108,493, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $83,333 and transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $522,861, offset by interest income on investments held in the Trust Account of $3,298.
Liquidity and Going Concern
On December 22, 2020, we consummated the Initial Public Offering of 25,000,000 Units at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $250,000,000. Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the sale of 4,933,333 private placement warrants at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the sponsor, generating gross proceeds of $7,400,000.
Following the Initial Public Offering, the partial exercise of the over-allotment option, and the sale of the Private Placement Units, a total of $250,000,000 was placed in the Trust Account. We incurred $14,161,525 in Initial Public Offering related costs, including $5,000,000 of underwriting fees and $8,750,000 of deferred underwriting fees and $411,525 of other offering costs.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $1,738,114. Net income of $4,767,283 was affected by a change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $7,744,000 and interest earned on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $63,998. Changes in operating assets and liabilities provided $1,302,601 of cash for operating activities.
For the period from September 11, 2020 (inception) through December 31, 2020, cash used in operating activities was $677,599. Net loss of $711,389 was affected by formation cost paid by sponsor in exchange for issuance of founder shares of $878, interest earned on investments held in the Trust Account of $3,298, change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $83,333 and transaction costs associated with the Initial Public Offering of $522,861. Changes in operating assets and liabilities used $569,984 of cash from operating activities.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held in the Trust Account of $250,007,295. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes. Through December 31, 2021, we withdrew $60,000 of interest earned from the Trust Account.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less income taxes payable), to complete our initial business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $200,884. We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete an initial business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an initial business combination, the sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors or their affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete an initial business combination, we would repay such loaned amounts. In the event that an initial business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into warrants at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants.
On December 30, 2021, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note (the “2021 Promissory Note”) to the sponsor, pursuant to which the Company borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $544,000. The 2021 Promissory Note is non-interest bearing and matures upon the closing of our initial business combination.
On January 28, 2022, the Company issued an unsecured promissory note in principal amount of up to $400,000 to the Sponsor (the “2022 Promissory Note”), of which $75,000 was funded by the sponsor upon execution thereof. The 2022 Promissory Note does not bear interest and matures upon closing of the Company’s initial business combination.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Financial Accounting Standard Board’s Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” the Company has until December 22, 2022, to consummate an initial business combination. It is uncertain that the Company will be able to consummate an initial business combination by this time. If an initial business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution of the Company. Management has determined that the liquidity condition and mandatory liquidation, should an initial business combination not occur, and potential subsequent dissolution raises substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. No adjustments have been made to the carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after December 22, 2022.
Off-Balance Sheet Financing Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than an agreement to pay the sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support. Upon completion of an initial business combination or the Company’s liquidation, the Company will cease paying these monthly fees.
The underwriters are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit, or $8,750,000 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company incurred legal fees of $508,525 and investment advisory fees of $400,000, which are contingent upon the consummation of the Merger.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Warrant Liabilities
The Company does not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. The Company evaluates all of its financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and FASB ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging” (“ASC 815”). The Company accounts for the Public Warrants and private placement warrants (together with the Public Warrants, the “Warrants”) in accordance with the guidance contained in ASC 815-40 under which the Warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as liabilities. Accordingly, the Company classifies the Warrants as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the Warrants to fair value at each reporting period. This liability is subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in the statement of operations. The Private Placement Warrants were initially and subsequently valued using a Monte Carlo Simulation Model. The Public Warrants for periods where no observable traded price was available were also valued using a Monte Carlo simulation Model. For periods subsequent to the detachment of the Public Warrants from the Units, the Public Warrant quoted market price was used as the fair value as of each relevant date.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption is classified as a liability instrument and is measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable common stock (including common stock that feature redemption rights that is either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock features certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ deficit section of our balance sheets.
Net Income (Loss) per Common Share
Net income (loss) per common stock is computed by dividing net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common stock outstanding for the period. The Company has two classes of common stock, which are referred to as Class A common stock and Class B common stock. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of common stock. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A common stock is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2024 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. The Company is currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.