Item 7.Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
References to the “Company,” “Metals Acquisition Corp,” “MAC,” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Metals Acquisition Corp. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the interim financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements
This report includes “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of Section 27A of the Securities Act and Section 21E of the Exchange Act that are not historical facts and involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those expected and projected. All statements, other than statements of historical fact included in this Form 10-K, including, without limitation, statements in this “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” regarding the Company’s financial position, business strategy and the plans and objectives of management for future operations, are forward-looking statements. Words such as “anticipate,” “believe,” “continue,” “could,” “estimate,” “expect,” “intend,” “may,” “might,” “plan,” “possible,” “potential,” “predict,” “project,” “should,” “would” and variations thereof and similar words and expressions are intended to identify such forward-looking statements. Such forward-looking statements relate to future events or future performance, but reflect management’s current beliefs, based on information currently available. A number of factors could cause actual events, performance or results to differ materially from the events, performance and results discussed in the forward-looking statements. For information identifying important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements, please refer to “Risk Factors” in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The Company’s securities filings can be accessed on the EDGAR section of the SEC’s website at www.sec.gov. Except as expressly required by applicable securities law, the Company disclaims any intention or obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statements whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
Overview
The Company is a blank check company, incorporated as a Cayman Islands exempted company on March 11, 2021. The Company was incorporated for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”).
Following the closing of the IPO on August 2, 2021 and the underwriter’s partial exercise of its over-allotment option on September 3, 2021, $265,147,800 ($10.00 per Unit) from the net proceeds of the sale of the Units in the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was placed in the Trust Account and invested only in U.S. government treasury obligations, within the meaning set forth in Section Rule 2a-7 under the Investment Company Act. Except with respect to interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account that may be released to the Company to pay its income taxes, if any, the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association, subject to the requirements of law and regulation, provides that the proceeds from the IPO and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants held in the Trust Account will not be released from the Trust Account (1) to the Company, until the completion of the initial Business Combination, or (2) to the public shareholders, until the earliest of (a) the completion of the initial Business Combination, and then only in connection with those Class A ordinary shares that such shareholders properly elected to redeem, subject to the limitations described herein, (b) the redemption of any public shares properly tendered in connection with a (A) shareholder vote to amend the Company’s amended and restated memorandum and articles of association to modify the substance or timing of the Company’s obligation to provide holders of the Class A ordinary shares the right to have their shares redeemed in connection with the initial Business Combination or to redeem 100% of the public shares if the Company does not complete the initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, or (B) with respect to any other provision relating to the rights of holders of the Class A ordinary shares or pre-initial Business Combination activity, and (c) the redemption of the public shares if the Company has not consummated the initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO. Public shareholders who redeem their Class A ordinary shares in connection with a shareholder vote described in clause (b) in the preceding sentence shall not be entitled to funds from the Trust Account upon the subsequent completion of an initial Business Combination or liquidation if the Company has not consummated an initial Business Combination within 24 months from the closing of the IPO, with respect to such Class A ordinary shares so redeemed.
We will have only 24 months from the closing of the IPO (the “Combination Period”) to complete the initial Business Combination. If we have not completed the initial Business Combination within the Combination Period, we will: (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible, but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our income taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of the then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidation distributions, if any); and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and the board of directors, liquidate and dissolve, subject in the case of clauses (ii) and (iii), to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the IPO and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
Recent Developments
On March 17, 2022, the Company, Metals Acquisition Corp. (Australia) Pty Ltd (“MAC-Sub”) and Glencore Operations Australia Pty Limited (“Glencore”) entered into a Share Sale Agreement (the “SSA”).
Under the terms of the SSA, MAC-Sub (a newly formed, wholly owned subsidiary of the Company) will acquire from Glencore 100% of the issued share capital of Cobar Management Pty. Limited (“CMPL”) (the acquisition of CMPL and the CSA mine (as defined herein) from Glencore, the “Proposed Business Combination”). CMPL owns and operates the Cornish, Scottish and Australian mine (the “CSA Mine”) in Cobar, New South Wales, Australia.
In consideration for the acquisition of CMPL, the Company and MAC-Sub will: (a) pay US$1,050,000,000 to Glencore (subject to a customary closing accounts adjustments to reflect the working capital, net debt and tax liabilities of CMPL at the time of closing under the SSA (the “Closing”)), (b) issue US$50,000,000 (5,000,000 shares) worth of MAC Class A ordinary shares, $0.0001 par value (the “Common Stock”) to Glencore, and (c) enter into a net smelter royalty pursuant to which after the Closing, CMPL will pay to Glencore a royalty of 1.5% of all net smelter copper concentrate produced from the mining tenure held by CMPL at the time of the Closing.
The SSA and related agreements are further described in the Form 8-K, filed by us on March 17, 2022.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
As of December 31, 2021, the Company was actively identifying potential targets as well as conducting due diligence on identified targets for a Business Combination. Activity for the period from March 11, 2021, through December 31, 2021, relates to the preparation and consummation of the IPO, the search for a target to consummate a Business Combination and conducting due diligence on identified targets for a Business Combination. We will at the earliest generate any operating revenues after the completion of a Business Combination. We will generate non-operating income in the form of interest income from the proceeds derived from the IPO and placed in the Trust Account as well as interest income on operating cash balances.
For the period from March 11, 2021, through December 31, 2021, we had a net income of $10,815,018, consisting of the change in the fair value of warrant liabilities of $14,982,447 and trust interest income of $7,819 partially offset by $1,122,004 in formation and operating costs, $1,066,666 in the excess value of the Public Warrants, $1,984,130 in Public Warrant offering costs and $2,448 in bank fees.
We classify the warrants issued in connection with the IPO and Private Placement as liabilities at their fair value and adjust the warrant instruments to fair value at each reporting period. These liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. For the period from March 11, 2021, through December 31, 2021, the change in fair value of warrants was a decrease of $14,982,447 million.
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus (COVID-19). In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic (the “COVID-19 pandemic”), based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. The full impact of the COVID-19 pandemic continues to evolve. The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our results of operations, financial position and cash flows will depend on future developments, including the duration and spread of the pandemic and related advisories and restrictions. These developments and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets and the overall economy are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted. If the financial markets and/or the overall economy are impacted for an extended period, our results of operations, financial position and cash flows may be materially adversely affected. Additionally, our ability to complete an initial Business Combination, including the Proposed Business Combination, may be materially adversely affected due to significant governmental measures being implemented to contain the COVID-19 pandemic or treat its impact, including travel restrictions, the shutdown of businesses and quarantines, among others, which may limit our ability to have meetings with potential investors or affect the ability of a potential target company’s personnel, vendors and service providers to negotiate and consummate an initial Business Combination in a timely manner. Our ability to consummate an initial Business Combination may also be dependent on the ability to raise additional equity and debt financing, which may be impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and any resulting market downturn.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had $954,974 of cash and working capital of $690,771.
We intend to use all the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (excluding deferred underwriting commissions) to complete our Business Combination. We may withdraw interest to pay our taxes. To the extent that equity or third-party debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
Further, our Sponsor, officers, directors, or their respective affiliates may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If we complete a Business Combination, we will repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans will be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon the consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. To date, we had no borrowings under Working Capital Loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs for identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence, and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our Business Combination. To fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with an intended Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required (as described under “Working Capital Loans”). Prior to the completion of our Business Combination, we do not expect to seek loans from parties other than our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor as we do not believe third parties will be willing to loan such funds and provide a waiver against any and all rights to seek access to funds in our Trust Account.
Going Concern and Management’s Plan
As of December 31, 2021, we had investments held in the Trust Account of $265,155,619, principally invested in U.S. government securities. Interest income on the balance in the Trust Account may be used by us to pay taxes, and to pay up to $100,000 of any dissolution expenses. As of December 31, 2021, there were no working capital loan amounts outstanding, current liabilities of approximately $604,474 and cash of approximately $954,974.
In connection with the Company’s assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the Company’s business plan is dependent on the completion of a Business Combination and the Company’s cash and working capital as of December 31, 2021 are not sufficient to complete its planned activities. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of America (“GAAP”), which contemplate continuation of the Company as a going concern.
We have incurred and expect to continue to incur significant costs in pursuit of our acquisition plans. In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations, we determined that we do not currently have adequate liquidity to sustain operations.
As of December 31, 2021, we had $954,974 of cash and working capital of $690,771, which are not sufficient to complete our planned activities. While we believe we have sufficient access to additional sources of capital if necessary, there is no current commitment on the part of any financing source to provide additional capital and no assurances can be provided that such additional capital will ultimately be available. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. There is no assurance that our plans to raise additional capital (to the extent ultimately necessary) or to consummate a Business Combination will be successful or successful within the Combination Period.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
In March 2021, the Company’s Sponsor paid $25,000, or approximately $0.003 per share, to cover certain of the offering and formation costs in exchange for an aggregate of 7,187,500 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share, of which 937,500 shares were subject to forfeiture depending on the extent to which the underwriter’s over-allotment option was exercised.
On September 3, 2021, the underwriter partially exercised the over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,514,780 Units. On September 16, 2021, the remaining time on the over-allotment option expired unused. Consequently, 558,805 shares were forfeited for no consideration.
The Company’s initial shareholders have agreed not to transfer, assign or sell any of their founder shares and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon conversion thereof until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination and (B) subsequent to the initial Business Combination, (x) if the closing price of the Class A ordinary shares equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, share capitalizations, reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, or (y) the date on which the Company completes a liquidation, merger, share exchange, reorganization or other similar transaction that results in all of the public shareholders having the right to exchange their ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Promissory Note
The Sponsor has agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 to be used for a portion of the expenses of the IPO. These loans were non-interest bearing, unsecured and due at the earlier of December 31, 2021, or the closing of the IPO. During the period from March 11, 2021 (inception) through the closing of the IPO, the Company borrowed $167,251 under the promissory note. The Company fully repaid the amount at the closing of the IPO on August 2, 2021.
Advances from Related Parties
The Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor occasionally incurs expenses on behalf of the Company. The liability is non-interest bearing and due on demand; as of December 31 , 2022, there was no amount payable. During the period from March 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2022, the Company received advances from related parties of $150,000. These advances which were non-interest bearing and due on demand, were fully repaid on September 30, 2021.
Working Capital Loans
To finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (the “Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes the initial Business Combination, the Company will repay the Working Capital Loans. If the initial Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds from the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Up to $1,500,000 of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. Such warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. At December 31, 2022, there were no Working Capital Loans outstanding.
Commitments and Contingencies
Registration Rights
The holders of the (i) founder shares (which were issued in a private placement prior to the closing of the IPO), (ii) Private Placement Warrants (which were issued in a private placement simultaneously with the closing of the IPO) and (iii) Private Placement Warrants (that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans) will have registration rights to require the Company to register a sale of any of the securities held by them pursuant to a registration rights agreement to be signed prior to or on the effective date of the IPO. The holders of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that the Company register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed after the completion of the initial Business Combination. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriter’s Agreement
The underwriter had a 45-day option from the date of the IPO to purchase up to an additional 3,750,000 Units to cover over-allotments, if any.
On September 3, 2021, the underwriter partially exercised its over-allotment option to purchase an additional 1,514,780 Units generating aggregate gross proceeds of $15,147,800 and incurring $302,956 in cash underwriting fees.
On September 16, 2021, the remaining time on the over-allotment option expired unused.
The underwriter was paid a cash underwriting discount of two percent (2%) of the gross proceeds of the IPO (including the Over-Allotment Units), or $5,302,956. Additionally, the underwriter will be entitled to a deferred underwriting discount of 3.5% or $9,280,173 of the gross proceeds of the IPO held in the Trust Account upon the completion of the Company’s initial Business Combination subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities as at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following critical accounting policies:
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Our derivative instruments are recorded at fair value as of the IPO on August 2, 2021, and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statement of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined the warrants are
derivative instruments. As the warrants meet the definition of a derivative, the Warrants are measured at fair value at issuance and at each reporting date in accordance with ASC 820, “Fair Value Measurement”, with changes in fair value recognized in the statement of operations in the period of change.
Warrant Instruments
We account for the 13,666,666 warrants issued in connection with the IPO and Private Placement and an additional 504,927 Public Warrants and 201,971 Private Placement Warrants with the exercise of the underwriter’s over-allotment option, in accordance with the guidance contained in FASB ASC 815 “Derivatives and Hedging”. Under FASB ASC 815 the warrants do not meet the criteria for equity treatment and must be recorded as a liability. Accordingly, we classify the warrant instrument as a liability at fair value and adjust the instrument to fair value at each reporting period. This liability will be re-measured at each balance sheet date until the warrants are exercised or expire, and any change in fair value will be recognized in the Company’s statement of operations. The fair value of warrants will be estimated using an internal valuation model. The valuation model utilizes inputs and other assumptions and may not be reflective of the price at which they can be settled. Such warrant classification is also subject to re-evaluation at each reporting period.
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholder’s equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
Net Income Per Share
We have two classes of ordinary shares, Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Earnings and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Private and public warrants to purchase 14,373,564 Class A ordinary shares at $11.50 per share were issued on August 2, 2021, and September 3, 2021. No warrants were exercised during the period from March 11, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. The calculation of diluted income per common share does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the (i) IPO, (ii) exercise of over-allotment, and (iii) Private Placement, since the exercise of the warrants is contingent upon the occurrence of future events. As a result, diluted net income per ordinary share is the same as basic net income per ordinary share for the periods. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Income Taxes
The Company follows the asset and liability method of accounting for income taxes under FASB ASC 740, “Income Taxes” (“ASC 740”). Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the estimated future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statements carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that included the enactment date. Valuation allowances are established, when necessary, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount expected to be realized.
ASC 740 prescribes a recognition threshold and a measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of tax positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. For those benefits to be recognized, a tax position must be more likely than not to be sustained upon examination by taxing authorities. The Company’s management determined that the Cayman Islands is the Company’s major tax jurisdiction. The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits as income tax expense. As of December 31, 2021, there were no unrecognized tax benefits and no amounts accrued for interest and penalties. The Company is currently not aware of any issues under review that could result in significant payments, accruals or material deviation from
its position. The Company’s management does not expect that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits will materially change over the next twelve months.
The Company is an exempted Cayman Islands company with no connection to any other taxable jurisdiction and is presently not subject to income taxes or income tax filing requirements in the Cayman Islands or the United States. As such, the Company’s tax provision was zero for the period presented.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our management does not believe that there are any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our balance sheet.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.