ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. This discussion may contain forward-looking statements based upon current expectations that involve risks and uncertainties, including those set forth under the heading “Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Our actual results and the timing of selected events discussed below could differ materially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward-looking statements.
Overview
Molecular Templates is a clinical-stage biopharmaceutical company focused on the discovery and development of targeted biologic therapeutics. Our proprietary drug platform technology, known as engineered toxin bodies, or ETBs, leverages the resident biology of a genetically engineered form of Shiga-like Toxin A subunit, or SLTA to create novel therapies with potent and differentiated mechanisms of action for cancer and other serious diseases.
Business
ETBs use a genetically engineered version of the SLTA. In its wild-type form, Shiga-like Toxin or “SLT” is thought to induce its own entry into a cell when proximal to the cell surface membrane, self-route to the cytosol, and enzymatically and irreversibly shut down protein synthesis via ribosome inactivation. SLTA is normally coupled to its cognate Shiga-like Toxin B subunit, or SLTB, to target the CD77 cell surface marker, a non-internalizing glycosphingolipid. In our scaffold, a genetically engineered SLTA subunit with no cognate SLTB component is genetically fused to antibody domains or fragments specific to a target, resulting in a biologic therapeutic that can identify the particular target and specifically kill the cell. The antibody domains may be substituted with other antibody domains having different specificities to allow for the rapid development of new drugs to selected targets in cancer and other serious diseases.
ETBs combine the specificity of an antibody with SLTA’s potent mechanism of cell destruction. Based on the disease setting, we have created ETBs that have reduced immunogenicity and are capable of delivering additional payloads into a target cell. Immunogenicity is the ability of a foreign substance to provoke an immune response in a host. ETBs have relatively predictable pharmacokinetic, or PK, profiles and can be rapidly screened for desired activity in robust cell-based and animal-model assays. Because SLTA can induce internalization against non- and poorly-internalizing receptors, the universe of targets for ETBs should be substantially larger than that seen with antibody drug conjugates, or ADCs, which are not likely to be effective if the target does not readily internalize the ADC payload.
ETBs have a differentiated mechanism of cell kill in cancer therapeutics (the inhibition of protein synthesis via ribosome destruction), and we have preclinical and clinical data demonstrating the utility of these molecules in chemotherapy-refractory cancers. ETBs have shown good tolerability in multiple animal models as well as a generally favorable tolerability profile in our clinical studies to date. We believe the target specificity of ETBs, their ability to self-internalize, their potent and differentiated mechanism of cell kill and their tolerability profile provide opportunities for the clinical development of these agents to address multiple cancer types.
Our initial approach to drug development in oncology involves the selection of lead compounds to validated targets in cancer. We have developed ETBs for various targets, including PD-L1, HER2, and CD38. PD-L1 is central to immune checkpoint pathways and is a validated target expressed in a variety of solid tumor cancers. HER2 is clinically validated as a target for the treatment of solid tumors including breast and gastric cancer. CD38 has been validated as a meaningful clinical target in the treatment of multiple myeloma.
We filed an IND for MT-6402, our ETB targeting PD-L1, in December 2020 and the IND was accepted in January 2021. A Phase 1 study of MT-6402 in PD-1/PD-L1 antibody relapsed/refractory patients began in July 2021 at a starting dose of 16.0 μg/kg. The Phase 1 study for MT-6402 is a multi-center, open-label, dose escalation and dose expansion trial in the United States. Patients with confirmed PD-L1 expressing tumors or confirmed PD-L1 expression in the tumor microenvironment are eligible for enrollment. Following a review of the safety data from cohort 2 (24.0 μg/kg), patient enrollment in cohort 3 initiated at a dose of 32.0 μg/kg. Following determination of the maximum tolerated dose (MTD), expansion cohorts are planned to evaluate MT-6402 as a monotherapy in tumor-specific and PD-L1 positive basket tumor cohorts.
As of March 2022, 12 patients have been treated across two dose escalation cohorts of 16.0 μg/kg and 24 μg/kg in the MT-6402 study of patients with relapsed/refractory tumors that express PD-L1. Six patients remain on study with five patients awaiting their first efficacy assessment. Regarding safety, no dose limiting toxicities (DLTs) were observed in the six patients treated in the first cohort of 16.0 μg/kg and one DLT of grade 3 dermatitis was observed in one patient in the second cohort at 24.0 μg/kg. This patient had development of a grade 3 dermatitis of two days duration which began rapidly, 6 days after cycle 1, dose 1. The patient was treated with systemic steroids and treatment with MT-6402 was held until cycle 2, dose 1, whereupon the patient was re-challenged at the same dose without development of recurrent dermatitis. We continue to observe pharmacodynamic (PD) effects including monocyte depletion and T cell activation, potentially in a dose-dependent manner. Regarding efficacy, one patient in cohort 1 with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) had evaluable-only multiple sites of bone disease that appeared to have resolved on bone scan with only one remaining site which showed decreased
uptake. This patient remained on MT-6402 up to cycle 8 when increased uptake was noted on bone scan and MT-6402 treatment was discontinued.
In November 2021, MT-6402 was granted Fast Track Designation for the treatment of patients with advanced NSCLC expressing PD-L1. For MT-6402, dose escalation in the Phase 1 study continues as planned.
We filed an IND for MT-5111, our ETB targeting HER2, in March 2019 and the IND was accepted in April 2019. We began dosing study subjects in a Phase I study of MT-5111 for the treatment of HER2-positive cancers in the fourth quarter of 2019. The ongoing Phase I study has two parts: Part 1 is dose escalation and Part 2 is dose expansion, which will begin when a MTD is established in Part 1. We most recently provided an update on this study in January 2022. All of the following information on the Phase I study for MT-5111 was as of that update. 30 patients, with a median of 4 prior lines of therapy and a median of 2 prior HER2-targeting regimens, have been treated with MT-5111; patients with breast cancer received a median of 5.5 prior lines of therapy, 4 of which contained HER2-targeting agents (metastatic breast cancer n=11, metastatic biliary tract carcinoma n=6, metastatic gastric/gastroesophageal n=4, metastatic colorectal cancer n=3, metastatic NSCLC n=3, metastatic pancreatic cancer n=2, and metastatic uterine cancer n=1). Eight cohorts (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.5, 6.75, 10.0, and 13.0 μg/kg/week) have been successfully completed and enrollment for the ninth cohort (17.0 μg/kg) has been initiated. Pharmacokinetic (PK) data confirm the predicted human PK based on non-human primate studies. PK modeling has suggested that doses equal to or greater than 10.0 μg/kg are likely needed for efficacy. To date, we have not observed any cases of capillary leak syndrome (CLS) (any grade) or significant cardiotoxicity in human subjects who have been dosed with MT-5111.
As of our January 2022 update, two patients experienced grade 1 troponin elevations without any corresponding symptoms, EKG changes, deterioration in cardiac function on echocardiogram, or other clinical manifestations of cardiac toxicity. No grade 4 or 5 AEs were reported. No DLTs were observed. One patient with metastatic breast cancer in cohort 2 (1.0 µg/kg) remained on treatment for 10 cycles with stable disease; although the patient had unmeasurable disease by RECIST criteria, the patient had three sub-centimeter hepatic lesions that disappeared at the end of cycle 8 before the patient discontinued at cycle 10. This patient had received three prior HER-2 targeting regimens which initially included pertuzumab plus trastuzumab followed by trastuzumab and TDM1 as monotherapies. The HER2-positive breast cancer expansion cohort initiated in November 2021 at a dose of 10.0 μg/kg. Dose escalation will continue to determine the MTD, while the breast cancer expansion cohort collects efficacy and safety data.
We are encouraged by the safety profile to date in these heavily pretreated subjects and believes the observed PK in patients suggests potentially clinically active dose levels.
Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited (“Takeda”) filed an IND for TAK-169, now known as MT-0169, our jointly discovered ETB targeting CD38, in May 2019 and the IND was accepted in June 2019, and Takeda initiated a Phase 1 study in relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma in the fourth quarter of 2019. In December 2019, the FDA granted Orphan Drug Designation to MT-0169 for the treatment of multiple myeloma. Phase I dosing for MT-0169 began in the first quarter of 2020, was paused in March 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic and was re-initiated during the fourth quarter of 2020.
In April 2021, we received a notice of termination from Takeda for the Development Collaboration and Exclusive License Agreement by and between the Company and Takeda, dated September 18, 2018, as amended (the “Collaboration Agreement”) to co-develop one or more products incorporating or comprised of one or more SLT-A fusion proteins targeting CD38 for the treatment of patients with diseases such as multiple myeloma. Following receipt of the termination notice from Takeda, we notified Takeda of our intent to assume full rights to MT-0169, by entering into an agreement for such rights pursuant to the termination provisions of the Collaboration Agreement. In August 2021, we assumed full rights to MT-0169, including full control of MT-0169 clinical development, per the terms of the terminated Collaboration Agreement. Following the transfer of the full MT-0169 rights to us, we will owe low-single digit royalties on future net sales of MT-0169 to Takeda as well as to certain third-party licensors. We will also owe certain third-party licensors potential aggregate clinical and regulatory milestone payments of up to $22.25 million.
Upon approval of a revised protocol, we will continue to conduct the ongoing Phase 1 study for MT-0169 in relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma and non-Hodgkins lymphoma with dose escalation planned through six dose cohorts, in which the first patient was dosed in February 2020. Patient enrollment in the 50 μg/kg cohort in relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma originally resumed following the transfer of the IND to us in August 2021. As of our November 2021 update, five multiple myeloma patients have been treated to date, with CD38+ NHL patients to be dosed in addition to myeloma patients as part of a protocol amendment. Two cardiac adverse events were observed that meet criteria for DLTs. Both evaluations were triggered by asymptomatic elevations in high-sensitivity troponin values. As previously disclosed, the first DLT was an asymptomatic, rapidly reversible episode of myocarditis that did not require treatment. The second DLT was an asymptomatic, reversible non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. We believe both DLTs may be due to activity against low CD38-expressing cells in the cardiac endothelium. We have not seen evidence of any clinically relevant cardiac adverse event such as myocarditis or cardiomyopathy in any other ETB program (MT-3724, MT-6402, MT-5111) at any dose.
A more rapid and complete elimination of CD38+ NK cells (a known PD marker for CD38-targeting therapeutics) was observed in the first five patients than had been predicted from in vitro and in vivo models, suggesting that the starting dose of 50 mcg/kg is higher than required.
A revised protocol was submitted to explore a lower dose of MT-0169 to reduce the risk of adverse events observed at the initial dose and to enable patients to continue MT-0169 therapy for a longer duration that may drive tumor benefit.
We expect to provide periodic updates on MT-6402, MT-5111 and MT-0169 throughout 2022. We continue to advance our pipeline of next-generation ETBs targeting CTLA-4, TIGIT, TROP2, BCMA, SLAMF-7, and CD45 with a potential IND filing for its CTLA-4 program in the second half of 2022.
We have built up multiple core competencies around the creation and development of ETBs. We developed the ETB technology in-house and continue to make iterative improvements in the scaffold and identify new uses of the technology. We also developed the proprietary process for manufacturing ETBs under Current Good Manufacturing Process, or cGMP regulatory standards and continue to make improvements to our manufacturing processes.
We have conducted multiple cGMP manufacturing runs with our compounds and believe this process is robust and could support commercial production with gross margins that are similar to those seen with antibodies.
Impact of COVID-19
In March 2020, the outbreak of COVID-19 caused by a novel strain of the coronavirus was recognized as a pandemic by the World Health Organization. It has impacted, and is continuing to impact, all aspects of society, including the operation of the healthcare system and other business and economic activity worldwide. The COVID-19 pandemic, and other similar outbreaks of contagious diseases, may adversely impact our business, financial condition, and results of operations. For example, we and the third-party clinical trial sites or investigators involved in our current and future clinical trials may experience significant interruptions or delays as a result of this pandemic, and these could impact the conduct of our clinical trials and our ability to complete them in a timely manner or at all, which in turn could delay and/or negatively impact the regulatory review and approval of our drug or biologic candidates.
We are carefully and continually evaluating the potential individual patient risk associated with continuing to enroll in our existing clinical studies during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, in accordance with FDA and foreign regulatory authorities’ recommendations for clinical trials. Our Phase 1 studies for MT-6402 and MT-5111 are open and able to treat enrolled subjects and screen new subjects. A revised protocol was submitted to explore a lower dose of MT-0169 to reduce the risk of adverse events observed at the initial dose and to enable patients to continue MT-0169 therapy for a longer duration that may drive tumor benefit.
The decision to continue our ongoing studies throughout the COVID-19 pandemic was predicated on the treating investigator determining that the potential benefit to the patient of investigational therapy outweighs the potential risk of contracting COVID-19 as the subjects enrolled in our trials had relapsed or refractory incurable malignancies with few or no standard-of-care therapeutic options and limited life expectancy.
Overall, COVID-19 led to a significant slowdown in the pace of site initiations and patient enrollment into our clinical trials. The degree of disruption was, and continues to be, variable by geography and individual clinical site. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a significant slowdown in the pace of site initiations and patient enrollment across the MT-0169 program, which had a temporary pause in the activation of new study sites and new patient enrollment (along with most of Takeda’s other early-stage studies) due to COVID-19 and was reinitiated in the fourth quarter of 2020. To date, screening and enrollment for the MT-5111 Phase I study, which remained open throughout the pandemic, has been less adversely affected than the MT-0169 study was during 2020 and throughout 2021, prior to the submission of a revised protocol. Our Phase 1 study of MT-6402 began in July 2021. To date, we have been able to continue to work at our cGMP manufacturing facility and laboratories without significant interruption from COVID-19. As a result, manufacturing of product supply for clinical trials and research activities to support advancement of our preclinical pipeline (including partnered programs) have not been adversely affected by COVID-19 to date.
The extent to which the COVID-19 pandemic may impact our business, financial condition and results of operations will depend on the manner in which this pandemic continues to evolve and future developments in response thereto, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted with confidence and which may include, among other things, the ultimate severity, intensity and duration of this pandemic (including any resurgences); impact of the new COVID-19 variants, the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines; governmental, business or other actions that have been, or will be, taken in response to this pandemic, including restrictions on travel and mobility, business closures and imposition of social distancing measures; impacts of the pandemic on the vendors or distribution channels in our or our partners’ supply chain and ability to continue to manufacture our investigational products; impacts of the pandemic on the conduct of our clinical trials, including with respect to enrollment rates, availability of investigators and clinical trial sites or monitoring of data; and impacts of the pandemic on the regulatory agencies with which we interact in the development, review, approval and commercialization of our therapeutic products.
Collaboration Agreements
Previous Agreements
On September 18, 2018, we entered into the Collaboration Agreement with Takeda for the development and commercialization of products incorporating or comprised of one or more CD38 SLT-A fusion proteins (“Licensed Products”) for the treatment of patients with diseases such as multiple myeloma.
In April 2021, we received a notice of termination from Takeda for the Collaboration Agreement. Following receipt of the termination notice from Takeda, we notified Takeda of our intent to assume full rights to MT-0169, a second-generation ETB targeting CD38, by entering into an agreement for such rights pursuant to the termination provisions of the Collaboration Agreement. The termination of the Collaboration Agreement was effective in August 2021. As of the same date, we assumed full rights to MT-0169, including full control of MT-0169 clinical development, per the terms of the terminated Collaboration Agreement. Following the transfer of the full MT-0169 rights to us, we will owe low-single digit royalties on future net sales of MT-0169 to Takeda as well as to certain third-party licensors. We will also owe certain third-party licensors potential aggregate clinical and regulatory milestone payments of up to $22.25 million.
On November 18, 2019, we entered into a Master Collaboration Agreement (“Vertex Collaboration Agreement”) with Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated (“Vertex”), in which the parties agreed to enter into a strategic research collaboration to leverage our ETB technology platform to discover and develop novel targeted biologic therapies for applications outside of oncology.
In October 2021, we received a notice of termination from Vertex for the Vertex Collaboration Agreement. The termination of the Vertex Collaboration Agreement was effective October 29, 2021. There are no ongoing activities or economic obligations in connection with the Vertex Collaboration Agreement
In June 2017, we entered into a Multi-Target Collaboration and License Agreement with Takeda (the “Takeda Multi-Target Agreement”), pursuant to which we agreed to collaborate with Takeda to identify, generate and evaluate ETBs, against certain targets designated by Takeda. In March 2022, following our request to bring the agreement to an end, we and Takeda mutually agreed to terminate the Takeda Multi-Target Agreement. As a result of the termination, we regained full rights to pursue the targets worked on under the Takeda Multi-Target Agreement. There are no ongoing activities or economic obligations in connection with the Takeda Multi-Target Agreement.
Bristol Myers Squibb Company
On February 10, 2021, we entered into a Collaboration Agreement (“BMS Collaboration Agreement”) with Bristol Myers Squibb Company (“Bristol Myers Squibb”), in which we and Bristol Myers Squibb agreed to enter into a strategic research collaboration to leverage our ETB technology platform to discover and develop novel products containing ETBs directed to multiple targets.
Pursuant to the BMS Collaboration Agreement, Bristol Myers Squibb paid us an upfront payment of $70.0 million. We might receive near term and development and regulatory milestone payments of up to an additional $874.5 million and will be eligible to receive up to an additional $450.0 million in milestone payments upon the achievement of certain sales milestone events. We will also be entitled to receive, subject to certain reductions, tiered royalties ranging from mid-single digits up to mid-teens as percentages of calendar year net sales, if any, on any licensed product.
We will be responsible for conducting the research activities through the designation, if any, of one or more development candidates. Upon the exercise of its option for a development candidate, Bristol Myers Squibb will be responsible for all development, manufacturing, regulatory and commercialization activities with respect to that development candidate, subject to the terms and conditions of the BMS Collaboration Agreement.
For more information concerning this collaboration agreement, refer to Note 3, “Research and Development Agreements” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Grant Agreements
CPRIT Grant Contract
In September 2018, we entered into a Cancer Research Grant Contract (the “CD38 CPRIT Agreement”) with the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas (“CPRIT”), which was extended in October 2021, in connection with a grant of approximately $15.2 million awarded by CPRIT to us in November 2016 to fund research of a cancer therapy involving an ETB that is targeting CD38 (the “Award”). Pursuant to the CD38 CPRIT Agreement, we might also use such funds to develop a replacement CD38 targeting ETB, with or without a partner. The Award is contingent upon funds being available during the term of the CD38 CPRIT Agreement and subject to CPRIT’s ability to perform its obligations under the CD38 CPRIT Agreement as well as our progress towards achievement of specified milestones, among other contractual requirements.
Subject to the terms of the CD38 CPRIT Agreement, full ownership of any CPRIT funded technology and CPRIT funded intellectual property rights developed pursuant to the CD38 CPRIT Agreement will be retained by us, our Collaborators (as defined in the CD38 CPRIT Agreement) and, to the extent applicable, any participating third party (the “Project Results”). With respect to any Project Results, we agreed to grant to CPRIT a nonexclusive, irrevocable, royalty-free, perpetual, worldwide license, solely for academic, research and other non-commercial purposes, under the Project Results and to exploit any necessary additional intellectual property rights, subject to certain exclusions.
We will pay to CPRIT, during the term of the CD38 CPRIT Agreement, certain payments equal to a percentage of revenue ranging from the low- to mid-single digits. These payments will continue up to and until CPRIT receives an aggregate amount of 400% of the sum of all monies paid to us by CPRIT under the CD38 CPRIT Agreement. If we are required to obtain a license from a third party to sell any such product, the revenue sharing percentages might be reduced. In addition, once we pay CPRIT 400% of the monies we have received under the CD38 CPRIT Agreement, we will continue to pay CPRIT a revenue-sharing percentage of 0.5%.
The CD38 CPRIT Agreement will terminate, with certain obligations extending beyond termination, on the earlier of (a) May 31, 2022 or (b) the occurrence of any of the following events: (i) by mutual written consent of the parties, (ii) by CPRIT for an Event of Default (as defined in the CD38 CPRIT Agreement) by us, (iii) by CPRIT if allocated funds should become legally unavailable during the term of the CD38 CPRIT Agreement and CPRIT is unable to obtain additional funds or (iv) by us for convenience. CPRIT might approve a no cost extension for the CD38 CPRIT Agreement for a period not to exceed six months after the termination date if additional time is required to ensure adequate completion of the approved project, subject to the terms and conditions of the CD38 CPRIT Agreement.
For more information about our grant agreements, please see Note 3, “Research and Development Agreements” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Financial Operations Overview
Revenue
To date, we have not generated any revenue from product sales to customers. We do not expect to receive any revenue from any ETB candidates that we or our current or future collaboration partners develop, including MT-6402, MT-5111, MT-0169, and other pre-clinical ETB candidates, until we obtain regulatory approval and commercialize such biologics. Our revenue consists principally of collaboration revenue and grant revenue.
Research and Development revenue primarily relates to our collaboration agreement with Bristol Myers Squibb which is accounted for using the percentage-of-completion cost-to-cost method.
Grant revenue relates to our CPRIT grant for a CD38 ETB (MT-0169). CPRIT grant funds for MT-0169 are provided to us in arrears as cost reimbursement where revenue is recognized as allowable costs are incurred. Revenue recognized in excess of amounts collected are recorded as unbilled revenue.
For more information about our revenue recognition policy, please see Note 1, “Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses consist principally of:
•
salaries for research and development staff and related expenses, including stock-based compensation expenses;
•
costs for current good manufacturing practices (“cGMP”) manufacturing of drug substances and drug products by contract manufacturers;
•
fees and other costs paid to clinical trials sites and clinical research organizations, (“CROs”), in connection with the performance of clinical trials and preclinical testing;
•
costs for consultants and contract research;
•
costs of laboratory supplies and small equipment, including maintenance; and
•
depreciation of long-lived assets.
Our research and development expenses may vary substantially from period to period based on the timing of our research and development activities, including the initiation and enrollment of subjects in clinical trials and manufacture of drug or biologic materials for clinical trials. We expect research and development expenses to increase as we advance the clinical development of MT-6402, MT-5111, and/or MT-0169 and further advance the research and development of our pre-clinical ETB candidates, and other earlier stage drugs or biologics. The successful development of our ETB candidates is highly uncertain. At this time, we cannot reasonably estimate the nature, timing and costs of the efforts that will be necessary to complete the development of, or the period, if any, in which material net cash inflows may commence from any of our ETB candidates. This is due to numerous risks and uncertainties associated with developing drugs, including the uncertainty of:
•
the scope, rate of progress and expense of our research and development activities;
•
clinical trials and early-stage results;
•
the terms and timing of regulatory approvals; and
•
the ability to market, commercialize and achieve market acceptance for MT-6402, MT-5111, MT-0169, or any other ETB candidate that we or our current or future collaboration partners may develop in the future.
Any of these variables with respect to the development of MT-6402, MT-5111, MT-0169, or any other ETB candidate that we may develop could result in a significant change in the costs and timing associated with the development of such candidates. For example, if the FDA, the European Medicines Agency (“EMA”) or other regulatory authority were to require us to conduct pre-clinical and clinical studies beyond those which we currently anticipate will be required for the completion of clinical development or if we experience significant delays in enrollment in any clinical trials, we could be required to expend significant additional financial resources and time on the completion of our clinical development programs.
General and Administrative Expenses
Our general and administrative expenses consist principally of:
•
salaries for employees other than research and development staff, including stock-based compensation expenses;
•
professional fees for auditors and other consulting expenses related to general and administrative activities;
•
professional fees for legal services related to the protection and maintenance of our intellectual property and regulatory compliance;
•
cost of facilities, communication and office expenses;
•
information technology services; and
•
depreciation of long-lived assets.
We expect that our general and administrative costs will increase in the future as our business expands and we increase our headcount to support the expected growth in our operating activities. Additionally, we expect these expenses will also increase in the future as we incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. These increases will likely include additional legal fees, accounting and audit fees, management board and supervisory board liability insurance premiums and costs related to investor relations. In addition, we expect to grant stock-based compensation awards to key management personnel and other employees.
Other Income (Expense)
Other income (expense) mainly includes interest income earned on our cash and marketable securities balances held, and interest expense on our outstanding borrowings.
Results of Operations
Revenues
The table below summarizes our revenues as follows (in thousands):
Research and Development Revenue - from related party
The increase in research and development revenue - from related parties for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to research and development revenues that were recognized associated with the Takeda Development and License Agreement (MT-0169).
For more information about our collaboration agreements, please see Note 3, “Research and Development Agreements” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development Revenue - other
The increase in research and development revenue - other for the year ended December 31, 2021 is a result of recognizing revenue associated with the Vertex Collaboration Agreement.
For more information about our collaboration agreements, please see Note 3, “Research and Development Agreements” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Grant Revenue
The decrease in grant revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the Company incurring no expenses for the CD38 CPRIT Agreement grant during the year.
Operating Expenses
The table below summarizes our operating expenses as follows (in thousands):
Research and Development Expenses
The table below summarizes our research and development expenses as follows (in thousands):
Research and development (“R&D”) expenses decreased $8.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. This decrease is primarily due to decreased program costs related to our collaboration agreements and is partially offset by increases in headcount.
Program costs decreased $16.9 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The programs driving the decrease were $12.8 million for MT-3724, $5.7 million for MT-0169, $1.0 million for MT-6402, $0.5 million for SLAMF7, $0.5 million for other programs, $0.4 million for Vertex, $0.1 million for MT-5111 and $0.1 million for Multi-Target which is partially offset by an increase of $2.5 million for CTLA-4, $1.1 million for BMS and $0.6 million for CD-20.
Headcount increased in R&D by 5% from December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021 in support of our clinical trials and pipeline development. This staffing increase resulted in an increase in employee compensation costs of $8.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, respectively.
Laboratory costs increased by $0.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, which is due to the expansion of lab facilities, including small equipment and supplies. The increase in expense reflects the costs of outfitting, supplying and maintaining these facilities.
Other R&D costs decreased by $0.2 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to reduction in recruiting fees.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses increased by $7.4 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020. The main driver of this increase being payroll and related costs due to increased headcount.
Nonoperating activities
The table below summarizes our nonoperating activities as follows (in thousands):
Interest and Other Income and Interest Expense
The decrease in interest and other income for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to lower interest related to our marketable securities.
The increase in interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to interest paid for our debt holdings.
Debt Extinguishment
The decrease in debt extinguishment for the year ended December 31, 2021 was due to the repayment of the Perceptive Credit Facility during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Asset Loss
In connection with the December 2020 sale of Evofosfamide, the Company recorded a loss on assets held for sale of $2.0 million which was the difference between the carrying value and the consideration received.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources of Funds
We have devoted substantially all of our resources to developing our ETB candidates and platform technology, building our intellectual property portfolio, developing our supply chain, conducting business planning, raising capital and providing for general and administrative support for these operations. We plan to increase our research and development expenses for the foreseeable future as we continue to advance MT-6402, MT-5111, MT-0169 and our earlier-stage pre-clinical programs. At this time, due to the inherently unpredictable nature of preclinical and clinical development and given the early stage of our programs and drug or biologic candidates, we cannot reasonably estimate the costs we will incur and the timelines that will be required to complete development, obtain marketing approval and commercialize our drugs or biologics, if and when approved. For the same reasons, we are also unable to predict when, if ever, we will generate revenue from product sales or whether, or when, if ever, we may achieve profitability. Clinical and preclinical development timelines, the probability of success, and development costs can differ materially from expectations.
In addition, we cannot forecast which drugs or biologics, if and when approved, may be subject to future collaborations, when such arrangements will be secured, if at all, and to what degree such arrangements would affect our development plans and capital requirements.
We expect to incur substantial additional losses in the future as we expand our research and development cost-sharing activities with our collaboration partner. We believe such investment is strategically aligned with increasing the value of our technology. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we incurred net losses of $83.0 million and $104.9 million, respectively. At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $352.1 million.
To date, we have financed our operations through public offerings of common and preferred stock, private placements of equity securities, a reverse merger, and upfront and milestone payments received from our collaboration agreements, as well as funding from governmental bodies and bank and bridge loans.
In May 2020, we entered into a debt financing facility for up to $45.0 million with K2 HealthVentures, a healthcare-focused specialty finance company (the “K2 Loan and Security Agreement”). The K2 Loan and Security Agreement is drawable in three tranches subject to the satisfaction of the terms and conditions therein. The first tranche of $15.0 million was drawn at the initial closing. The second tranche of $20.0 million was drawn in May 2021, at our option and was subject to the achievement of certain clinical milestones, which we had achieved. The third tranche of $10.0 million was available subject to lender consent and certain additional conditions prior to December 31, 2021. Pursuant to the terms of the K2 Loan and Security Agreement, the principal accrues interest at an annual rate equal to the greater of 8.45% or the sum of the Prime Rate plus 5.2%. Monthly payments commenced on July 1, 2020 and payments will be interest only until July 1, 2023. Thereafter, the loan shall amortize monthly such that the principal amount of the loan and interest accrued thereon shall be fully amortized by the loan’s maturity date of June 1, 2024.
In July 2020, we raised gross proceeds of approximately $50.0 million through at-the-market sales (“ATM”) of our common stock pursuant to our then current ATM facility. We sold approximately 3.6 million shares of our common stock at a purchase price of $12.00 per share and 0.5 million shares at a purchase price of $12.70, in each case the market price at the time of sale. These sales constituted the full available dollar amount under such ATM facility and, with such completion, the ATM facility terminated.
In August 2020, we filed a universal shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-242078) with the SEC, which was declared effective on August 17, 2020. In August 2020, we entered into a sales agreement (the “Sales Agreement’) with Cowen and Company, LLC (“Cowen”), pursuant to which we may offer and sell to or through Cowen acting as agent and/or principal shares of our common stock having an aggregate offering price of up to $100,000,000. Under the Sales Agreement, Cowen may sell the shares by any method permitted by law and deemed to be an “at the market” offering as defined in Rule 415 of the Securities Act. To date, we have not sold any shares under the Sales Agreement.
In February 2021, we completed a public offering of 6,000,000 shares of common stock at an offering price of $12.65 per share. We received net proceeds of approximately $71.1 million, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and estimated offering expenses payable by us.
We expect to incur significant expenses and operating losses for the foreseeable future as we advance our lead ETB candidates through clinical trials, progress our pipeline ETB candidates from discovery through pre-clinical development, and seek regulatory approval and pursue commercialization of our ETB candidates. In addition, if we obtain regulatory approval for any of our ETB candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product manufacturing, marketing, sales and distribution. In addition, we may incur expenses in connection with the in-license or acquisition of additional technology to augment or enable development of future ETB candidates. Furthermore, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company, including significant legal, accounting, investor relations and other expenses that we did not incur as a private company.
As a result, we will need additional financing to support our continuing operations. Until such time as we can generate significant revenue from product sales, if ever, we expect to finance our operations through a combination of public or private equity and debt financings or other sources, which may include collaborations with third parties. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. Our inability to raise capital as and when needed would have a negative impact on our financial condition and our ability to pursue our business strategy. We will need to generate significant revenue to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities of $152.0 million and $93.9 million, respectively. We expect that our existing cash and cash equivalents will enable us to fund our operating expenses and capital expenditure requirements into the fourth quarter of 2023. We have based this estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong, and we may use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect.
Cash Flows
Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The table below summarizes our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
The increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily due to decreased deferred revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021.
The decrease in net cash used in investing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was primarily due to investment activity in marketable securities.
The increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily due to proceeds from issuance of common stock and debt during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Operating and Capital Expenditure Requirements
We have not achieved profitability since our inception and had an accumulated deficit of $352.1 million at December 31, 2021. We expect to continue to incur significant operating losses for the foreseeable future as we continue our research and development efforts and seek to obtain regulatory approval and commercialization of our ETB candidates.
We expect our expenses to increase substantially in connection with our ongoing development activities related to MT-6402, MT-5111, and MT-0169, our collaboration with Bristol Myers Squibb, our pre-clinical programs, and expanding our operating capabilities. In addition, we expect to incur additional costs associated with operating as a public company. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially if and as we:
•
support the PD-L1 program and the ongoing Phase I study for MT-6402;
•
support the ongoing Phase I study of MT-5111;
•
continue clinical development of MT-0169, an ETB biologic candidate to which we have full rights, and support the ongoing Phase I study;
•
continue the research and development of our other ETB candidates, including completing pre-clinical studies and commencing clinical trials;
•
research activities through the designation of the development candidate(s) with Bristol Myers Squibb;
•
seek to enhance our technology platform using our antigen-seeding technology approach to immuno-oncology;
•
seek regulatory approvals for any ETB candidates that successfully complete clinical trials;
•
potentially establish a sales, marketing and distribution infrastructure and scale up manufacturing capabilities to commercialize any drugs for which we may obtain regulatory approval;
•
add clinical, scientific, operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and potential future commercialization efforts and to support our increased operations;
•
experience any delays or encounter any issues resulting from any of the above, including but not limited to failed studies, complex results, safety issues or other regulatory challenges;
•
service long-term debt; and
•
complete the expansion of the Company’s research and development spaces.
Because of the numerous risks and uncertainties associated with the development of MT-6402, MT-5111, and MT-0169, our collaboration with Bristol Myers Squibb and our other pre-clinical programs, and because the extent to which we may enter into collaborations with third parties for development of these ETB candidates is unknown, we are unable to estimate the amount of increased capital outlays and operating expenses associated with completing the research and development of our ETB candidates. Our future capital requirements for MT-6402, MT-5111, MT-0169 or our other pre-clinical programs will depend on many factors, including:
•
the progress, timing and completion of pre-clinical testing and clinical trials for our current or any future ETB candidates;
•
the number of potential new ETB candidates we identify and decide to develop;
•
the costs involved in growing our organization to the size needed to allow for the research, development and potential commercialization of our current or any future ETB candidates;
•
the costs involved in filing patent applications and maintaining and enforcing patents or defending against claims or infringements raised by third parties;
•
the time and costs involved in obtaining regulatory approval for our ETB candidates and any delays we may encounter as a result of evolving regulatory requirements or adverse results with respect to any of these ETB candidates;
•
any licensing or milestone fees we might have to pay during future development of our current or any future ETB candidates;
•
selling and marketing activities undertaken in connection with the anticipated commercialization of our current or any future ETB candidates and costs involved in the creation of an effective sales and marketing organization; and
•
the amount of revenues, if any, we may derive either directly or in the form of royalty payments from future sales of our ETB candidates, if approved.
Identifying potential ETB candidates and conducting pre-clinical testing and clinical trials is a time-consuming, expensive and uncertain process that takes years to complete, and we may never generate the necessary data or results required to obtain marketing approval and achieve product sales. In addition, our ETB candidates, if approved, may not achieve commercial success. Our commercial revenues, if any, will be derived from sales of drugs or biologics that we do not expect to be commercially available for many years, if ever. Accordingly, we will need to obtain substantial additional funds to achieve our business objectives.
Adequate additional funds may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To the extent that we raise additional capital through the sale of equity or convertible debt securities, stockholders’ ownership interest will be diluted, and the terms of these securities may include liquidation or other preferences that adversely affect their rights as stockholders. Additional debt financing and equity financing, if available, may involve agreements that include covenants limiting or restricting our ability to take specific actions, such as incurring additional debt, making capital expenditures or declaring dividends and may require the issuance of warrants, which could potentially dilute stockholders’ ownership interest.
If we raise additional funds through collaborations, governmental grants, strategic alliances or licensing arrangements with third parties, we may have to relinquish valuable rights to our technologies, future revenue streams, research programs or ETB candidates or grant licenses on terms that may not be favorable to us. If we are unable to raise additional funds through equity or debt financings when needed, we may be required to delay, limit, reduce or terminate our product development programs or any future commercialization efforts or grant rights to develop and market ETB candidates that we would otherwise prefer to develop and market ourselves.
Critical Accounting Policies and Use of Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect reported amounts of assets and liabilities as of the date of the balance sheet and reported amounts of revenues and expenses for the periods presented. Management makes estimates and exercises judgment in income taxes, revenue recognition, research and development expenses, stock-based compensation and preferred stock. Judgments must also be made about the disclosure of contingent liabilities. These estimates and assumptions form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. We periodically evaluate our estimates and judgments, including those described in greater detail below, in light of changes in circumstances, facts and experience.
We have identified the following accounting policies that we believe require application of management’s most subjective judgments, often requiring the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our actual results could differ from these estimates and such differences could be material.
Revenue Recognition
Our revenue has consisted principally of research and development revenue from collaboration partners and grant revenue.
Grant revenue relates to the grants we have received from governmental bodies that are conditional cost reimbursement grants, and we recognize revenue as allowable costs are incurred. Amounts collected in excess of revenue recognized are recorded as deferred revenue.
The Company analyzes its collaboration arrangements to assess whether they are within the scope of ASC 808, Collaborative Arrangements (“ASC 808”) to determine whether such arrangements involve joint operating activities performed by parties that are both active participants in the activities and exposed to significant risks and rewards. This assessment is performed throughout the life of the arrangement based on changes to the arrangements. For collaboration arrangements within the scope of ASC 808 the Company may analogize to ASC 606 for certain elements.
We identify the goods or services promised within each collaboration agreement and assesses whether each promised good or service is distinct for the purpose of identifying the performance obligations in the contract. This assessment involves subjective determinations and requires management to make judgments about the individual promised goods or services and whether such are separable from the other aspects of the contractual relationship. Promised goods and services are considered distinct provided that: (i) the customer can benefit from the good or service either on its own or together with other resources that are readily available to the customer and (ii) the entity’s promise to transfer the good or service to the customer is separately identifiable from other promises in the contract. In assessing whether a promised good or service is distinct, we consider factors such as the research, manufacturing and commercialization capabilities of the collaboration partner and the availability of the associated expertise in the general marketplace. If a promised good or service is not distinct, an entity is required to combine that promised good or service with other promised goods or services until it identifies a bundle of goods or services that is distinct.
The allocation of the transaction price to the performance obligations in proportion to their standalone selling prices is determined at contract inception. If the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, we estimate the amount of consideration to which we will be entitled in exchange for transferring the promised goods or services to a customer. We determine the amount of variable consideration by using the expected value method or the most likely amount method. The Company includes the unconstrained amount of estimated variable consideration in the transaction price. The amount included in the transaction price is the amount for which it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur. At the end of each subsequent reporting period, we re-evaluate the estimated variable consideration included in the transaction price and any related constraint, and if necessary, adjust our estimate of the overall transaction price. Any such adjustments are recorded on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period of adjustment.
In determining the transaction price, we adjust consideration for the effects of the time value of money if there is a significant benefit of financing. We assessed our collaboration agreements and concluded that no significant financing components were present.
If an arrangement contains customer options that allow the customer to acquire additional goods or services, including an exclusive license to our intellectual property, the goods and services underlying the customer options are evaluated to determine whether they are deemed to represent a material right. In determining whether the customer option has a material right, we assess whether there is an option to acquire additional goods or services at a discount. If the customer option is determined not to represent a material right, the option is not considered to be performance obligations at the outset of the arrangement. If the customer option is determined to represent a material right, the material right is recognized as a separate performance obligation at the outset of the arrangement. We allocate the transaction price to material rights based on the relative standalone selling price, which is determined based on the identified discount and the probability that the customer will exercise the option. Amounts allocated to a material right are not recognized as revenue until the option is exercised.
We recognize as revenue the amount of the transaction price that is allocated to the respective performance obligation as each performance obligation is satisfied over time, with progress toward completion measured based on actual costs incurred relative to total estimated costs to be incurred over the life of the contract. Recorded revenue and costs are subject to revision as the contract progresses. Such revisions may result in increases or decreases to revenue and income and are reflected in the consolidated financial statements in the periods in which they are first identified. Estimating costs under our collaboration agreements is complex and involves significant judgment. Factors that must be considered in making estimates include labor productivity and availability, the nature and technical complexity of the work to be performed, potential performance delays, availability and timing of funding from the customer and progress toward completion. Adjustments to original estimates are often required as work progresses and additional information becomes known, even though the scope of the work required under the contract may not change. Any adjustment as a result of a change in estimates is made when facts develop, events become known, or an adjustment is otherwise warranted, such as in the case of contract change orders. We have procedures and processes in place to monitor the actual progress of a project against estimates and our estimates are updated if circumstances are warranted.
Performance obligations may include research and development services to be performed by us on behalf of the collaboration partner. Revenue is recognized on research and development efforts as the services are performed and presented on a gross basis, since we are the principal.
Under collaboration agreements, the timing of revenue recognition and contract billings may differ and result in contract assets and contract liabilities. Contract assets represent revenues recognized in excess of amounts billed under collaboration agreements and are transferred to accounts receivable when billed or billing rights become unconditional. Contract liabilities represent billings in excess of revenues recognized under collaboration agreements.
For further information regarding our revenue recognition, please see Note 1, “Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited consolidated financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Research and Development Expenses
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date. This process involves reviewing open contracts and purchase orders, communicating with our staff to identify services that have been performed on our behalf and estimating the level of service performed and the associated cost incurred for the service when we have not yet been invoiced or otherwise notified of the actual cost. The majority of our service providers invoice us monthly in arrears for services performed or when contractual milestones are met. We make estimates of our accrued expenses as of each balance sheet date based on facts and circumstances known to us at that time. We periodically confirm the accuracy of our estimates with the service providers and make adjustments, if necessary. The significant estimates in our accrued research and development expenses include the costs incurred for services performed by our vendors and clinical trial sites in connection with research and development activities for which we have not yet been invoiced.
We record our expenses related to research and development activities based on our estimates of the services received and efforts expended pursuant to quotes and contracts with vendors that conduct research and development on our behalf. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows. There may be instances in which payments made to our vendors will exceed the level of services provided and result in a prepayment of the research and development expenses. In accruing service fees, we estimate the time period over which services will be performed and the level of effort to be expended in each period. If the actual timing of the performance of services or the level of effort varies from our estimate, we adjust the accrual or prepaid expense accordingly. Non-refundable advance payments for goods and services that will be used in future research and development activities are expensed when the activity has been performed or when the goods have been received rather than when the payment is made.
Although we do not expect our estimates to be materially different from amounts actually incurred, if our estimates of the status and timing of services performed differ from the actual status and timing of services performed, it could result in our reporting amounts that are too high or too low in any particular period. To date, there have been no material differences between our estimates of such expenses and the amounts actually incurred.
Income Taxes
We account for income taxes under the asset and liability method. We record deferred tax assets and liabilities for the future tax consequences attributable to differences between the financial statement carrying amounts of existing assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, as well as for operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. We measure deferred tax assets and liabilities using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which we expect to recover or settle those temporary differences. We recognize the effect of a change in tax rates on deferred tax assets and liabilities in the results of operations in the period that includes the enactment date. We assess the likelihood that deferred tax assets will be realized, and we recognize a valuation allowance if it is more likely than not that some portion of the deferred tax assets will not be realized. This assessment requires judgment as to the likelihood and amounts of future taxable income by tax jurisdiction. To date, we have provided a valuation allowance against our deferred tax assets as we believe the objective and verifiable evidence of our historical pretax net losses outweighs any positive evidence of our forecasted future results. Although we believe that our tax estimates are reasonable, the ultimate tax determination involves significant judgment. We will continue to monitor the positive and negative evidence and will adjust the valuation allowance as sufficient objective positive evidence becomes available.
We account for uncertain tax positions by recognizing the financial statement effects of a tax position only when, based upon technical merits, it is more likely than not that the position will be sustained upon examination. We recognize potential accrued interest and penalties associated with unrecognized tax positions within our global operations in income tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
We account for stock-based compensation expense related to stock options granted to employees, non-employees, and members of our board of directors under our 2018 Equity Incentive Plan, the 2014 Equity Incentive Plan, as amended, and the 2004 Amended and Restated Equity Incentive Plan, by estimating the fair value of each stock option or award on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes model. We recognize stock-based compensation expense on a straight-line basis over the requisite service periods of the awards, which is generally the vesting period.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements Not Yet Adopted
For a discussion of recently issued accounting pronouncements and interpretations not yet adopted by us, please see Note 1, “Organization and Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our audited financial statements for the year ended December 31, 2021, included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in the rules and regulations of the SEC.