ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULT OF OPERATIONS
Overview
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our financial statements, including the notes thereto, appearing elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this Annual Report. Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
The MD&A is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
Background
We are not currently engaged in any business operations. We are, however, in the process of attempting to identify, locate, and if warranted, acquire new commercial opportunities.
No revenue has been generated by the Company. It is unlikely the Company will have any revenues unless it is able to effect an acquisition or merger with an operating company, of which there can be no assurance. The Company’s plan of operation for the remainder of the fiscal year shall be to continue its efforts to locate suitable acquisition candidates. Our principal business objective for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be to achieve long-term growth potential through a combination with a business rather than immediate, short-term earnings. The Company will not restrict our potential candidate target companies to any specific business, industry, or geographical location and, thus, may acquire any type of business.
The Company does not currently engage in any business activities that provide cash flow. The costs of investigating and analyzing business combinations for the next 12 months and beyond such time will be paid with funds to be loaned to or invested in us by our stockholders, management, or other investors.
During the next 12 months we anticipate incurring costs related to:
(i) filing of Exchange Act reports, and
(ii)
investigating, analyzing, and consummating an acquisition.
We believe we will be able to meet these costs through use of funds to be loaned by or invested in us by our stockholders, management or other investors. There are no assurances that such funds will be advanced or that the Company will be able to secure any additional funding as needed.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The Year Ended December 31, 2021, compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Operating Revenues
We have generated no revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses and Net Loss
Operating expenses for the year ended December 31, 2021, were $19,682 compared with $11,531 for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in operating expenses consisted of a decrease in general and administrative expenses from $4,832 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $226 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase in professional fees from $6,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $16,789 for the year ended December 31, 2021, and an increase in depreciation expense $699 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $2,667 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company recorded a net loss of $19,682, compared with net loss of $11,531 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, the Company's cash balance was $0, respectively in both years. As of December 31, 2021, the Company's total assets were $3,675 compared to total assets of $5,640 as of December 31, 2020.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had total liabilities of $17,155 compared with total liabilities of $17,733 as of December 31, 2020. The decrease in total liabilities is attributed to a decrease in account payable - related party from $15,733 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $15,145 for the year ended December 31, 2021, an increase in accounts payable from $0 for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $2,010 for the year ended December 31, 2021 and included a decrease in accrued expenses $2,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020, to $0 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
As of December 31, 2021, the Company has a working capital deficit of $13,480 compared with working capital deficit of $12,093at December 31, 2020.
Cash Flow from Operating Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company used $702 of cash for operating activities compared to the use of $6,339 cash for operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flow from Investment Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021 the Company used $702 for investment activities, compared to the use of $6,339 for investment activities during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cash Flow from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, and December 31, 2020, the Company did not receive any cash from financing activities.
Capital Stock
On January 21, 2021, the Company filed a Certificate of Amendment with the Secretary of State of Nevada whereby its authorized shares were changed to 900,000,000, par value $.0001, consisting of 800,000,000 Common Stock and 100,000,000 Blank Check Preferred Stock. These shares are non-assessable.
On February 9, 2021, the Company filed a Certificate of Designation Preferences and Rights of Series A Convertible Stock with the Secretary of State of Nevada whereby One Hundred Million shares of the Preferred Stock, $.0001 par value, were be issued in denominations of 1,000 shares or greater. Holder of each Series A Super voting Preferred Stock have Twenty Thousand times the number of votes as shareholders of the Common Stock. On that same day 99,922,000 shares of Series A Preferred Stock was issued to a Related Party, in exchange for a debt conversion of $18,295 in Related Party Payable.
Going Concern
We have not attained profitable operations and are dependent upon the continued financial support from our shareholders, the ability to raise equity or debt financing, and the attainment of profitable operations from our future business. These factors raise substantial doubt regarding our ability to continue as a going concern.
Our ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to generate future profitable operations and/or to obtain the necessary financing to meet our obligations and repay our liabilities arising from normal business operations when they come due. Our ability to continue as a going concern is also dependent on our ability to find a suitable target company and enter into a possible reverse merger with such company. Management’s plan includes obtaining additional funds by equity financing through a reverse merger transaction and/or related party advances; however, there is no assurance of additional funding being available.
The Company, as of the date of this filing had approximately $0 in cash and has not earned any revenues from operations to date. In the previous two fiscal years our operating expenses were $19,682 and $11,531 in the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 respectively, consisting primarily of professional fees, administrative expenses and filing fees. The ongoing expenses of the Company will be related to seeking out a suitable acquisition as well as mandatory filing requirements including our reporting requirements under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 upon effectiveness of this registration statement.
The Company continues to rely on borrowings and financings either arranged by the Company’s President or through entities controlled by the President. In the next 12 months we expect to incur expenses equal to approximately $16,500 related to legal, accounting, audit, and other professional service fees incurred in relation to the Company’s Exchange Act filing requirements. The costs related to the acquisition of a business combination target company vary widely and are dependent on a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the amount of time it takes to complete a business combination, the location of the target company, the size and complexity of the business of the target company, whether stockholders of the Company prior to the transaction will retain equity in the Company, the scope of the due diligence investigation required, the involvement of the Company’s auditors in the transaction, possible changes in the Company’s capital structure in connection with the transaction, and whether funds may be raised contemporaneously with the transaction. Therefore, we believe such costs are unascertainable until the Company identifies a business combination target. These conditions raise substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern. The Company is currently devoting its efforts to locating merger candidates. The Company’s ability to continue as a going concern is dependent upon our ability to develop additional sources of capital, locate and complete a merger with another company, and ultimately, achieve profitable operations.
The Company may consider a business which has recently commenced operations, is a developing company in need of additional funds for expansion into new products or markets, is seeking to develop a new product or service, or is an established business which may be experiencing financial or operating difficulties and needs additional capital. Our management believes that the public company status that results from a combination with the Company will provide such company greater access to the capital markets, increase its visibility in the investment community, and offer the opportunity to utilize its stock to make acquisitions. There is no assurance that we will in fact have access to additional capital or financing as a public company. In the alternative, a business combination may involve the acquisition of, or merger with, a company which does not need substantial additional capital, but which desires to establish a public trading market for its shares, while avoiding, among other things, the time delays, significant expense, and loss of voting control which may occur in a public offering.
Our officers and directors have not had any preliminary contact or discussions with any representative of any other entity regarding a business combination with us. Any target business that is selected may be a financially unstable company or an entity in its early stages of development or growth, including entities without established records of sales or earnings. In that event, we will be subject to numerous risks inherent in the business and operations of financially unstable and early stage or potential emerging growth companies. In addition, we may affect a business combination with an entity in an industry characterized by a high level of risk, and, although our management will endeavor to evaluate the risks inherent in a particular target business, there can be no assurance that we will properly ascertain or assess all significant risks.
Our management anticipates that it will likely be able to effect only one business combination, due primarily to our limited financing and the dilution of interest for present and prospective stockholders, which is likely to occur as a result of our management’s plan to offer a controlling interest to a target business in order to achieve a tax-free reorganization. This lack of diversification should be considered a substantial risk in investing in us because it will not permit us to offset potential losses from one venture against gains from another.
The Company anticipates that the selection of a business combination will be complex and extremely risky. While the Company is in a competitive market with a small number of business opportunities, through information obtained from industry professionals including attorneys, investment bankers, and other consultants with experience in the reverse merger industry, our management believes that there are opportunities for a business combination with firms seeking the perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation. Such perceived benefits of becoming a publicly traded corporation include, among other things, facilitating or improving the terms on which additional equity financing may be obtained, providing liquidity for the principals of and investors in a business, creating a means for providing incentive stock options or similar benefits to key employees, and offering greater flexibility in structuring acquisitions, joint ventures, and the like through the issuance of stock. Potentially available business combinations may occur in many different industries and at various stages of development, all of which will make the task of comparative investigation and analysis of such business opportunities extremely difficult and complex.
We do not currently intend to retain any entity to act as a “finder” to identify and analyze the merits of potential target businesses.
We have not established a specific timeline, nor have we created a specific plan to identify an acquisition target and consummate a business combination. We expect that our management and the Company, through its various contacts and affiliations with other entities will locate a business combination target. We expect that funds in the amount of approximately $16,500 will be required in order for the Company to satisfy its Exchange Act reporting requirements during the next 12 months, in addition to any other funds that will be required in order to complete a business combination. Such funds can only be estimated upon identifying a business combination target. Our management and stockholders have indicated an intent to advance funds on behalf of the Company as needed in order to accomplish its business plan and comply with its Exchange Act reporting requirements, however, there are no agreements in effect between the Company and our management or stockholders specifically requiring they provide any funds to the Company. Therefore, there are no assurances that the Company will be able to obtain the required financing as needed in order to consummate a business combination transaction.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources and would be considered material to investors.
Default on Notes
There are currently no notes in default.
Other Contractual Obligations
As of the year ended December 31, 2021, we did not have any contractual obligations.
Plan of Operation and Funding
We estimate that our expenses over the next 12 months will be approximately $16,500 as described in the table below. These estimates may change significantly depending on the nature of our future business activities and our ability to raise capital from shareholders or other sources. Our working capital requirements are expected to increase in line with the growth of our business.
In connection with our business plan, management anticipates additional increases in operating expenses and capital expenditures relating to: (i) developmental expenses associated with a start-up business and (ii) marketing expenses.
We intend to meet our cash requirements for the next 12 months through the use of the cash we have on hand and through equity financing, debt financing, or other sources, which may result in further dilution in the equity ownership of our shares. Further, such securities might have rights, preferences or privileges senior to our common stock. We currently do not have any arrangements in place to complete any private placement financings and there is no assurance that we will be successful in completing any such financings on terms that will be acceptable to us. If adequate funds are not available or are not available on acceptable terms, we may not be able to take advantage of prospective new business endeavors or opportunities, which could significantly and materially restrict our business operations.