Item 7. Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
Trust Overview
The following review of Mesa Royalty Trust’s (the “Trust”) financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto. The discussion of net production attributable to the Hugoton Royalty Properties and San Juan Basin Royalty Properties (as each is defined below) represents production volumes that are to a large extent hypothetical as the Trust does not own and is not entitled to any specific production volumes. Any discussion of “actual” production volumes represents the hydrocarbons that were produced from the properties in which the Trust has an overriding royalty interest.
The Trust was created on November 1, 1979 and is now governed by the Mesa Royalty Trust Indenture (as amended, the “Trust Indenture”). Through a series of conveyances, assignments, and acquisitions, the Trust currently owns an overriding royalty interest (the “Royalty”) equal to 11.44% of 90% of the Net Proceeds (as defined and described in an Overriding Royalty Conveyance, dated as of November 1, 1979 (the “Conveyance”)) attributable to the specified interest in certain producing oil and gas properties located in the:
•
Hugoton field of Kansas (the “Hugoton Royalty Properties”);
•
San Juan Basin field of New Mexico (the “San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties”);
•
San Juan Basin field of Colorado (the “San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties”, and together with the “San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties, the “San Juan Basin Royalty Properties”, and together with the Hugoton Royalty Properties, the “Royalty Properties”).
Pursuant to past conveyances, Scout, Hilcorp, Simcoe and Red Willow are the operators of certain portions of the Hugoton Royalty Properties and San Juan Basin Royalty Properties (each of Scout, Hilcorp, Simcoe, and Red Willow being a “Working Interest Owner”, and together, the “Working Interest Owners”). As used in this report, Scout refers to the current operator of the Hugoton Royalty Properties, Hilcorp refers to the current operator of the San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties, and Simcoe and Red Willow refer to the current co-operators of certain tracts of land included in the San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties, unless otherwise indicated.
The Trust is a passive entity whose purposes are limited to: (1) converting the Royalties to cash, either by retaining them and collecting the proceeds of production (until production has ceased or the Royalties are otherwise terminated) or by selling or otherwise disposing of the Royalties; and (2) distributing such cash, net of amounts for payments of liabilities to the Trust, to the unitholders. The Trust has no sources of liquidity or capital resources other than the revenues, if any, attributable to the Royalties and interest on cash held by the Trustee as a reserve for liabilities or for distribution. The Trust does not undertake or control any capital projects or make capital expenditures. While the Trust’s Royalty income is net of capital expenditures, these capital expenditures are controlled and paid by the Working Interests Owners, and the Trust receives Royalty income net of these expenses. In addition, the Trust does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements or other contingent obligations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Liquidity. As discussed in “Business - Description of the Trust” under Item 1 of this Form 10-K, the Trust’s primary source of cash is the Royalty income received from its share of the Net Proceeds from the Royalty Properties, and the only other source of cash is interest income earned pursuant to the Trust Indenture. For estimates of future Royalty income attributable to the Royalty, refer to the Notes to Financial Statements under Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
In addition, the Working Interest Owners reimburse the Trust each quarter for certain expenses incurred by the Trust on their behalf. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were $0 and $8,565 of unreimbursed expenses, respectively. In accordance with the provisions of the Conveyance, generally all revenues received by the Trust, net of unreimbursed Trust administrative expenses and sums paid to or from any reserves established pursuant to the Trust Indenture, are distributed to the unitholders.
The terms of the Trust Indenture provide, among other things, that the Trustee may establish cash reserves and borrow funds to pay liabilities of the Trust, and may pledge assets of the Trust to secure payment of the borrowings in accordance with the Trust Indenture. At any given time, the balance of the Contingent Reserve is included in cash and short-term investments.
The Trustee utilizes the Contingent Reserve in its discretion in accordance with the Conveyance, and adjusts the balance of the Contingent Reserve as necessary when funds are added or removed.
The net effects of such adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in the balance of the Contingent Reserve being equal to $1,025,000 as of December 31, 2021. The Trustee intends to increase the Contingent Reserve to a total of $2.0 million, which will reduce Net Proceeds available to the Trust and distributions to Trust unitholders. The amount and timing of the addition to the Contingent Reserve will be determined by the Trustee on a monthly basis and is expected to vary in future periods depending on circumstances at the time.
Capital Resources. The Trust is a passive entity that does not undertake or control any capital projects or make capital expenditures. While the Trust’s Royalty income is net of capital expenditures, these capital expenditures are controlled and paid by the Working Interests Owners, and the Trust receives Royalty income net of these expenses. Therefore, the Trust has no material commitments for capital expenditures.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
SUMMARY OF ROYALTY INCOME, PRODUCTION, PRICES AND COSTS (Unaudited)
(1)
Gross Proceeds from natural gas liquids attributable to each of the Hugoton Royalty Properties and San Juan Basin Royalty Properties are net of a volumetric in-kind processing fee retained by Scout and Hilcorp, respectively.
(2)
Royalty income is computed after deducting the Trust’s proportionate share of capital costs, operating costs and interest on any cost carryforward from the Trust’s proportionate share of Gross Proceeds. As a result of excess production costs incurred in one monthly operating period and then recovered in a subsequent monthly operating period, the Royalty income paid to the Trust may not agree to the Trust’s royalty interest in the Net Proceeds (as defined in the Conveyance). The excess production costs must be recovered by the Working Interest Owners before any distribution of Royalty income will be made to the Trust. See “Note 5 - Excess Production Costs” in the Notes to Financial Statements contained in Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
(3)
Average production costs attributable to the Royalty are calculated as stated capital costs plus operating costs, divided by stated net production volumes attributable to the Royalty paid. As noted above in footnote (2), production costs may be incurred in one operating period and then recovered in a subsequent operating period, which may cause Royalty income paid to the Trust not to agree to the Trust’s Royalty interest in the Net Proceeds.
(4)
Net production volumes attributable to the Royalty are determined by dividing Royalty income by the average sales price received. Any differences noted are due to rounding.
(5)
Subject to adjustments to actual current production and costs to account for historical monthly reconciliations as they are completed. See Trustee’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations - Operational Overview - San Juan Basin Royalty Properties under Item 7 of the Form 10-K.
Financial Review
Royalty and Interest Income. The Trust’s Royalty income was $908,160 and $832,149 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 was primarily a result of actual expenses being greater than actual revenues in past periods as reported by the Working Interest Owners. Such amounts are being recovered by Hilcorp, Scout and Simcoe by withholding the Net Proceeds that would otherwise be payable to the Trust. Hilcorp’s recovery is substantially complete with Net Proceeds paid to the Trust in December 2021, resulting in the increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020. The Trust’s Interest income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $117 and $5,756, respectively. In accordance with the Trust Indenture and as explained below, interest on cash on hand was paid at a rate equivalent to 1.5% below the prime interest rate.
General and Administrative Expense. General and administrative expense was $172,737 and $193,947 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The Trustee’s fees are included in general and administrative expense.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Trustee was due $475,000 for its services. The Trust paid $433,153 of this amount to the Trustee, and $41,847 was allocated to offset against interest due to the Trust under the Trust Indenture. The Trust Indenture requires that cash being held by the Trustee earn interest at 1.5% below the prime rate, which would have yielded the Trust a 1.75% annualized return from January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021. However, due to the current interest rate environment, the Trustee was unable to obtain an account in which such an interest rate was available. In the event such an interest rate is unavailable in the future, the Trustee intends to allocate certain of its fees due to the Trust to meet the minimum interest rate payable under the Trust Indenture. In future periods the Trustee will continue to allocate a portion of the fees earned for its services to the Trust until all remaining interest due to the Trust is fully offset.
Unreimbursed Expenses and the Contingent Reserve. The Working Interest Owners partially reimburse the Trust each quarter for amounts paid in connection with the Trustee’s services. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Trustee’s aggregate fees were $433,153 and the Working Interest Owners reimbursed the aggregate sum of $383,588 to the Trustee, which was the same amount reimbursed for the year ended December 21, 2020. As of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Trust incurred unreimbursed expenses of $0 and $8,565, respectively.
The terms of the Trust Indenture provide, among other things, that the Trustee may establish cash reserves and borrow funds to pay liabilities of the Trust, and may pledge assets of the Trust to secure payment of the borrowings in accordance with the Trust Indenture. At any given time, the balance of the Contingent Reserve is included in cash and short-term investments. The Trustee utilizes the Contingent Reserve in its discretion in accordance with the Conveyance, and adjusts the balance of the Contingent Reserve as necessary when funds are added or removed. The net effects of such adjustments for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted in the balance of the Contingent Reserve being equal to $1,076,485 as of
December 31, 2020 and equal to $1,025,000 as of December 31, 2021. The Trustee intends to increase the Contingent Reserve to a total of $2.0 million.
Distributable Income Available for Distribution. The portion of the Trust’s distributable income available for distribution each year includes the Royalty income received from the Working Interest Owners during such period, plus interest income earned to the date of distribution (if any) and increases or withdrawals to and from the Contingent Reserve (if any). Distributable income available for distribution for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $787,025 and $544,685, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Trust calculated total aggregate distributions of $0.422 and $0.292 per unit, respectively.
Operational Review
Working Interest Owner and Industry Update
The outlook for commodity pricing improved during 2021 when compared to the historic downturn in oil and gas prices seen during 2020. The West Texas Intermediate spot price of crude oil has rallied materially from $48.52 per barrel on December 31, 2020 to $75.21 per barrel on December 31, 2021. The Henry Hub Natural Gas Spot Prices increased from $2.36 per MMBtu on December 30, 2020 to $3.82 per MMBtu on December 31, 2021. However, the lingering effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and the ongoing uncertainty around production from Russia and actions of OPEC continue to affect the oil and gas industry. The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in economic and financial uncertainty, significant business and operational disruptions, business closures, disruptions to supply chains, travel restrictions and limitations on the availability of workforces. The lasting impact of COVID-19 and the conflict in Ukraine remain unknown, and it is not possible to reliably estimate the impact that these developments will have on the Working Interest Owners or the Trust in future periods. If commodity prices for crude oil and natural gas fall or remain volatile as seen in 2020, monthly distributions to unitholders could be substantially reduced or there may be no distributions in future periods. The Trust did not make distributions for some periods in 2020 and 2021, as costs, charges and expenses attributable to the Trust’s Royalty properties, and applicable reserves, exceeded the revenue received from the sale of oil, natural gas and other hydrocarbons produced from such properties for such periods, as reported by the Working Interest Owners. Additionally, sharp increases in inflation coupled with supply chain disruptions are expected to increase expenses for Working Interest Owners and are expected to have an adverse impact on Royalty income during 2022.
Hugoton Royalty Properties
Net Reserves Estimate. According to Miller and Lents, volumes produced from the Hugoton Royalty Properties were not profitable enough in 2020 to generate future Net Proceeds to the Trust based on average expenses and declining well performance coupled with low prices, which rendered the wells in the Hugoton Royalty Properties uneconomic in 2020. It is uncertain whether future production from the Hugoton Royalty Properties will generate material Net Income to the Trust.
Royalty Income. Royalty income attributable to the Hugoton Royalty Properties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $0 and $248,445, respectively. The decrease in Royalty income was primarily a result of actual expenses being greater than actual revenues in past periods as reported by Scout. Such amounts are being recovered by Scout by withholding the Net Proceeds that would otherwise be payable to the Trust for the year ended December 31, 2021. Net Proceeds from the Hugoton Properties adjusted against the outstanding excess production costs and recovered by Scout for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $422,787, leaving a balance of $8,100 to be recovered from future proceeds, if any.
Operating Costs and Capital Expenditures. Operating costs attributable to the Hugoton Royalty Properties for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $1,280,283, a decrease of approximately 8% as compared to $1,388,398 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capital expenditures on these properties were $22,547 for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $1,331 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Average Sales Prices. Average sales prices per Mcf of natural gas and Bbl for natural gas liquids for the Hugoton Royalty Properties are directly dependent on the prices Scout realizes for natural gas sold under short-term and multi-month contracts to multiple purchasers.
San Juan Basin Royalty Properties
Royalty income from the San Juan Basin Royalty Properties is calculated and paid to the Trust on a state-by-state basis depending upon whether the property is situated in Colorado and New Mexico. The majority of the Royalty income from the San Juan Basin Royalty Properties is attributable to the San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties. The Trustee has been informed that the natural gas produced from the San Juan Basin Royalty Properties has historically been sold in the spot market.
San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties
Royalty Income. Royalty income attributable to the San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $630,687 and $191,448, respectively. The increase for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to Royalty income received from Simcoe in May 2021 which included unusually high pricing due to extreme winter weather in early 2021. Simcoe has informed the Trustee that the amounts paid to the Trust in the months of May and June 2021 are subject to further adjustment in future periods for certain expenses that Simcoe is entitled to deduct under the Conveyance. Simcoe is expected to recover such expense amounts by withholding a portion or all of the net proceeds that would otherwise be payable to the Trust in future periods. Net Proceeds from the San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties operated by Simcoe, adjusted against the outstanding expenses and recovered by Simcoe for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $83,365, leaving a balance of $341,707 to be recovered from future proceeds, if any.
Operating Costs and Capital Expenditures. Operating costs attributable to the San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $ 488,939 and $117,130, respectively. The increase was primarily the result of prior period adjustments reported by Simcoe in the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, that Simcoe is entitled to deduct under the Conveyance. If not for the adjustments, operating costs would have been $79,363 for the year ended December 31, 2021. The Trust will not receive Net Proceeds for the San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties until future proceeds from production exceed the total accumulated excess costs plus accrued interest during the deficit period.
There were no capital expenditures attributable to the San Juan Basin - Colorado Properties for the years ended December 31, 2021 or 2020.
San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties
Royalty Income. Royalty income attributable to the San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $277,472 and $392,256, respectively. The decrease was primarily a result of actual expenses being greater than actual revenues in past periods as reported by Hilcorp. Such amounts were being recovered by Hilcorp by withholding the Net Proceeds that would otherwise be payable to the Trust in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020. Hilcorp also informed the Trust that Hilcorp was in process of a system conversion that delayed the ability to provide current information. For each month in the second and third quarters ended June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021, respectively, Hilcorp recorded estimates of revenues and expenses based on its December 2020 production month. Hilcorp estimated $90,649 in Net Proceeds to the Trust for each month in the quarters ended June 30, 2021 and September 30, 2021. Hilcorp has informed the Trust that its system conversion was completed in December 2021. Hilcorp will utilize actual revenue and expense amounts to reconcile historical amounts on a month-by-month basis. Royalty income for December 2021 was $277,472, which will be recognized by the Trust in accordance with the Trust’s modified cash basis of accounting. Because of these adjustments, the amounts of Net Proceeds reported for the San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties during the year ended December 31, 2021 may not be representative of Net Proceeds that will be received in future years.
Operating Costs and Capital Expenditures. Operating costs were $992,942 for the year ended December 31, 2021, a decrease of approximately 9% as compared to $1,091,986 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Capital expenditures on these properties for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $1,187,696 and $95,594, respectively. The increase of $1,092,102 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to December 31, 2020 was primarily due to including an approximately $1.1 million true-up of historical amounts attributable to the Trust, incurred in 2018 with respect to a newly drilled well in the San Juan Basin  -  New Mexico Properties, in the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the twelve months ended December 31, 2020.
Following Hilcorp’s acquisition of ConocoPhillips’ and XTO’s interests in the San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties, there was a transition period to transfer historical information, knowledge and processes from one owner to the other. During this transition period, Hilcorp recorded estimates of revenues and expenses and made payments to the Trust based on historical amounts previously paid by ConocoPhillips, and the Trust recognized such amounts in accordance with its modified cash basis of accounting. Accordingly, Hilcorp made an estimated monthly payment of $97,150 in Net Proceeds to the Trust from September 2017 to March 2019 based upon the July 2017 production month previously paid by ConocoPhillips. In April 2019, Hilcorp began to generate actual (instead of estimated) Net Proceeds due to the Trust on a monthly basis. Hilcorp has informed the Trust that it will utilize actual revenue and expense amounts and either add or subtract reconciled historical amounts on a month by month basis. These amounts will be recognized over time by the Trust in accordance with the Trust’s modified cash basis of accounting. In December 2019, Hilcorp made the first payment to the Trust reconciling historical amounts for one accounting month. For the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, Hilcorp reconciled 10 additional historical amounts for the accounting months of October 2017 through July 2018. For the three months ended March 31, 2021, Hilcorp reconciled seven additional historical amounts (including the incremental costs of approximately $1.1 million referred to below) for the accounting months of August 2018 through February 2019, which resulted in a charge to the Trust of $975,792. As of March 31, 2021, Hilcorp informed the Trust that its true-up reconciliation for the estimates of revenue and expenses was complete.
Although Hilcorp has indicated that all estimated historical monthly amounts received by the Trust from September 2017 to March 2019 were fully reconciled, Net Proceeds from the San Juan Basin  -  New Mexico Properties that would otherwise be payable to the Trust in subsequent periods continued to be adjusted against the outstanding excess production costs until such amounts were fully recovered by Hilcorp.
Hilcorp has informed the Trust that significant incremental costs of approximately $1.1 million attributable to the Trust were incurred in 2018 with respect to a newly drilled well in the San Juan Basin - New Mexico Properties. Hilcorp has reconciled these costs resulting in a charge to the Trust for which the amount is included in the true-up of historical amounts referred to above. With the assistance of a third party consultant, the Trust has commenced a review of the reconciliation calculations by Hilcorp and the amount of Net Proceeds calculated and paid.
In April 2021, Hilcorp informed the Trust that Hilcorp was in process of a system conversion that delayed the ability to provide current information. For the Trust distribution months of April through November 2021, Hilcorp recorded estimates of revenues and expenses and calculated payments to the Trust based on Hilcorp’s December 2020 production month, and the Trust recognized such amounts in accordance with its accounting practices. Accordingly, Hilcorp calculated an estimated payment of $90,649 in Net Proceeds to the Trust for each month from April 2021 through November 2021. These Net Proceeds were adjusted against the outstanding excess production costs referred to above. Per Hilcorp, the system conversion was completed in December 2021. Hilcorp will perform a true-up of the estimated amounts and provide the true-up to the Trust. Net Proceeds received by the Trust from Hilcorp in December 2021 were $277,472.
For the twelve months ended December 31, 2021, Net Proceeds from the San Juan Basin  -  New Mexico Properties adjusted against the outstanding excess production costs and recovered by Hilcorp were $958,625, leaving a balance of $17,167 to be recovered from future proceeds. Because of the offset, the amounts of Net Proceeds reported for the San Juan Basin  -  New Mexico Properties during the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 may not be representative of Net Proceeds that will be received in the future.
Pursuant to the Trust Indenture, the Trust is not required to pay to Hilcorp any amounts that could be owed if the estimated revenue exceeded actual revenue amounts or estimated expenses were less than actual expense amounts in past periods. However, Hilcorp may recover such amounts by withholding a portion or all of the Net Proceeds that would otherwise be payable to the Trust in subsequent periods. This could result in a decrease in Net Proceeds paid to the Trust and could result in future material reductions in distributions to the Trust’s unitholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
The financial statements of the Trust are prepared on the following basis:
(a) Royalty income recorded for a month is the amount computed and paid by the Working Interest Owners to the Trustee for such month rather than either the value of a portion of the oil and gas produced by the Working Interest Owners for such month or the amount subsequently determined to be the Trust’s proportionate share of the Net Proceeds for such month;
(b) Interest income, interest receivable and distributions payable to unitholders include interest to be earned on short-term investments from the financial statement date through the next date of distribution;
(c) Trust general and administrative expenses, net of reimbursements, are recorded in the month they are included in the calculation of the monthly distribution amount;
(d) Amortization of the Royalty is computed on a unit-of-production basis and is charged directly to trust corpus since such amount does not affect distributable income; and
(e) Distributions payable are determined on a monthly basis and are payable to unitholders of record as of the last business day of each month or such later date as the Trustee determines is required to comply with applicable law or stock exchange requirements.
This basis for reporting distributable income is considered to be the most meaningful because distributions to the unitholders for a month are based on net cash receipts for such month. However, these statements differ from financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States because, under such principles, royalty income for a month would be based on Net Proceeds from production for such month without regard to when calculated or received, general and administrative expenses would be recorded in the month they accrue, and interest income for a month would be calculated only through the end of such month.