Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Part II, Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Part I, Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on July 16, 2021 (inception), as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We have not selected any Business Combination target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any Business Combination target. We intend to effectuate our initial Business Combination using cash from the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the private placement of the Private Placement Warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, equity and debt.
The Registration Statement for our Public Offering was declared effective on December 6, 2021. On December 9, 2021, we consummated our initial public offering (the “IPO”) of 30,000,000 units (the “Units”). Each Unit consists of one Class A ordinary share of the Company, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Class A Shares”), and one-third of one redeemable warrant of the Company (“Warrant”), with each whole Warrant exercisable for one Class A Share for $11.50 per share. The Units were sold at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $300,000,000. The Company granted the underwriters’ in the IPO a 45-day option to purchase an additional 4,500,000 Units (the “Over-Allotment Units”) to cover over-allotments (the “Option”), if any. On December 9, 2021, simultaneously with the consummation of the IPO, the Company completed the private sale (the “Private Placement”) of 10,666,667 warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a purchase price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant, to the Company’s sponsor, Motive Capital Funds Sponsor II, LLC (the “Sponsor”) generating gross proceeds to the Company of $16,000,000.
On December 16, 2021, the Company consummated the closing of the Option, pursuant to which the underwriters’ purchased an aggregate of 4,137,444 Over-Allotment Units, which were sold at an offering price of $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds to the Company of $41,374,440. On December 16, 2021, in connection with the sale of Over-Allotment Units, the Company completed a private sale of an additional 1,103,318 Private Placement Warrants to the Sponsor generating gross proceeds to the Company of $1,654,978.
A total of $348,201,929, comprised of $334,546,951 of the proceeds from the IPO, including $11,948,105 of the underwriters’ deferred discount, and $13,654,978 of the proceeds from the Private Placement, were placed in a U.S.-based trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee.
If we are unable to complete an initial business combination within 18 months from the closing of the Public Offering, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our franchise and income taxes (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses and net of taxes payable), divided by the number of then-outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining shareholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Initial Public Offering, described below, and the Company’s search for a target business with which to complete a Business Combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our initial Business Combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses in connection with completing a Business Combination.
For the period from July 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of $(144,212), which consists of formation and operating costs of $(157,072), offset by unrealized gain on marketable securities held in the Trust Account of $12,860.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Until the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 (the “Class B ordinary shares” or “Founder Shares”), by the Sponsor and loans from our Sponsor.
Following the Initial Public Offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, a total of $348,201,929 (equal to $10.20 per Unit), comprised of $334,546,951 of the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering (including $11,948,105 of the underwriters’ deferred discount) and $13,654,978 of the proceeds from the Private Placement, were placed in a U.S.-based trust account maintained by Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company, acting as trustee. At December 31, 2021, we have a cash balance of $1,731,361 and working capital of $2,294,896.
For the period from July 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, cash used in operating activities was $(1,660,755). A net loss of $(144,212) was offset by formation and operating expenses paid by the Sponsor in exchange for Founder Shares of $6,549, $(119,285) paid by the Sponsor under promissory note arrangement, gain on marketable securities held in Trust Account of $(12,380), and change in operating assets and liabilities of $(1,390,947).
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust Account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account, excluding deferred underwriting commissions, to complete our initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest from the Trust Account to pay taxes, if any. To the extent that our share capital or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete a Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We intend to use the funds held outside the Trust Account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a Business Combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our Sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a Business Combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be convertible into Private Placement Warrants of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant at the option of the lender. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any outstanding working capital loans.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a Business Combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial Business Combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our initial Business Combination or redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such Business Combination.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than a promissory note due to the Sponsor.
The underwriters’ were paid an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $6,827,489 upon closing of the Initial Public Offering. The underwriters’ are entitled to a deferred fee of $0.35 per Unit sold in the Initial Public Offering plus $0.35 per Unit sold pursuant to the over-allotment option, or $11,948,105 in the aggregate. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters’ from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on December 9, 2021, the holders of the Founder Shares, Private Placement Warrants and any warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any Class A ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) will be entitled to registration rights. The holders of the majority of these securities are entitled to make up to three demands, excluding short form demands, that we register such securities. In addition, the holders have certain "piggy-back" registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to completion of a Business Combination. However, the registration rights agreement provides that we will not permit any registration statement filed under the Securities Act to become effective until termination of the applicable lockup period. The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have not identified any critical accounting estimates.
Net Loss Per Ordinary Share
Net loss per ordinary share is computed by dividing net loss applicable to shareholders by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding during the period, plus, to the extent dilutive, the incremental number of shares of ordinary shares to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method. For the period from July 16, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, the impact of the securities and other contracts that could potentially be exercised or converted into ordinary shares and then share in the earnings of the Company, is anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted income per share is the same as basic income per share for the period presented.
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares (the “Founder Shares”). Earnings are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares on the assumption that the consummation of the Initial Business Combination is the most likely outcome. Accretion associated with the redeemable shares of Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
The Company accounts for its ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480, “Distinguishing Liabilities” from Equity. Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. The Company’s ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of the Company’s control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. The Company recognizes changes in redemption value immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of redeemable Class A ordinary shares to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable Class A ordinary shares are affected by charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Recent Accounting Standards
In August the FASB issued a new standard (ASU 2020-06) to reduce the complexity of accounting for convertible debt and other equity-linked instruments. For certain convertible debt instruments with a cash conversion feature, the changes are a trade-off between simplifications in the accounting model (no separation of an “equity” component to impute a market interest rate, and simpler analysis of embedded equity features) and a potentially adverse impact to diluted EPS by requiring the use of the if-converted method. The new standard will also impact other financial instruments commonly issued by both public and private companies. For example, the separation model for beneficial conversion features is eliminated simplifying the analysis for issuers of convertible debt and convertible preferred stock. Also, certain specific requirements to achieve equity classification and/ or qualify for the derivative scope exception for contracts indexed to an entity’s own equity are removed, enabling more freestanding instruments and embedded features to avoid mark-to- market accounting. The new standard is effective for companies that are SEC filers (except for Smaller Reporting Companies) for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2021 and interim periods within that year, and two years later for other companies. Companies can early adopt the standard at the start of a fiscal year beginning after December 15, 2020. The standard can either be adopted on a modified retrospective or a full retrospective basis. The Company adopted the standards effective July 16, 2021 (inception) and determined that the effects are immaterial to the Company’s financial statements.
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
Impact of COVID-19
Our Sponsor continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the balance date.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS Act
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five (5) years following the completion of our Public Offering or until we otherwise no longer qualify as an “emerging growth company.”