Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations.
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the notes related thereto which are included in “Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated in the Cayman Islands on October 14, 2020, formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, amalgamation, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash derived from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private placement warrants, our shares, debt or a combination of cash, shares and debt.
We expect to continue to incur significant costs in the pursuit of our acquisition plans. We cannot assure you that our plans to complete a business combination will be successful.
Recent Developments
On December 16, 2021, BICS SA, a Belgian limited liability company (“Seller”), TeleSign, the Company, New SPAC, and New Holdco, our wholly owned subsidiary, entered into the TeleSign Merger Agreement, pursuant to which (i) prior to closing, we will merge with and into New SPAC, with New SPAC surviving, and thereby become a Delaware corporation (ii) and immediately following the merger into a Delaware corporation and investments by the PIPE Investors (as defined in the TeleSign Merger Agreement), New Holdco will acquire TeleSign from Seller in exchange for New Holdco stock and cash. The Company will then be renamed TeleSign, Inc. The TeleSign Merger will be consummated subject to the deliverables and provision as further described in the TeleSign Merger Agreement. For more information on the TeleSign Merger and the TeleSign Merger Agreement, see “Item 1. Business.”
On February 21, 2021, concurrently with the execution of the Business Combination Agreement, entered into separate subscription agreements (collectively, the “Subscription Agreements”) with the PIPE Investors, pursuant to which the PIPE Investors agreed to purchase, and the Company agreed that New Holdco will sell to the PIPE Investors, an aggregate of 11,698,750 shares of New Holdco Common Stock (the “PIPE Shares”) in a private placement or placements (the “Private Placements”) for an aggregate purchase price of $107,500,000. The closing of the sale of the PIPE Shares pursuant to the Subscription Agreements will take place substantially concurrently with the closing of the Business Combination and is contingent upon customary closing conditions. The purpose of the Private Placements is to raise additional capital for use by the post-combination company following the closing of the Business Combination.
Refer to our Current Report on Form 8-K, filed with the SEC on December 17, 2021 for additional information.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from inception to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for our initial public offering, described below, and, after our initial public offering, identifying a target company for an initial business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after completion of our business combination. We generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held in our trust account and will recognize unrealized gains or losses from the changes in the fair values of our Warrants, FPA and Working Capital Loan options. We are incurring expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as due diligence expenses.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we had net income of $6,668,643, primarily driven by an unrealized gain on the change in the fair value of our warrants of $9,593,945 and our forward purchase agreement of $1,668,542 and interest income on investments in our trust of $88,190, partially offset by operating costs of $2,669,205, share based compensation expense of $1,079,197 and warrant issuance costs of $933,632.
For the year ended December 31, 2020, we had a net loss of $5,000 which consisted of formation costs.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
On January 26, 2021, the Company consummated the initial public offering of 37,950,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including 4,950,000 Units issued pursuant to the full exercise of the underwriters’ over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $379,500,000.
Simultaneously with the closing of our initial public offering, the Company consummated the sale of 7,126,667 Private Placement Warrants (the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.50 per Private Placement Warrant in a private placement to the Sponsor, generating total gross proceeds of $10,690,000.
Following the initial public offering and the sale of the Private Placement Warrants, an aggregate of $379,500,000 ($10.00 per Unit) was held in a Trust Account (“Trust Account”). Transaction costs of the IPO amounted to $21,283,859, consisting of $7,590,000 of underwriting discount, $13,282,500 of deferred underwriting discount, and $411,359 of other offering costs. Effective on the date of the IPO, $933,632 of offering costs associated with the issuance of the warrants was expensed while the remaining $20,350,227 was classified as temporary equity.
On August 6, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan us up to $1,500,000 to be used for a portion of our expenses. These loans are non-interest bearing, unsecured and are due upon consummation of an initial Business Combination. At the option of the Sponsor, the outstanding principle of the note may be converted into that number of warrants (“Conversion Warrants”) equal to the outstanding principle of the note divided by $1.50. In no case may the balance of the note be repaid out of funds in the Trust. At December 31, 2021 we owed $1,199,994 under the August 6, 2021 promissory note.
As of December 31, 2021, we have available to us approxiamately $1.4 million of cash on our balance sheet and a working capital deficit of approxiamately $6 thousand. We will use these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business, legal, and accounting due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination. The interest income earned on the investments in the Trust Account are unavailable to fund operating expenses.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account (less taxes payable) to complete our initial business combination. We may withdraw interest from the trust account to pay franchise and income taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our initial business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We have engaged underwriters as advisors in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our shareholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’s attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with the potential business combination, assist us in obtaining shareholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay the Marketing Fee for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination in an amount equal to, in the aggregate, 3.5% of the gross proceeds of our initial public offering, including any proceeds from the full or partial exercise of the over-allotment option.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. As of December 31, 2021, approximately $1.2 million was borrowed from the Sponsor to pay certain operating expenses. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the Trust Account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our Trust Account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1,500,000 of such loans may be
convertible into warrants of the post-business combination entity, at a price of $1.50 per warrant, at the option of the lender. The warrant would be identical to the private placement warrants.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business prior to our initial business combination. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. If we are unable to complete our initial business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates.
Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable ordinary shares (including ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within the Company’s control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, all ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of the balance sheet.
All of the Class A ordinary share sold as part of the Units in the IPO contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of such public shares in connection with our liquidation, if there is a shareholder vote or tender offer in connection with the Business Combination and in connection with certain amendments to our certificate of incorporation. In accordance with SEC and its staff’s guidance on redeemable equity instruments, which has been codified in ASC 480-10-S99, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require ordinary share subject to redemption to be classified outside of permanent equity.
If it is probable that the equity instrument will become redeemable, we have the option to either accrete changes in the redemption value over the period from the date of issuance (or from the date that it becomes probable that the instrument will become redeemable, if later) to the earliest redemption date of the instrument or to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying amount of the instrument to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. We recognize changes in redemption value immediately as they occur. Immediately upon the closing of the IPO, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value and subsequently adjusted the redemption book value as of the IPO date for the earnings in the Trust Account. The change in the carrying value of redeemable ordinary share resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital and accumulated deficit.
Warrant Liabilities
We account for our warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the warrant’s specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in ASC 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the warrants are freestanding financial instruments pursuant
to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the warrants meet all of the requirements for liability classification under ASC 815. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
Our warrants meet the criteria as liability classified derivative instruments and are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date
Share Based Compensation
The Company complies with ASC 718 Compensation - Stock Compensation regarding interest in founder shares acquired by directors of the Company. The interest in the founder shares vests 75% immediately with the remaining 25% vesting upon the Company consummating an initial Business Combination (the “Vesting Date”). If prior to the Vesting Date, the director(s)’ status as a director terminates, the unvested portion of the interest in the Sponsor is forfeited.
The interest in the founder shares was issued on January 20, 2021. Since the approach in ASC 718 is to determine the fair value without regard to the vesting date, the Company has determined the valuation of the Class B shares as of January 20, 2021. No consideration was paid for the interest in the founder shares or the transferred interest in the Sponsor.
Forward Purchase Agreement Liabilities
The contingent forward purchase units and their component securities would be identical to the units issued at the close of the IPO, except that the contingent forward purchase units and their component securities would be subject to transfer restrictions and certain registration rights, as described in the prospectus.
Our forward purchase units meet the criteria as liability classified derivative instruments and are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We evaluate our financial instruments to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives in accordance with ASC Topic 815, “Derivatives and Hedging”. Derivative instruments are recorded at fair value on the grant date and re-valued at each reporting date, with changes in the fair value reported in the statements of operations. Derivative assets and liabilities are classified on the balance sheet as current or non-current based on whether or not net-cash settlement or conversion of the instrument could be required within 12 months of the balance sheet date. We have determined our public warrants, private warrants and contingent forward purchase warrants, are a derivative instrument.
FASB ASC 470-20, Debt with Conversion and Other Options addresses the allocation of proceeds from the issuance of convertible debt into its equity and debt components. We apply this guidance to allocate IPO proceeds from the Units between Class A ordinary shares and warrants, using the residual method by allocating IPO proceeds first to fair value of the warrants and contingent forward purchase units and then the Class A ordinary shares.
Recent Accounting Standards
August 2020, the FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial
conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments. ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on its financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
We do not believe that any recently issued, but not effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.