ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations is intended to provide a reader of our financial statements with a narrative from the perspective of our management on our financial condition, results of operations, liquidity, and certain other factors that may affect our future results. You should read the following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and the related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical information, the following discussion and analysis includes forward-looking information that involves risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results and the timing of events could differ materially from those anticipated by these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those discussed under “Item 1A. Risk Factors” and elsewhere in this Form 10 -K. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” included elsewhere in this Form 10 -K.
Overview
We are a medical device company focusing on noninvasive biological response-activating devices that target wound healing and pain therapy and can be administered at home, without the assistance of medical professionals. Our WoundShield, PainShield and UroShield products are backed by novel technology which relates to ultrasound delivery through surface acoustic waves.
Recent Events
COVID-19
The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has and may continue to adversely impact our business, as our operations are based in and rely on third parties located in countries affected by the pandemic. Our third-party manufacturer, which is based in China, temporarily shut down for sixty days during 2020 due to the pandemic and became fully operational in April 2020 which led to a significant delay in the production of goods needed to fulfill our sales orders which were scheduled to be fulfilled in our first quarter of 2020. We were able to fulfill these orders in the second quarter of 2020. Additionally, the notified regulatory body we rely on to obtain European CE approval is located in Italy and was shut down for approximately six weeks from March to April 2020, which delayed our submission for CE mark approval for the year 2020. The CE Mark approval was subsequently approved in April 2020. The various precautionary measures taken by many governmental authorities around the world in order to limit the spread of COVID-19 have had and may continue to have an adverse effect on the global markets and global economy, including on the availability and pricing of employees, resources, materials, manufacturing and delivery efforts and other aspects of the global economy. During the first six months of 2020, the financial downturn compelled us to furlough or reduce working hours for much of our operating staff, and forced our remaining staff as well as third-party contractors, to work remotely. In addition, many staff members continue to operate remotely from their homes which is continuing to result in delays in obtaining certain financial records. We also rely on third-party professionals to provide services such as the preparation of our financial statements and to conduct audits, and many of these parties have been affected by government-imposed precautionary measures, thereby delaying our receipt of these services. Such government-imposed precautionary measures may have been relaxed in certain countries or states, but there is no assurance that more strict measures will be put in place again due to a resurgence in COVID-19 cases. Although there were no material disruptions during 2021, the COVID-19 pandemic again disrupt production and cause delays in the development, supply and delivery of our products, our operation, further divert the attention and efforts of the medical community coping with COVID-19 and disrupt the marketplace in which we operate. The extent to which COVID-19 impacts our results will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information which may emerge concerning the severity of COVID-19, its variants and the actions to contain COVID-19 or treat its impact, among others. The COVID-19 pandemic could continue to materially disrupt our business and operations, hamper our ability to raise additional funds or sell or securities, continue to slow down the overall economy, curtail consumer spending, interrupt our sources of supply, and make it hard to adequately staff our operations.
On February 26, 2021, Protrade Systems, Inc. (“Protrade”) filed a Request for Arbitration (the “Request”) with the International Court of Arbitration (the “ICA”) of the International Chamber of Commerce alleging the Company is in breach of an Exclusive Distribution Agreement dated March 7, 2019 (the “Agreement”) between Protrade and the Company. Protrade alleges, in part, that the Company has breached the Agreement by discontinuing the manufacture of the DV0057 Painshield MD device in favor of an updated 10-100-001 Painshield MD device. Protrade claims damages estimated at $3 million.
On March 15, 2022, the arbitrator issued a final award, which, although finding that Protrade’s claims failed as a matter of law or were unsupported by the evidence, nevertheless awarded Protrade $1,432,000 for “lost profits” on the grounds that the Company allegedly failed to supply Protrade with “requested patches.” We continue to dispute the claims asserted by Protrade and intend to pursue the available options to vacate or seek correction of the award to Protrade. As of December 31, 2021, the Company accrued the amount of the award to Protrade amounting to $1,500,250 as part of “General and administrative expenses” and “Other accounts payable and accrued expenses”.
Business Developments
Effective as of January 2020, the U.S. CMS approved our PainShield™ for reimbursement for Medicare beneficiaries on a national basis. We were notified on March 30, 2020 that our Medicare Enrollment Application was approved, and we are now an approved Medicare Supplier for DME through the National Supplier Clearinghouse, Palmetto-GBA as well as Noridian Administrative Services, LLC, the two Medicare Administrative Contractors that handle DME reimbursement nationwide. PainShield is currently available for Medicare reimbursement on a national level under new HCPCS (Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System) code K1004.
In March 2020, we signed a license agreement with Sanuwave Health, Inc. for the manufacture and delivery of our WoundShield technology. Under the terms of the agreement, we will receive warrants to purchase 127,000 shares of Sanuwave stock, a $250,000 milestone payment based on receipt of U.S. Food and Drug Administration approval, and 10% royalty on Sanuwave’s gross revenues from sales or rentals of WoundShield. In return, Sanuwave has received the worldwide, exclusive rights to our WoundShield product and technology. In addition, Sanuwave will bear the costs and clinical validation responsibilities associated with obtaining approval for WoundShield from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and other regulatory agencies around the world.
In September 2020, the FDA exercised its Enforcement Discretion to allow distribution of our UroShield device in the United States. This temporary authorization is limited to use as an extracorporeal acoustic wave generating accessory to urological indwelling catheter for use during the COVID-19 pandemic.
NASDAQ Delisting Procedure
On November 5, 2020, the Company received a subsequent letter from the Nasdaq Stock Market (“Nasdaq) indicating that, based upon the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock for the 30 consecutive business day period between September 24, 2020, through November 4, 2020, the Company did not meet the minimum bid price of $1.00 per share required for continued listing on the Nasdaq Capital Market pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2).
On January 4, 2021, the Company received formal notice that the Company has regained compliance with the equity requirement of Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(b)(1), as required by the Panel decision dated October 6, 2020. Accordingly, the Panel determined to continue the listing of the Company’s securities on The Nasdaq Stock Market.
On February 2, 2021, the Company received formal notice that Nasdaq had determined that for the period from January 19 to February 1, 2021, the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock had been at $1.00 per share or greater. Accordingly, the Company regained compliance with Listing Rule 5550(a)(2).
On March 2, 2022, NanoVibronix, Inc. received a letter from Nasdaq indicating that, based upon the closing bid price of the Company’s common stock for the 30 consecutive business day period between January 14, 2022, through March 1, 2022, the Company did not meet the minimum bid price of $1.00 per share required for continued listing on The Nasdaq Capital Market pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5550(a)(2). The letter also indicated that the Company will be provided with a compliance period of 180 calendar days, or until August 29, 2022 (the “Compliance Period”), in which to regain compliance pursuant to Nasdaq Listing Rule 5810(c)(3)(A).
In order to regain compliance with Nasdaq’s minimum bid price requirement, the Company’s common stock must maintain a minimum closing bid price of $1.00 for at least ten consecutive business days during the Compliance Period. In the event the Company does not regain compliance by the end of the Compliance Period, the Company may be eligible for additional time to regain compliance. To qualify, the Company will be required to meet the continued listing requirement for the market value of its publicly held shares and all other initial listing standards for The Nasdaq Capital Market, with the exception of the bid price requirement, and will need to provide written notice of its intention to cure the deficiency during the second compliance period, by effecting a reverse stock split if necessary. If the Company meets these requirements, the Company may be granted an additional 180 calendar days to regain compliance. However, if it appears to Nasdaq that the Company will be unable to cure the deficiency, or if the Company is not otherwise eligible for the additional cure period, Nasdaq will provide notice that the Company’s common stock will be subject to delisting. The letter has no immediate impact on the listing of the Company’s common stock, which will continue to be listed and traded on The Nasdaq Capital Market, subject to the Company’s compliance with the other listing requirements of The Nasdaq Capital Market
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Estimates
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and the reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reported period. In accordance with U.S. GAAP, we base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates if conditions differ from our assumptions. While our significant accounting policies are more fully described in Note 3 in the “Notes to Financial Statements”, we believe the following accounting policies are critical to the process of making significant estimates in preparation of our financial statements.
Inventory
Inventories are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Net realizable value is the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. Cost is determined using the “first-in, first-out” method.
Inventory write-offs are provided to cover risks arising from slow-moving items or technological obsolescence. The Company periodically evaluates the quantities on hand relative to current and historical selling prices and historical and projected sales volume. Based on this evaluation, provisions are made when required to write-down inventory to its net market value. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was no allowance on inventory.
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Management reviews for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of property and equipment may not be recoverable under the provisions of accounting for the impairment of long-lived assets. If it is determined that an impairment loss has occurred based upon expected future cash flows, the loss is recognized in the Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Sequencing
The Company adopted a sequencing policy under ASC 815-40-35 whereby if reclassification of contracts from equity to liabilities is necessary pursuant to ASC 815 due to the Company’s inability to demonstrate it has sufficient authorized shares. This was due to the Company committing more shares than authorized. While temporary suspensions are in place to keep the potential exercises beneath the number authorized, certain instruments are classified as liabilities, after allocating available authorized shares on the basis of the most recent grant date of potentially dilutive instruments. Pursuant to ASC 815, issuances of securities granted as compensation in a share-based payment arrangement are not subject to the sequencing policy.
Derivative Liability
The Company’s derivative financial instruments are measured at fair value using the Black Scholes Model which takes into account, as of the valuation date, factors including the current exercise price, the expected life of the warrant, the current price of the underlying stock and its expected volatility, expected dividends on the stock and the risk-free interest rate for the term of the instrument. The Black Scholes Model is subject to uncertainty since the underlying calculation relies on historical data to project future stock prices, i.e. expected volatility, in order to estimate fair value. Because the expected volatility is based on historical stock prices, the volatility assumed for each period may vary. The liability is revalued at each reporting period and changes in fair value are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss under the caption “Change in fair value of derivative liabilities.” As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were $0 and $2,471 derivative liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet, respectively (see Note 8).
Revenue recognition
It is the Company’s policy that revenues from product sales is recognized in accordance with ASC 606 “Revenue Recognition.” Five basic steps must be followed before revenue can be recognized; (1) Identifying the contract(s) with a customer that creates enforceable rights and obligations; (2) Identifying the performance obligations in the contract, such as promising to transfer goods or services to a customer; (3) Determining the transaction price, meaning the amount of consideration in a contract to which an entity expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring promised goods or services to a customer; (4) Allocating the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, which requires the company to allocate the transaction price to each performance obligation on the basis of the relative standalone selling prices of each distinct good or services promised in the contract; and (5) Recognizing revenue when (or as) the entity satisfies a performance obligation by transferring a promised good or service to a customer. The amount of revenue recognized is the amount allocated to the satisfied performance obligation. Adoption of ASC 606 has not changed the timing and nature of the Company’s revenue recognition and there has been no material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Revenue from product sales is recorded at the net sales price, or “transaction price,” which includes estimates of variable consideration that result from coupons, discounts, chargebacks and distributor fees, processing fees, as well as allowances for returns and government rebates. The Company constrains revenue by giving consideration to factors that could otherwise lead to a probable reversal of revenue. Collectability of revenue is reasonably assured based on historical evidence of collectability between the Company and its customers.
Revenues from sales to distributors are recognized at the time the products are delivered to the distributors (“sell-in”). The Company does not grant rights of return, credits, rebates, price protection, or other privileges on its products to distributors.
Revenues from sales to distributors are recognized at the time the products are delivered to the distributors (“sell-in”). The Company does not grant rights of return, credits, rebates, price protection, or other privileges on its products to distributors.
Stock-based compensation
We rely on the Black-Scholes option pricing model for estimating the fair value of stock-based awards granted, and expected volatility is based on the historical volatilities of peer company’s common stock. Stock options generally vest over one or two years from the grant date and generally have ten-year contractual terms. Information about the assumptions used in the calculation of stock-based compensation expense is set forth in Notes 3 and 6 in the “Notes to Financial Statements”.
Income taxes
On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”) was enacted in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act, among other things, permits NOL carryovers and carrybacks to offset 100% of taxable income for taxable years beginning before 2021. In addition, the CARES Act allows NOLs incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid income taxes. The Company has been consistently in a loss position in the U.S. and at present does not expect that the NOL carryback provision of the CARES Act would result in a material cash benefit to the Company.
We account for income taxes in accordance with ASC 740, “Income Taxes”. This topic prescribes the use of the liability method whereby deferred tax assets and liability account balances are determined based on differences between financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when the differences are expected to reverse. We provide full valuation allowance, to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not to be realized.
We implemented a two-step approach to recognize and measure uncertain tax positions. The first step is to evaluate the tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return by determining if the weight of available evidence indicates that it is more likely than not that, on an evaluation of the technical merits, the tax position will be sustained on audit, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. The second step is to measure the tax benefit as the largest amount that is more than 50% (cumulative basis) likely to be realized upon ultimate settlement.
We recognize interest and penalties related to uncertain tax positions on the income tax expense line in the accompanying consolidated statement of operations. Accrued interest and penalties are included on the related tax liability line in the consolidated balance sheet.
Recently issued accounting standards
For a summary of recent accounting pronouncements applicable to our consolidated financial statements see Note 3, “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part IV, Item 15 of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our revenues were approximately $1,695,000 and $623,000, respectively, an increase of approximately 172%, or $1,072,000, between the periods. The increase was mainly attributable to increased sales from our Ultra Pain Products distributor as well as adding a new distributor who sells our products to Veteran Administration facilities. Our revenues may fluctuate as we add new customers or when existing distributors make large purchases of our products during one period and no purchases during another period. Our revenues by quarter may not be linear or consistent. We do not anticipate that our revenues will be impacted by inflation or changing prices in the foreseeable future.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, the percentage of revenues attributable to our products was: PainShield - 99% and UroShield - 1%. For the year ended December 31, 2020, the percentage of revenues attributable to our products was: PainShield - 92% WoundShield - 8%; and UroShield - 0. For both the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the portion of our revenues that was derived from distributors was 93%.
Gross Profit. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, gross profit was approximately $770,000 and $214,000, respectively. The increase was due to the large increase in revenues in 2021, enhanced by decreased costs of manufacturing in 2021, as we incurred several one-time costs in the transition of our manufacturing of products to a third-party manufacturer in 2020.
Gross profit as a percentage of revenues were approximately 45% and 34% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in gross profit as a percentage is mainly due to the reasons described above.
Research and Development Expenses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, research and development expenses were approximately $293,000 and $171,000, respectively, an increase of approximately 71%, or $122,000 between the periods. This increase was mainly due to studies performed during 2021 and development of an over-the-counter PainShield product and a CBD application for our PainShield product.
Research and development expenses as a percentage of total revenues were approximately 17% and 27% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
The significant difference during the year, as compared to last year’s percentage, was due to the variation of the number of clinical trials that the Company does per year. In particular, the Company only did one (1) clinical trial in 2021, which was considerably less than the previous years.
Our research and development expenses consist mainly of payroll expenses to employees involved in research and development activities, expenses related to subcontracting, patents, clinical trial and facilities expenses associated with and allocated to research and development activities.
Selling and Marketing Expenses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, selling and marketing expenses were approximately $1,101,000 and $993,000, respectively, an increase of approximately 11%, or $108,000, between the periods. The increase in selling and marketing expenses was mainly due to normalization of operations in 2021 after COVID-19 restrictions in 2020 which caused reduced payroll and curtailed marketing activities, such as less travel and trade show expenses.
Selling and marketing expenses as a percentage of total revenues were approximately 65% and 159% for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in our percentage was due to the increase in revenues.
Selling and marketing expenses consist mainly of payroll expenses to direct sales and marketing employees, stock-based compensation expenses, travel expenses, advertising and marketing expenses, rent and facilities expenses associated with and allocated to selling and marketing activities.
General and Administrative Expenses. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, general and administrative expenses were approximately $5,059,000 and $3,769,000, respectively, an increase of approximately 34%, or $1,290,000, between the periods. The increase was mainly due to the recognition of a $1,500,000 arbitration settlement expense from final award of arbitration issued in favor of the Company’s former distributor to cover for “lost profits” and reimbursement of arbitration costs.
Interest expense. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $0 and $147,000, respectively. All notes were paid off in the fourth quarter of 2020. There were no new notes in 2021.
Change in fair value of derivative liabilities. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, there was a change in fair value of derivative liabilities resulting in a loss of approximately $6,956,000 and gain of approximately $513,000, respectively. The change in fair value fluctuates based on the Company’s stock price.
Warrant modification expense. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, warrant modification expense was approximately $1,627,000 and $0, respectively. The warrant modification expense was due to the resolution of the overissuance shares matter. The overissuance shares matter resulted in a reclassification of derivative liabilities to equity during 2021. There was no warrant modification in 2020.
Income tax expense. For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our income tax expense was approximately $35,000 and $15,000, respectively. The low tax expense for 2020 was a result of favorable adjustments due to lapses of statutes of limitations on its Israel tax positions. In 2021, there was no such adjustment and large increase in revenues.
Net Loss. Our net loss increased by approximately $9,957,000, or 230%, to approximately $14,282,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 from approximately $4,325,000 during the same period in 2020. The increase in net loss resulted primarily from the factors described above.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have incurred losses in the amount of approximately $14,282,000 during the year ended December 31, 2021, which primarily consisted of increased expenses from research studies and product development, increase in payroll costs to normal levels since COVID furloughs in 2020, losses due to changes in fair value of derivative liabilities and warrant modifications. We also had negative cash flow from operating activities of $4,367,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021. Although we expect to continue to incur losses and negative cash flows from operating activities, we had a cash balance of just over $7,737,000 as of December 31, 2021, and therefore, we expect to have sufficient resources to fund our operation for the next twelve months from the date of this filing. The Company may need to continue to raise additional capital to finance its losses and negative cash flows from operations beyond the next years and may continue to be dependent on additional capital raising as long as our products do not reach commercial profitability. If we are unable to obtain stockholder ratification of certain prior issuances of our common stock and approval of an increase in the number of authorized shares of our common stock, we will be unable to issue common stock or convertible instruments. As a result, the Company will be limited in its ability to raise additional capital.
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we met our short-term liquidity requirements from our existing cash reserves and proceeds from warrant exercises. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of our available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products, our development of future products and competing technological and market developments as well as our ability to overcome obstacles that may be presented due to developments caused by the coronavirus outbreak. We expect to continue to incur losses and negative flows from operations. We intend to use the proceeds generated from equity financings, or strategic alliances with third parties, either alone or in combination with equity financing to meet our short-term liquidity requirements as well as to advance our long-term plans. While we believe we have sufficient capital to execute our business plan over the next twelve months, there are no assurances that we will not need to raise additional capital at a later time, or that we would be able to raise additional capital, if required, on terms favorable to us.
We do not have any material commitments to capital expenditures as of December 31, 2021, and we are not aware of any material trends in capital resources that would impact our business.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to Years Ended December 31, 2020
General. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $7,737,000, compared to approximately $7,533,000 as of December 31, 2020. We have historically met our cash needs through a combination of issuance of equity, borrowing activities and sales. Our cash requirements are generally for product development, research and development cost, marketing and sales activities, general and administrative cost, capital expenditures and general working capital.
Cash used in our operating activities was approximately $4,367,000 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and approximately $3,391,000 for the same period in 2020. The increase in our net cash used in operating activities in the amount of $975,000 is mainly attributable to the decrease in noncash expense of change in fair value of derivative liability, legal settlement expense and warrant modification expense, partially offset by other working capital accounts.
Cash used in our investing activities was approximately $3,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 compared to cash used in our investing activities was $2,000 during the years ended December 31, 2020.
Cash provided by financing activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 was approximately $4,580,000 which was mostly the net proceeds received from the exercise of warrants completed in 2021 compared to $9,522,000 in 2020, which was the net proceeds received from the sale of common stock in private placements 2020. Our future capital requirements and the adequacy of available funds will depend on many factors, including our ability to successfully commercialize our products, our development of future products and competing technological and market developments.
Factors That May Affect Future Operations
We believe that our future operating results will continue to be subject to quarterly variations based upon a wide variety of factors, including the ordering patterns of our distributors, timing of regulatory approvals, the implementation of various phases of our clinical trials and manufacturing efficiencies due to the learning curve of utilizing new materials and equipment as well issues that may continue to occur due to the development of the coronavirus outbreak. While there were significant delays in the production of goods due to COVID-19 issues, presently, we are no longer experiencing such delays in the production of our products. That said, there are no assurances that if a second wave of the pandemic occurs that we will not experience significant delays in the future. Our operating results could also be impacted by a weakening of the Euro and strengthening of the New Israeli Shekel, or NIS, both against the U.S. dollar. Lastly, other economic conditions we cannot foresee may affect customer demand, such as individual country reimbursement policies pertaining to our products.