Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read together with our Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes related to those statements, as well as the other financial information included in this Form 10-K. Some of our discussion is forward-looking and involves risks and uncertainties. For information regarding risk factors that could have a material adverse effect on our business and future results, refer to Item 1A of this Form 10-K, “Risk Factors.”
The Company
Navidea Biopharmaceuticals, Inc. is a biopharmaceutical company focused on the development and commercialization of precision immunodiagnostic agents and immunotherapeutics. Navidea is developing multiple precision-targeted products based on our Manocept platform to enhance patient care by identifying the sites and pathways of undetected disease and enable better diagnostic accuracy, clinical decision-making and targeted treatment.
Navidea’s Manocept platform is predicated on the ability to specifically target the CD206 mannose receptor expressed on activated macrophages. The Manocept platform serves as the molecular backbone of Tc99m tilmanocept, the first product developed and commercialized by Navidea based on the platform. Other than Tc99m tilmanocept, which the Company has a license to distribute outside of Canada, Mexico and the United States, none of the Company’s drug product candidates have been approved for sale in any market.
We manage our business based on two primary types of drug products: (i) diagnostic substances, including Tc99m tilmanocept and other diagnostic applications of our Manocept platform, and (ii) therapeutic applications of our Manocept platform. See Note 15 to the consolidated financial statements for more information about our business segments.
In the near term, the Company intends to continue to develop our additional imaging product candidates into advanced clinical testing, as well as working to extend the regulatory approvals for use of the Tc99m tilmanocept product. We will also be evaluating potential funding and other resources required for continued development, regulatory approval and commercialization of any Manocept platform product candidates that we identify for further development, and potential options for advancing development.
Outlook
Our operating expenses in recent years have been focused primarily on support of both diagnostic and therapeutic applications of our Manocept platform, and Tc99m tilmanocept. We incurred approximately $5.1 million and $4.9 million in total on R&D activities during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Of the total amounts we spent on R&D during those periods, excluding costs related to our internal R&D headcount and our general and administrative staff which we do not currently allocate among the various development programs that we have underway, we incurred out-of-pocket charges by program as follows:
(a)
Certain development program expenditures were offset by grant reimbursement revenues totaling $88,000 and $696,000 during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
(b)
Certain 2020 amounts have been reclassified from Tc99m Tilmanocept to Manocept Platform - Diagnostics to conform to the 2021 presentation.
We expect to continue the advancement of our efforts with our Manocept platform during 2022. We currently expect our total research and development expenses, including both out-of-pocket charges as well as internal headcount and support costs, to be higher in 2022 than in 2021. However, the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the global economy and may impact our operations, including the potential interruption of our clinical trial activities and our supply chain. For example, the COVID-19 outbreak delayed enrollment in our NAV3-32 clinical study in the United Kingdom due to national COVID-19-related shutdowns. In addition, the regulatory approval process in India was delayed by the impact of COVID-19 in that country. The COVID-19 pandemic may delay enrollment in our future clinical trials due to prioritization of hospital resources toward the outbreak, and some patients may be unwilling to enroll in our future trials or be unable to comply with clinical trial protocols if quarantines impede patient movement or interrupt healthcare services, which would delay our ability to conduct clinical trials or release clinical trial results. The spread of an infectious disease, including COVID-19, may also result in the inability of our suppliers to deliver clinical drug supplies on a timely basis or at all. In addition, hospitals may reduce staffing and reduce or postpone certain treatments in response to the spread of an infectious disease. Such events may result in a period of business disruption, and in reduced operations, or doctors and medical providers may be unwilling to participate in our clinical trials, any of which could materially affect our business, financial condition and results of operations.
The extent to which the ongoing global COVID-19 pandemic impacts our business will depend on future developments, which are highly uncertain and cannot be predicted, including new information that may emerge concerning the severity and spread of COVID-19, the actions taken by federal, state and local governmental authorities, both domestic and foreign, as well as private parties, to contain or treat its impact, and other events outside of our control. The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition and results of operations, including our ability to obtain additional funding, if needed.
Tc99m tilmanocept is approved by the EMA for use in imaging and intraoperative detection of sentinel lymph nodes draining a primary tumor in adult patients with breast cancer, melanoma, or localized squamous cell carcinoma of the oral cavity in the EU. We anticipate that we will incur costs to support our product, regulatory, manufacturing and commercial activities related to the sale of Tc99m tilmanocept in the EU, as well as related to the potential marketing registration and sale of Tc99m tilmanocept in markets other than the EU. There can be no assurance that Tc99m tilmanocept will achieve regulatory approval in any market other than the EU, or if approved in those markets, that it will achieve market acceptance in the EU or any other market. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
We continue to evaluate existing and emerging data on the potential use of Manocept-related agents in the diagnosis, disease-staging and treatment of disorders in which macrophages are involved, such as RA, KS, NASH and other disease states, to define areas of focus, development pathways and partnering options to capitalize on the Manocept platform. We will also be evaluating potential funding and other resources required for continued development, regulatory approval and commercialization of any Manocept platform product candidates that we identify for further development, and potential options for advancing development. There can be no assurance of obtaining funding or other resources on terms acceptable to us, if at all, that further evaluation or development will be successful, that any Manocept platform product candidate will ultimately achieve regulatory approval, or if approved, the extent to which it will achieve market acceptance. See Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
Results of Operations
Our pharmaceutical products and product candidates are not yet generating significant commercial revenue, therefore the discussion of our revenue focuses on the grant and other revenue and our operating variances focus on our product development programs and the supporting general and administrative expenses.
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Royalty Revenue. During 2020, we recognized royalty revenue of $8,000 related to our license agreement with SpePharm in Europe. No royalty revenue was recorded during 2021. The decrease in royalty revenue was due to termination of our license agreement with SpePharm in May 2020.
License Revenue. During 2021 and 2020, we recognized license revenue of $46,000 and $111,000, respectively, related to net transitional sales from SpePharm in Europe. The decrease in license revenue was due to the cessation of active marketing of Tc99m tilmanocept in Europe following the termination of our license agreement with SpePharm in May 2020.
Grant and Other Revenue. During 2021, we recognized $486,000 of grant and other revenue compared to $796,000 in 2020. Grant revenue of $88,000 and $696,000 during 2021 and 2020, respectively, was primarily related to SBIR grants from the NIH supporting Manocept development. Other revenue during 2021 included $298,000 from LikeMinds for the partial recovery of debts previously written off in 2015 and $100,000 from Cardinal Health 414 for reimbursement of certain research and development costs. Other revenue for 2020 included $100,000 from Alseres for the partial recovery of debts previously written off in 2015.
Research and Development Expenses. R&D expenses increased $212,000, or 4%, to $5.1 million during 2021 from $4.9 million during 2020. The increase was primarily due to increased regulatory consulting expenses of $101,000, increased employee compensation including incentive-based awards of $82,000, increased travel costs of $30,000, increased recruiting fees of $28,000 and increased general office expenses of $19,000. These increases were coupled with net increases in drug project expenses related to (i) increased therapeutics development costs of $316,000, including increased preclinical and clinical development costs; and (ii) increased Tc99m tilmanocept development costs of $79,000, primarily European regulatory consulting expenses; offset by (iii) decreased Manocept diagnostic development costs of $388,000 including decreased license fees and manufacturing-related activities offset by increased clinical trial costs.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses. Selling, general and administrative expenses increased $755,000, or 11%, to $7.5 million during 2021 from $6.7 million during 2020. The net increase was primarily due to separation expenses of $969,000 related to the resignation of our former Chief Executive Officer, increased consulting services of $413,000 related to European distribution of Tc99m tilmanocept, increased director fees of $189,000 related to additional board members and increased board compensation rates, increased insurance costs of $176,000, losses on the abandonment of certain intellectual property of $93,000, recruiting fees of $75,000 related to our search for a new Chief Executive Officer, increased travel expenses of $52,000 and increased general office expenses of $34,000 primarily related to technology upgrades, offset by decreased legal and professional services of $580,000, and decreased employee compensation including incentive-based awards of $471,000, decreased investor relations costs of $133,000, decreased EMA and other annual registration fees of $30,000, decreased facilities costs of $27,000 and decreased franchise taxes of $13,000.
Other Income (Expense). Other income, net, was $346,000 during 2021 compared to other expense, net, of $11,000 during 2020. During 2021, we recognized a gain on extinguishment of debt of $366,000 resulting from forgiveness of our PPP loan. During 2021 and 2020, we recognized interest income of $3,000 and $18,000, respectively. During 2021 and 2020, we recorded interest expense of $9,000 and $7,000, respectively.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash balances increased to $4.2 million as of December 31, 2021 from $2.7 million as of December 31, 2020. The net increase was primarily due to net proceeds from issuance of preferred stock of $12.6 million, offset by cash used to fund our operations of $10.2 million, payments on notes payable of $492,000 and patent and trademark costs of $304,000.
Operating Activities. Cash used in operations was $10.2 million during 2021 compared to $8.2 million cash used in operations during 2020.
Stock subscriptions and other receivables decreased $2.9 million to $93,000 as of December 31, 2021 from $3.0 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to decreased preferred stock subscriptions of $2.9 million and decreased amounts receivable for transitional sales revenue from SpePharm of $58,000, offset by increased amounts receivable from related parties for reimbursement of legal fees of $90,000.
Inventory decreased $19,000 to $151,000 as of December 31, 2021 from $170,000 as of December 31, 2020, primarily due to materials allocated to manufacturing process development of $28,000 offset by increased finished goods inventory of $13,000 due to finished goods cost adjustments.
Prepaid expenses and other current assets increased $207,000 to $908,000 as of December 31, 2021 from $701,000 as of December 31, 2020. The increase was primarily due to a net increase in prepaid insurance of $160,000, an upfront contract payment of $56,000 related to a clinical study and an upfront contract payment of $23,000 related to manufacturing process development, offset by the return of a retainer for legal services of $30,000.
Accounts payable increased $260,000 to $1.4 million as of December 31, 2021 from $1.2 million as of December 31, 2020, primarily driven by net increased payables due for Manocept development costs, manufacturing-related activities, therapeutics development costs and investor relations costs, offset by net decreased payables due for Navidea Europe costs and legal and professional services. Accrued liabilities and other current liabilities increased $636,000 to $3.1 million as of December 31, 2021 from $2.5 million as of December 31, 2020. Increased accruals related to the separation of our former Chief Executive Officer, Manocept development costs, employee benefits and Navidea Europe were offset by decreased accruals for incentive-based compensation and legal and professional services. Our payable and accrual balances will continue to fluctuate, with planned increases in development activity related to the Manocept platform offset by decreased legal fees as we continue to work to resolve our legal disputes.
Investing Activities. Investing activities used $329,000 during 2021 compared to $413,000 used during 2020. Patent and trademark costs used $304,000 and purchases of property and equipment used $25,000 during 2021. Patent and trademark costs used $278,000 and purchases of property and equipment used $136,000 during 2020.
Financing Activities. Financing activities provided $12.1 million during 2021 compared to $10.2 million provided during 2020. The $12.1 million provided by financing activities in 2021 consisted primarily of proceeds from issuance of preferred stock of $12.7 million, offset by principal payments on financed insurance premiums of $492,000, payment of preferred stock issuance costs of $70,000 and payment of tax withholdings related to stock-based compensation of $17,000. The $10.2 million provided by financing activities during 2020 consisted primarily of proceeds from the issuance of preferred stock of $6.0 million, proceeds from the issuance of Common Stock of $4.4 million, and proceeds from notes payable of $366,000, offset by principal payments on financed insurance premiums of $369,000, payment of Common Stock issuance costs of $150,000 and payment of preferred stock issuance costs of $55,000.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
The Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (the “CARES Act”) was enacted on March 27, 2020. Among the provisions contained in the CARES Act was the creation of the Payroll Protection Program (“PPP”) that provides for Small Business Administration (“SBA”) Section 7(a) loans for qualified small businesses. PPP loan proceeds are available to be used to pay for payroll costs, including salaries, commissions, and similar compensation, group health care benefits, and paid leaves; rent; utilities; and interest on certain other outstanding debt. On May 18, 2020, Fifth Third Bank (the “Lender”) funded a PPP loan to the Company in the amount of $366,000 (the “PPP Loan”). In accordance with the loan forgiveness requirements of the CARES Act, the Company used the proceeds from the PPP Loan primarily for payroll costs, rent and utilities. On February 23, 2021, the Lender notified the Company that the entire PPP Loan amount of $366,000 had been forgiven. See Notes 2 and 10 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Registered Offering
On February 14, 2020, we executed an agreement with an investor to purchase approximately 1.6 million shares of our Common Stock at a price of $0.85 per share for aggregate gross proceeds to Navidea of $1.4 million. The offering was made pursuant to our shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-222092), which was declared effective by the SEC on December 27, 2017, including the prospectus contained therein, as well as a prospectus supplement filed with the SEC on February 18, 2020. See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Private Placements
On February 13, 2020, we executed a stock purchase agreement with John K. Scott, Jr. to purchase approximately 2.4 million shares of Common Stock for aggregate gross proceeds of approximately $2.0 million. A registration statement on Form S-3 (Registration No. 333-248404) covering the resale of the shares of Common Stock issued to Mr. Scott was declared effective by the SEC on September 16, 2020. See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
On August 30, 2020, the Company entered into a Common Stock Purchase Agreement with the Investors named therein, pursuant to which the Investors agreed to purchase from the Company up to $25.0 million in shares of the Company’s Common Stock. To date, we have received only $25,000 of the $5.0 million that was owed under the Common Stock Purchase Agreement. We are continuing to evaluate our rights and remedies under that agreement. Effective December 14, 2021, Navidea terminated the Common Stock Purchase Agreement. See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Series C Preferred Stock
On May 6, 2020, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent with Keystone Capital Partners, LLC (“Keystone”) pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue to Keystone 420,000 shares of newly-designated Series C Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series C Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of $4.2 million. All $4.2 million were received and the related Series C Preferred Stock was issued during the second and third quarters of 2020. The 420,000 shares of Series C Preferred Stock were subsequently converted into 1,425,076 shares of Common Stock. See Notes 2 and 14 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Series D Preferred Stock
On August 31, 2020, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent (the “Series D Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement”) with Keystone pursuant to which the Company agreed to issue to Keystone 150,000 shares of newly-designated Series D Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series D Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of $15.0 million. Pursuant to the Series D Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement, Keystone agreed to purchase Series D Preferred Stock in amounts to be determined by Keystone in one or more closings before the end of the nine-month period following the date when the Company’s prospectus supplement to its existing registration statement on Form S-3 was filed with the SEC. Through July 7, 2021, Keystone purchased 72,500 shares of Series D Preferred Stock pursuant to the Series D Preferred Stock Purchase Agreement for an aggregate purchase price of $7.25 million, leaving a remaining balance of 77,500 shares of Series D Preferred Stock. On July 8, 2021 (the “Amendment Effective Date”), the Company entered into an Amendment to Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent (the “Series D Amendment”) with Keystone pursuant to which Keystone purchased 22,077 shares of Series D Preferred Stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $2.2 million. After purchasing the 22,077 shares, Keystone has no further right or obligation to purchase shares of Series D Preferred Stock. Including the purchases pursuant to the Series D Amendment, Keystone’s purchases of Series D Preferred Stock pursuant to the Series D Purchase Agreement during the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled 76,827 shares of Series D Preferred Stock for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $7.7 million. The Series D Preferred Stock is convertible into a maximum of 5,147,000 shares of Common Stock. See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Series E Preferred Stock
On March 2, 2021, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement and Letter of Investment Intent with an existing accredited investor, John K. Scott, Jr., pursuant to which the Company issued to Mr. Scott in a private placement transaction 50,000 shares of newly-designated Series E Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock (the “Series E Preferred Stock”) for an aggregate purchase price of $5.0 million. On January 31, 2022, pursuant to the Certificate of Designations of the Series E Redeemable Convertible Preferred Stock dated March 2, 2021, the holder of the Series E Preferred Stock, John K. Scott, Jr., notified the Company that he was exercising his option to extend the Conversion Deadline (as defined therein) for an additional period of six months. The Series E Preferred Stock is convertible into a maximum of 2,173,913 shares of Common Stock. See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Jubilant Memorandum of Understanding
On August 9, 2020, the Company entered into a binding memorandum of understanding (“MOU”) with Jubilant Draximage Inc., dba Jubilant Radiopharma, Radiopharmaceuticals Division (“Jubilant”). The MOU outlines the terms and framework for a potential Exclusive License and Distribution Agreement (“ELDA”) for Navidea’s Tc99m-Tilmanocept Rheumatoid Arthritis diagnostic application in the United States, Canada, Mexico, and Latin America. In connection with the MOU, the Company entered into a Stock Purchase Agreement with Jubilant, pursuant to which Jubilant purchased $1.0 million in shares of the Company’s Common Stock in exchange for exclusivity of negotiations while due diligence efforts are completed.
The execution of the ELDA is subject to certain conditions, including negotiation of a definitive agreement in mutually acceptable form and Jubilant’s completion of its due diligence. See Notes 2 and 13 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Material Commitments
Latkin Separation Agreement. On November 23, 2021, Jed A. Latkin signed a Separation Agreement and General Release (the “Separation Agreement”) in connection with his resignation from his positions as Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer and Chief Financial Officer, and as a director, on October 24, 2021 (the “Separation Date”). Pursuant to the Separation Agreement, among other things, the Company agreed to the continued payment of Mr. Latkin’s base salary of $490,000, less all relevant taxes and other withholdings, on the following basis: (i) for 12 months, 100% of his base salary, minus an aggregate $24,000 deducted monthly pro rata for reimbursement of Mr. Latkin’s attorney fees which were paid by the Company, and (ii) for 10 months following the expiration of the first 12-month period, 50% of his base salary. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately $633,000 of payments remaining under the Separation Agreement.
Financed Insurance Premiums. In November 2021, the Company prepaid $566,000 of insurance premiums through the issuance of a note payable to IPFS Corporation with an interest rate of 4.36%. The note is payable in five monthly installments of approximately $114,000, with the final payment due in April 2022. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately $458,000 of payments remaining on the note.
Clinical Research Agreements. We have agreements in place with multiple clinical trial sites for conduct of our clinical studies, as well as with several contract research organizations for clinical trial-related services such as image and data management, monitoring, and statistical services. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately $496,000 of payments currently due related to clinical research agreements.
UCSD License Agreements. Under our license agreements with UCSD, we have exclusive world-wide rights to all diagnostic and therapeutic uses of tilmanocept, other than Tc99m tilmanocept used in lymphatic mapping in the United States, Canada and Mexico which rights are licensed to Cardinal Health. The UCSD license agreements include obligations for payments related to license fees, milestones, and royalties. As of December 31, 2021, the Company has accrued approximately $1.6 million of payments related to the UCSD license agreements for which we have not yet been invoiced.
CRG Litigation
See Notes 2 and 12 to the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements.
Platinum Litigation
See Notes 2 and 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Goldberg Agreement and Litigation
See Notes 2 and 12 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Summary
Our future liquidity and capital requirements will depend on a number of factors, including the ability of our distribution partners to achieve market acceptance of our products, our ability to complete the development and commercialization of new products, our ability to obtain milestone or development funds from potential development and distribution partners, regulatory actions by the FDA and international regulatory bodies, the ability to procure required financial resources, the outcome of any pending litigation, and intellectual property protection.
We plan to focus our resources during 2022 on development of products based on the Manocept platform. Although management believes that it will be able to achieve this objective, it is subject to a number of variables beyond our control, including the nature and timing of any partnering opportunities, the ability to modify contractual commitments made in connection with these programs, and the timing and expense associated with suspension or alteration of clinical trials, and consequently we may need to seek additional financing in order to support our planned development programs.
We will continue to evaluate our timelines, strategic needs, and balance sheet requirements. If we attempt to raise additional capital through debt, royalty, equity or otherwise, we may not be successful in doing so on terms acceptable to the Company, if at all. Although on February 14, 2022 we filed a registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission to register the sale of up to $35 million of Company Common Stock pursuant to a rights offering, the terms and timing of such rights offering have not yet been determined by the Company and there is no assurance that such rights offering will occur Further, we may not be able to gain access and/or be able to secure new sources of funding, identify new development opportunities, successfully obtain regulatory approval for and commercialize new products, achieve significant product revenues from our products, or achieve or sustain profitability in the future.
The Company is currently engaged in litigation with Dr. Goldberg and CRG. While the Company believes that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material impact on the Company's financial statements, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain and the final resolution of these matters may result in expense to the Company in excess of management's expectations.
In addition, the Company has experienced recurring net losses and has used significant cash to fund its operations. The COVID-19 pandemic may negatively impact the Company’s operations, including possible effects on its financial condition, ability to access the capital markets on attractive terms or at all, liquidity, operations, suppliers, industry, and workforce. We do not believe there has been a significant impact to the Company’s clinical development and regulatory timelines resulting from the ongoing COVID-19 global pandemic. However, the COVID-19 outbreak delayed enrollment in our NAV3-32 clinical study in the United Kingdom due to national COVID-19-related shutdowns. In addition, the regulatory approval process in India has been delayed by the impact of COVID-19 in that country. The COVID-19 pandemic has adversely affected economies and financial markets worldwide, resulting in an economic downturn that could impact our business, financial condition and results of operations, including our ability to obtain additional funding, if needed. The Company will continue to evaluate the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic could have on the operations, financial position, and the results of operations and cash flows during fiscal year 2022 and beyond.
The Company has experienced recurring net losses and has used significant cash to fund its operations. The Company has considerable discretion over the extent of development project expenditures and has the ability to curtail the related cash flows as needed. The Company also has funds remaining under outstanding grant awards, and continues working to establish new sources of funding, including collaborations, potential equity investments, and additional grant funding that can augment the balance sheet. However, based on our current working capital and our projected cash burn, management believes that there is substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for a period of one year from the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. No adjustments have been made to the accompanying condensed consolidated financial statements as a result of this uncertainty. See Note 2 to the accompanying consolidated financial statements and Item 1A - “Risk Factors.”
As of December 31, 2021, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recent Accounting Standards
See Notes 1(m) and 1(o) to the accompanying consolidated financial statements.
Critical Accounting Policies
Revenue Recognition. We currently generate revenue from a grant to support a product development initiative. We generally recognize grant revenue when expenses reimbursable under the grant have been paid and payments under the grant become contractually due.
We also earn revenues related to our licensing and distribution agreements. The consideration we are eligible to receive under our licensing and distribution agreements typically includes upfront payments, reimbursement for research and development costs, milestone payments, and royalties. Each licensing and distribution agreement is unique and requires separate assessment in accordance with current accounting standards.
Research and Development. R&D expenses include both internal R&D activities and external contracted services. Internal R&D activity expenses include salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation, as well as travel, supplies, and other costs to support our R&D staff. External contracted services include clinical trial activities, chemistry, manufacturing and control-related activities, and regulatory costs. R&D expenses are charged to operations as incurred. We review and accrue R&D expenses based on services performed and rely upon estimates of those costs applicable to the stage of completion of each project.
Series C, Series D and Series E Convertible Preferred Stock. The Company evaluated the provisions of the Series C, Series D and Series E Preferred Stock under Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity, ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging, ASC 470, Debt, and Accounting Series Release (“ASR”) 268, Presentation in Financial Statements of “Redeemable Preferred Stocks.” Based on this evaluation, the Company determined that the Series C, Series D and Series E Preferred Stock are not mandatorily redeemable financial instruments and any obligation to issue a variable number of shares of Common Stock is not unconditional. Accordingly, the Series C, Series D and Series E Preferred Stock should be classified as equity. Neither the embedded conversion option nor the embedded call option meet the criteria to be separated from the Series C, Series D or Series E Preferred stock and thus these features should not be bifurcated and accounted for as derivatives. Additionally, the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock contain a beneficial conversion feature (“BCF”). Prior to the January 1, 2021 adoption of Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) No. 2020-06, Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity, the BCF resulted in an increase to additional paid-in capital and a discount on the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock. The discounts on the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock were considered to be fully amortized at the date of issuance because the Series C and Series D Preferred Stock are immediately convertible, resulting in a deemed dividend at the date of issuance for the amount of the BCF. Following adoption of ASU 2020-06, no BCF is recorded in the consolidated financial statements. Finally, the Company determined that the conversion features of the Series C Preferred Stock could result in the Company being required to redeem a portion of the shares converted, thus the Series C Preferred Stock should be classified in mezzanine equity. Conversely, the Company determined that the Series D and Series E Preferred Stock do not contain conversion features that could result in the Company being required to redeem a portion of the shares converted, thus the Series D and Series E Preferred Stock should not be classified in mezzanine equity.
Use of Estimates. The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosures of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We base these estimates and assumptions upon historical experience and existing, known circumstances. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Critical Estimates
Stock-Based Compensation. Stock-based payments to employees and directors, including grants of stock options and restricted stock, are recognized in the statements of operations based on their estimated fair values on the date of grant, subject to an estimated forfeiture rate. The fair value of each option award with time-based vesting provisions is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model to value such stock-based payments and the portion that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over either (1) the requisite service period or (2) the estimated performance period. The determination of fair value using the Black-Scholes option pricing model is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and projected employee stock option behaviors. The fair value of each option award with market-based vesting provisions is estimated on the date of grant using a Monte Carlo simulation to value such stock-based payments and the portion that is ultimately expected to vest is recognized as compensation expense over either (1) the requisite service period or (2) the estimated performance period. The determination of fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation is affected by our stock price as well as assumptions regarding a number of complex and subjective variables, including expected stock price volatility, risk-free interest rate, expected dividends and projected employee stock option behaviors.
We estimate the expected term based on the contractual term of the awards and employees' exercise and expected post-vesting termination behavior. Restricted stock awards are valued based on the closing stock price on the date of grant and amortized ratably over the estimated life of the award.
Since stock-based compensation is recognized only for those awards that are ultimately expected to vest, we have applied an estimated forfeiture rate to unvested awards for the purpose of calculating compensation cost. These estimates will be revised, if necessary, in future periods if actual forfeitures differ from estimates. Changes in forfeiture estimates impact compensation cost in the period in which the change in estimate occurs.
Contingent Liabilities. We are subject to legal proceedings and claims that arise in the normal course of business. In accordance with ASC Topic 450, Contingencies, we accrue for contingent liabilities when management determines it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. This determination requires significant judgment by management. As of the date of the filing of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we are engaged in separate matters of ongoing litigation with Capital Royalty Partners II, L.P. and our former President and Chief Executive Officer, Dr. Michael Goldberg.
In assessing whether we should accrue a liability in our financial statements as a result of the lawsuits, we considered various factors, including the legal and factual circumstances of the cases, the trial records and post-trial rulings of the applicable courts and appellate courts, the current status of the proceedings, applicable law and the views of legal counsel. We have concluded that a loss from these cases is not probable and reasonably estimable and, therefore, a liability has not been recorded with respect to these cases as of December 31, 2021. While we believe that the ultimate resolution of these matters will not have a material impact on our financial statements, the outcome of litigation is inherently uncertain and the final resolution of these matters may result in expense to us in excess of management's expectations.