ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the annual financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this Report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company formed under the laws of the State of Delaware on November 6, 2020 for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or other similar business combination with one or more businesses. We intend to effectuate our business combination using cash from the proceeds of the initial public offering and the sale of the private units, our capital stock, debt or a combination of cash, stock and debt.
All activity through December 31, 2021 relates to our formation, initial public offering, and search for a prospective initial business combination target.
Factors That May Adversely Affect Our Results of Operations
Our results of operations and our ability to complete an initial business combination may be adversely affected by various factors that could cause economic uncertainty and volatility in the financial markets, many of which are beyond our control. Our business could be impacted by, among other things, downturns in the financial markets or in economic conditions, increases in oil prices, inflation, increases in interest rates, supply chain disruptions, declines in consumer confidence and spending, the ongoing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, including resurgences and the emergence of new variants, and geopolitical instability, such as the military conflict in the Ukraine. We cannot at this time fully predict the likelihood of one or more of the above events, their duration or magnitude or the extent to which they may negatively impact our business and our ability to complete an initial business combination.
Results of Operations
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any revenues to date. Our only activities from commencement of operations through December 31, 2021 were organizational activities and those necessary to prepare for the initial public offering, described below. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our business combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on marketable securities held after the initial public offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
For the period from January 15, 2021 (commencement of operations) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $0.59 million, which consisted of dividend income of $9,458, change in fair value of over-allotment liability of approximately $0.71 million and change in fair value of warrant liabilities of $11,953 and offset by warrant transaction costs of $454, franchise tax expense of approximately $0.19 million and formation and operating costs of approximately $0.49 million.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $0.44 million in cash and no cash equivalents.
Until the consummation of the initial public offering, our only source of liquidity was an initial purchase of common stock by the sponsor and loans from our sponsor.
On March 25, 2021, we consummated the initial public offering of 12,000,000 units, at a price of $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of $120.00 million. Simultaneously with the closing of the initial public offering, we consummated the sale of 390,000 placement units at a price of $10.00 per private unit in a private placement to the sponsor and EBC, generating gross proceeds of $3.90 million. On March 30, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in part and purchased an additional 843,937 units, generating gross proceeds of approximately $8.44 million. In connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment option, the Company sold an additional 16,879 placement units at a price of $10.00 per placement unit in a private placement to our sponsor and EBC, generating gross proceeds of approximately $0.17 million.
Following the initial public offering and the private placement, a total of approximately $128.44 million was placed in the trust account. We incurred $3.00 million in transaction costs, including approximately $2.57 million of underwriting fees and approximately $0.43 million of other offering costs.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash held in the trust account of approximately $128.45 million. We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the trust account, to complete our business combination. To the extent that our capital stock or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our business combination, the remaining proceeds held in the trust account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of approximately $0.44 million outside of the trust account. We intend to use the funds held outside the trust account primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, and structure, negotiate and complete a business combination.
In order to fund working capital deficiencies or finance transaction costs in connection with a business combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us funds as may be required. If we complete a business combination, we may repay such loaned amounts out of the proceeds of the trust account released to us. In the event that a business combination does not close, we may use a portion of the working capital held outside the trust account to repay such loaned amounts, but no proceeds from our trust account would be used for such repayment. Up to $1.50 million of such loans may be convertible into units at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender. Such units would be identical to the private units.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimate of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating a business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our business combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon consummation of our business combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination. Subject to compliance with applicable securities laws, we would only complete such financing simultaneously with the completion of our business combination. If we are unable to complete our business combination because we do not have sufficient funds available to us, we will be forced to cease operations and liquidate the trust account. In addition, following our business combination, if cash on hand is insufficient, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to meet our obligations.
Going Concern
In connection with our assessment of going concern considerations in accordance with the authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standard Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2014-15, “Disclosures of Uncertainties about an Entity’s Ability to Continue as a Going Concern,” management has determined that the mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution, should the we be unable to complete a business combination, raises substantial doubt about the our ability to continue as a going concern. We have until March 25, 2023 to consummate a business combination. It is uncertain that we will be able to consummate a business combination by this time. If a business combination is not consummated by this date, there will be a mandatory liquidation and subsequent dissolution. No adjustments have been made to carrying amounts of assets or liabilities should the Company be required to liquidate after March 25, 2023.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities, which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements as of December 31, 2021. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements. We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or purchased any non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
We do not have any long-term debt, capital lease obligations, operating lease obligations or long-term liabilities, other than described below.
Business Combination Marketing Agreement
We have engaged EBC as an advisor in connection with our business combination to assist us in holding meetings with our stockholders to discuss the potential business combination and the target business’ attributes, introduce us to potential investors that are interested in purchasing our securities in connection with our initial business combination, assist us in obtaining stockholder approval for the business combination and assist us with our press releases and public filings in connection with the business combination. We will pay EBC a cash fee of up to $4.20 million for such services upon the consummation of our initial business combination (exclusive of any applicable finders’ fees which might become payable); provided that up to 30% of the fee may be allocated at our sole discretion to other FINRA members that assist us in identifying or consummating an initial business combination. We will also pay EB. a cash fee of up to 1% of the gross proceeds from the initial public offering as a fee for introducing the Company to target companies for an initial business combination.
Registration Rights
Pursuant to a registration rights agreement entered into on March 22, 2021, the holders of the founder shares and representative shares, as well as the holders of the private units (and underlying securities) and any units issued in payment of working capital loans made to us (and underlying securities) are entitled to registration rights. The holders of a majority of these securities are entitled to make up to two demands that the Company register such securities.
The holders of a majority of the representative shares, private units and units issued in payment of working capital loans made to us (or underlying securities) can elect to exercise these registration rights at any time after we consummate a business combination. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, EBC may only make a demand on one occasion and only during the five-year period beginning on the effective date of the Registration Statement. In addition, the holders have certain “piggy-back” registration rights with respect to registration statements filed subsequent to consummation of a business combination; provided, however, that EBC may participate in a “piggy-back” registration only during the seven-year period beginning on the effective date of the Registration Statement.
The registration rights agreement does not contain liquidating damages or other cash settlement provisions resulting from delays in registering our securities. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
We granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the initial public offering to purchase up to 1,800,000 additional units to cover over-allotments, if any, at the public offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or $2.40 million in the aggregate, paid at the closing of the initial public offering. On March 30, 2021, the underwriters partially exercised their over-allotment option to purchase an additional 843,937 units at $10.00 per unit. In connection with the underwriters’ partial exercise of the over-allotment option on March 30, 2021, the underwriters were paid an additional cash underwriting fee of approximately $0.17 million.
Administrative Support Agreement
We have agreed to pay the sponsor a total of up to $10,000 per month in the aggregate for up to 24 months from the closing of the initial public offering, for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support. Services commenced on the effective date of the Registration Statement and will terminate upon the earlier of the consummation by us of a business combination or the liquidation of the Company. For the period from the effective date of the Registration Statement through December 31, 2021, we have incurred $90,000 for these services, of which such amount is included in the operating costs in the accompanying statement of operations.
Critical Accounting Policies
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. We have identified the following as our critical accounting policies:
Net Loss Per Share of Common Stock
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standard Codification, or FASB ASC, Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net loss per share of common stock is computed by dividing net loss attributable to common stockholders by the weighted average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the period, excluding common stock subject to forfeiture. We apply the two-class method in calculating earnings per share. The calculation of diluted loss per share of common stock does not consider the effect of the warrants issued in connection with the initial public offering since the exercise of the warrants are contingent upon the occurrence of future events and the inclusion of such warrants would be anti-dilutive.
Warrants
We do not use derivative instruments to hedge exposures to cash flow, market, or foreign currency risks. We evaluate all of our financial instruments, including issued stock purchase warrants, to determine if such instruments are derivatives or contain features that qualify as embedded derivatives, pursuant to ASC 480 and ASC 815-15.
We account for the public warrants and private warrants collectively (“warrants”), as either equity or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the specific terms of the warrants and the applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the Warrants meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the warrants are indexed to our own common stock and whether the warrant holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of our control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of issuance of the Warrants and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the warrants are outstanding.
For issued or modified warrants that meet all of the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded as a component of additional paid-in capital at the time of issuance. For issued or modified warrants that do not meet all the criteria for equity classification, such warrants are required to be recorded at their initial fair value on the date of issuance, and each balance sheet date thereafter. Changes in the estimated fair value of liability-classified warrants are recognized as a non-cash gain or loss on the statements of operations.
The private warrants are recognized as derivative liabilities in accordance with ASC 815-40. Accordingly, we recognize the warrant instruments as liabilities at fair value and adjust the instruments to fair value at each reporting period. The liabilities are subject to re-measurement at each balance sheet date until exercised, and any change in fair value is recognized in our statement of operations. The fair value of the private warrants was initially measured at fair value using a Monte Carlo simulation model and subsequently, the fair value of the private warrants have been estimated using a Monte Carlo simulation model each measurement date.
Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for the common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Shares of common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as a liability instrument and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable shares of common stock (including shares of common stock that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, shares of common stock are classified as stockholders’ equity. Our shares of common stock that were sold as part of units in the initial public offering feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 12,843,937 shares of common stock subject to possible redemption are presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our balance sheet.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, FASB issued Accounting Standards Update (“ASU”) 2020-06, Debt - Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging - Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40) (“ASU 2020-06”) to simplify accounting for certain financial instruments. ASU 2020-06 eliminates the current models that require separation of beneficial conversion and cash conversion features from convertible instruments and simplifies the derivative scope exception guidance pertaining to equity classification of contracts in an entity’s own equity. The new standard also introduces additional disclosures for convertible debt and freestanding instruments that are indexed to and settled in an entity’s own equity. ASU 2020-06 amends the diluted earnings per share guidance, including the requirement to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments.
ASU 2020-06 is effective January 1, 2022 and should be applied on a full or modified retrospective basis, with early adoption permitted beginning on January 1, 2021. We are currently assessing the impact, if any, that ASU 2020-06 would have on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.