ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements. The financial information provided below and in our financial statements does not include any information related to Emissions Zero.
The purpose of this discussion is to provide an understanding of the consolidated financial results and condition of New Century Resources Corporation up to December 31, 2021.
Forward-Looking Statements
This Management’s Discussion and Analysis and other parts of this report contain forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties, as well as current expectations and assumptions. From time to time, we may publish forward-looking statements, including those that are contained in this report, relating to such matters as anticipated financial performance, business prospects, acquisition strategies, technological developments, new products, research and development activities and similar matters. The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 provides a safe harbor for forward-looking statements. In order to comply with the terms of the safe harbor, we note that a variety of factors could cause our actual results and experience to differ materially from the anticipated results or other expectations expressed in our forward-looking statements. The risks and uncertainties that may affect the operations, performance, development and results of our business include, but are not limited to, our ability to maintain sufficient working capital, adverse changes in the economy, the ability to attract and maintain key personnel, our ability to implement our business plan. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements, including those set forth elsewhere in this report. We assume no obligation to update any such forward-looking statements.
PLAN OF OPERATION
On July 1, 2021 the Company entered into a Letter of Intent with Emissions Zero Module, LLC, a Wyoming company, whereby New Century would acquire all of the issued and outstanding shares or member interests in EZM in exchange for restricted common shares of the Company and that a closing date for this contemplated transaction is to be as soon as practicable and is otherwise subject to majority approval of each company's shareholders and preparation of audited consolidated financial statements.
In light of our competitive disadvantages, our strategy for successfully identifying and completing business combinations when we are competing with entities that possess great financial, technical and managerial capabilities is as follows.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We have no significant off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
It is the intent of our management and stockholders to provide sufficient working capital necessary to support and preserve the integrity of our Company as a corporate entity. However, there is no legal obligation for either the majority Shareholder or our key officers to provide additional future funding. If our management and/or key officers ceases to provide us the needed financing and we fail to identify any alternative sources of funding, there will be substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a “going concern”.
We have no current plans, proposals, arrangements or understandings with respect to the sale or issuance of additional securities. As a result, there can be no assurance that sufficient funds will be available to us to enable us to pay the expenses related to such activities.
Regardless of whether or not our cash assets prove to be adequate to meet our operational needs, we may seek to compensate providers of services by issuances of our common stock in lieu of cash.
At December 31, 2021, we had no cash assets, $293,528 in liabilities, and an accumulated deficit of $2,066,169. Our primary source of liquidity has been from shareholder advances and a notes payable to the company’s future acquirer, Emissions Zero Motors (EZM). As of December 31, 2021, the Company owed $14,784 in trade payables, $94,517 in notes and related interest, and $184,227 in related party advances loaned to the company.
Net cash used in operating activities was $43,768 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Net cash provided by financing activities was $43,768 for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Our expenses to date are comprised of professional and regulatory fees that include accounting and legal fees.
YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2021 COMPARED TO THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31, 2020
NET LOSS FROM OPERATIONS
The Company had net losses of $35,693 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a net loss of $36,092 for the year ended December 31, 2020.Operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of professional and regulatory fees associated with our reporting requirements.