Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following is a discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations as of, and for, the periods presented. You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with the sections entitled Item 1A. “Risk Factors,” “-Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and our consolidated financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K. This section and other parts of the Form 10-K contain forward-looking statements regarding the industry outlook, estimates and assumptions concerning events and financial and industry trends that may affect our future results of operations or financial condition and other non-historical statements. These forward-looking statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to the risks and uncertainties described in “-Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” and Item 1A. “Risk Factors.” Our actual results may differ materially from those contained in or implied by these forward-looking statements.
Overview
We are a leading provider of highly engineered products and support services that facilitate the optimization of oil and natural gas well completions and field development strategies. We provide our products and services primarily to E&P companies for use in onshore wells, predominantly wells that have been drilled with horizontal laterals in unconventional oil and natural gas formations. Our products and services are utilized in oil and natural gas basins throughout North America and in selected international markets, including Argentina, China, the Middle East and the North Sea. We provided our products and services to over 225 customers in 2021, including leading large independent oil and natural gas companies and major oil companies.
Our primary offering is our fracturing systems products and services, which enable efficient pinpoint stimulation: the process of individually stimulating each entry point into a formation targeted by an oil or natural gas well. Our fracturing systems products and services are typically utilized in cemented wellbores and enable our customers to precisely place stimulation treatments in a more controlled and repeatable manner as compared with traditional completion techniques. Our fracturing systems products and services are utilized in conjunction with third-party providers of pressure pumping, coiled tubing and other services.
We own a 50% interest in Repeat Precision, which sells composite frac plugs and related products. We provide tracer diagnostics services for well completion and reservoir characterization that utilize downhole chemical and radioactive tracers. We sell products for well construction, including our casing buoyancy system, liner hanger systems and toe initiation sleeves. We offer enhanced recovery systems, which enable our customers to inject water, other fluids, or gases in a controlled manner with the objective of increasing the amount of hydrocarbons produced from their assets. We operate in one reportable segment that has been identified based on how our chief operating decision maker manages our business.
Outlook
Our products and services are primarily sold to North American E&P companies and our ability to generate revenues from our products and services depends upon oil and natural gas drilling and completion activity in North America. Oil and natural gas drilling and completion activity is directly related to oil and natural gas prices.
Drilling activity in the United States bottomed in the third quarter of 2020 before increasing in the fourth quarter of 2020 and throughout 2021. Completion activity in the United States also increased throughout 2021, although customer drilling and completion activity in the United States in the first quarter of 2021 was negatively impacted by winter storm Uri. The Canadian rig count, which was also well below typical seasonal levels during the last three quarters of 2020, experienced the expected seasonal increase in the first quarter of 2021 but was 26% below the same period of 2020; however, by the second quarter of 2021, the Canadian rig count had surpassed 2020 levels and was 82% higher in the fourth quarter of 2021 compared to the fourth quarter of 2020. Additionally, during the third and fourth quarters of 2021, the Canadian rig count surpassed 2019 levels, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, indicating a stronger industry recovery in Canada than in the United States.
Based on capital budgets for 2022 that have been set by E&P companies, we believe that industry drilling and completion activity in the United States will be higher in 2022 than in 2021, with drilling activity increasing by over 20%, a faster rate than completion activity, which we expect to increase by over 10%. We expect drilling and completion activity to increase by 10% to 15% in Canada in 2022, with year-over-year increases highest in the first quarter before moderating over the remainder of the year. We currently expect international industry activity to improve by over 10% in 2022 as compared to 2021, reflecting recent increases in the international rig count. Many of our customers in North America continue to be committed to generating free cash flow while maintaining production at year-end 2021 levels, though privately-owned operators have increased activity as commodity prices improved and have contributed to the majority of activity increases since the end of 2020. Oil and natural gas prices continued to rise in early 2022, and spot pricing increased further following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in late February.
Despite the recent and expected improvements in industry activity levels, we continue to face intense competitive pressure across all of our product and services offerings, which may negatively impact our market share as well as our margins.
COVID-19 Impacts on the Oil & Gas Market and NCS Multistage
In 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic and associated actions taken around the world to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 caused unprecedented declines in economic activity, energy demand and oil and natural gas prices. Governments around the world implemented measures designed to slow the spread of COVID-19; however, in many countries, the most restrictive measures were eased throughout the second quarter of 2020 and further reduced with the distribution of vaccines in early 2021. These measures taken to slow the spread of COVID-19 have had material impacts on the global economy, resulting in a significant reduction in global gross domestic product (“GDP”) in 2020 and continued to negatively impact global GDP in 2021 as compared to 2019.
The demand for crude oil was materially reduced as a result of the measures taken by governments around the world to mitigate the spread of COVID-19. In response, members of OPEC+ agreed to a collective reduction in oil production of 9.7 MMBBL/D in May through July of 2020. With the distribution of vaccines and reopening of certain economic activities that resulted in increases in demand for oil and natural gas, much of this production has since been restored, with OPEC+ currently scheduled to add 0.4 MMBBL/D of production each month until production would be fully-restored in September 2022. Given the uncertainty related to the rate of new COVID-19 infections, vaccinations, economic recovery and oil demand recovery, OPEC+ plans to continue to meet monthly during 2022 to evaluate potential increases or decreases to the targeted level of production.
As a result of the rapid and material reduction in oil pricing in 2020, E&P companies responded by significantly reducing their capital expenditure budgets for that year, which resulted in significant reductions in drilling and completion activity. While commodity prices recovered in late 2020, capital budgets for E&P companies in the United States in 2021 were relatively in line with 2020, while E&P capital spending in 2021 exceeded 2020 levels in Canada. Preliminary capital budgets for 2022 indicate increases from 2021, led by private companies as public E&P companies continue to prioritize free cash flow with limited production growth.
The factors mentioned above have also led to an increase in consolidation amongst E&P companies, especially large, independent publicly-traded E&P companies. During 2020 and 2021, several large consolidation transactions were consummated. We provided products and services to several of the companies involved in consolidation transactions, and have experienced a reduction in spending with certain customers, especially for Repeat Precision’s products, and may experience a reduction in future business with consolidating customers if combined capital spending is reduced, if procurement strategies are altered, or if the counterparty in the consolidation has other preferred vendors for the products and services we provide.
While we experienced modest disruptions to our supply chain as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, including delays in importation of certain chemical products from China and temporary work-from-home orders that reduced the capacity at the Repeat Precision machine shop operations in Mexico, such disruptions were temporary in nature, the impacted products are available through alternative sources of supply, and we maintained sufficient inventory on hand to meet customer demand. We also experienced delays in access to certain materials and products utilized in our research and development activities, which has led, and may continue to lead, to delays in new product introductions. The continuing impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are contributing to ongoing supply chain disruptions and cost inflation, including labor cost inflation, the effects of which have continued into 2022.
In response to the reduction in demand for our products and services, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, throughout 2020 and 2021 NCS has undertaken, and the Board has and continues to monitor and evaluate initiatives to reduce our cost structure, limit capital expenditures and enhance our liquidity and access to capital, including:
Reductions in force and reductions to salaries and hourly rates for substantially all employees, not paying 2019 or 2020 bonuses, and a temporary elimination of the employer matching contributions for NCS’s U.S. 401(k) plan and its Registered Retirement Savings Plan in Canada. Such salaries were substantially reinstated in mid-2021, salary increases were implemented in the first quarter of 2022 and employer matching contributions were restored in 2022;
A moratorium on non-essential travel for all employees, negotiation of new rates, work rules and payment schedules with vendors, and reductions in third-party spend, including information technology, financial services and third-party research and development;
Deferral of U.S. employer payroll taxes for 2020, as permitted under the CARES Act, application for, and receipt of, benefits under the Canada Emergency Wage Subsidy (“CEWS”) and Canada Emergency Rent Subsidy (“CERS”) programs, and application for, and receipt of, refundable employee retention tax credits under the Taxpayer Certainty and Disaster Tax Relief Act of 2020;
Reducing planned capital expenditures for 2020 and 2021 and selling excess vehicles;
Closing our district operational facilities in Corpus Christi and Oklahoma City and relocating our U.S. assembly operations; and
Amending our revolving credit facility to modify certain covenants and to establish a borrowing base related to our accounts receivable, which we believe provides us with enhanced financial flexibility (as described in more detail in “Note 9. Debt” in our consolidated financial statements).
NCS continues to evaluate market conditions and will continue to take necessary actions to further reduce our cost structure and enhance liquidity should there be a further reduction in the demand for our products and services.
In connection with the reductions in force described above, NCS recorded severance expense of $5.7 million during the year ended December 31, 2020, with no significant severance or termination benefits incurred during the year ended December 31, 2021. For additional information, see “Note 11. Severance and Other Termination Benefits” of our consolidated financial statements.
As a result of the decrease in crude oil pricing, customer capital spending plans and activity as a result of the decline in market conditions primarily related to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the resulting decline in the quoted price of our common stock, we assessed the recoverability of the carrying value of our property and equipment and identifiable intangible assets as of March 31, 2020 and determined that a triggering event had occurred. As a result of the analysis, we recorded impairment charges of $9.7 million in property and equipment and $40.5 million related to identifiable intangible assets, which we recorded during the first quarter of 2020. There were no impairment charges recorded on our property and equipment or identifiable intangible assets during the remainder of 2020 or for the year ended December 31, 2021. For additional information, see “Note 6. Property and Equipment” and “Note 7. Goodwill and Identifiable Intangibles” of our consolidated financial statements.
On August 6, 2020, we entered into an amendment to our Senior Secured Credit Facility which, among other changes, reduced the lender commitments in the United States under our Senior Secured Credit Facility to $25.0 million and further limited the amount we may borrow subject to a borrowing base calculated on eligible receivables, which does not include receivables at Repeat Precision. See -"Liquidity and Capital Resources-Financing Arrangements” for a description of the amendment. Our borrowing base under the Senior Secured Credit Facility as of December 31, 2021 was $15.4 million. The amount available to be drawn under the Senior Secured Credit Facility may decline from current levels due to reductions in our borrowing base or a springing financial covenant, if our business were to be further adversely impacted by a decline in market conditions, including as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
See Item 1A. Risk Factors for a discussion of additional actual or potential impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business and operations.
Market Conditions
Oil and Natural Gas Drilling and Completion Activity
Oil and natural gas prices remain volatile, with WTI crude oil pricing at approximately $61/BBL at the end of December 2019, falling to approximately $48/BBL at the end of December 2020 before increasing to approximately $75/BBL at the end of December 2021, with crude oil pricing continuing to be supported by voluntary oil production reductions by members of OPEC+ as discussed above. WTI crude oil pricing has continued to rise in 2022 reaching approximately $90 per barrel by mid-February before rising to over $100 per barrel following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The improvement in oil demand from 2020 lows, combined with OPEC+ production curtailments has led to global oil and refined products storage levels being below long-term averages, which has also supported oil pricing.
Natural gas pricing was at an average level of $2.56 per MMBtu during the year ended 2019 as supply growth exceeded demand growth. Natural gas pricing fell even further to an average level of $2.03 per MMBtu during the year ended 2020 as it was negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic and resulting market conditions. Natural gas pricing increased to an average level of $3.89 per MMBtu during 2021 but was volatile during the year. Realized natural gas prices for Canadian E&P customers are typically at a discount to U.S. Henry Hub pricing. Spot pricing for Canadian natural gas at the AECO hub has been volatile since mid-2017, with discounts to Henry Hub pricing narrowing over time as infrastructure bottlenecks have been partially alleviated. Natural gas pricing in the United States has been supported by increased demand for exports of liquified natural gas (“LNG”) in late 2021 and early 2022, especially for power generation in Europe and Asia.
Sustained declines in commodity prices, or sustained periods when the local pricing received in regional markets is below benchmark pricing, known in the industry as high differentials, would be expected to lead North American E&P companies to reduce drilling and completion activity, which could negatively impact our business.
Listed and depicted below are recent crude oil and natural gas pricing trends, as provided by the Energy Information Administration (“EIA”) of the U.S. Department of Energy:
Listed and depicted below are the average number of operating onshore rigs in the United States and in Canada per quarter since the first quarter of 2019, as provided by Baker Hughes. The quarterly changes in the Canadian land rig count can be partially attributed to seasonality of activity in that market:
Over the past several years, North American E&P companies have been able to reduce their cost structures and have also utilized technologies, including ours, to increase efficiency and improve well performance. Both the rig count and completion activity in the United States began to decline in 2019 and the decline accelerated in 2020 before bottoming in the third quarter and increasing during the fourth quarter of 2020. During 2021, the average U.S. land rig count continued to increase to an average of 545 during the fourth quarter of 2021, which was 84% higher than the fourth quarter of 2020, but remained 32% below the fourth quarter of 2019. The average land rig count in Canada for the fourth quarter of 2021 was 82% higher than in the same period in 2020 and 17% higher than the same period in 2019. We expect U.S. and Canadian rig counts and completion activity to continue to rise in 2022 compared to prior year levels.
A substantial portion of our business is subject to quarterly variability. In Canada, we typically experience higher activity levels in the first quarter of each year, as our customers take advantage of the winter freeze to gain access to remote drilling and production areas. In the past, our revenue in Canada has declined during the second quarter due to warming weather conditions that result in thawing, softer ground, difficulty accessing well sites and road bans that curtail drilling and completion activity. Access to well sites typically improves throughout the third and fourth quarters in Canada, leading to activity levels that are higher than in the second quarter, but lower than activity in the first quarter. Our business can also be impacted by a reduction in customer activity during the winter holidays in late December and early January. In recent years, many customers in the United States exhausted their capital budgets prior to the end of the year, leading to reductions in drilling and completion activity during the fourth quarter.
Adoption of Pinpoint Stimulation
Traditional well completion techniques, including plug and perf and ball drop, currently account for the majority of unconventional well completions in North America and over 90% of unconventional well completions in the United States. We believe that pinpoint stimulation provides benefits compared to these traditional well completion techniques. Our ability to grow our market share, as evidenced by the percentage of horizontal wells in North America completed using our products and services, will depend in large part on the industry’s further adoption of pinpoint stimulation to complete wells, our ability to continue to innovate our technology to compete against continuing technological advances in competing traditional well completions techniques, and our
ability to successfully compete with other providers of pinpoint stimulation products and services, including adjusting our pricing in certain markets to respond to customer demands and to competitors that may provide discounted pricing to our customers.
Increasing Well Complexity and Focus on Completion Optimization
In recent years, E&P companies have drilled longer horizontal wells and completed more hydraulic fracturing stages per well to maximize the volume of hydrocarbon recoveries per well. This trend towards longer and more complex wells has resulted in us selling more sliding sleeves or composite frac plugs per well on average, which increases our revenue opportunity per well completion and has supported sales of our casing buoyancy systems. Additionally, E&P companies have become increasingly focused on well productivity through optimization of completion designs and we believe this trend may further the adoption of pinpoint stimulation, and in turn, increase the opportunity for sales of our products and services if our customers observe operational benefits and long-term production results from the application of pinpoint stimulation. This trend towards more complex well completions provides opportunities for tracer diagnostics services, which can be utilized to assess the effectiveness of various well completion techniques and well spacing strategies in support of completion and field development optimization efforts.
How We Generate Revenues
We derive our revenues from the sale of our fracturing systems and enhanced recovery systems products and the provision of related services, the sale of composite frac plugs, and related products through Repeat Precision and from sales of our tracer diagnostics services, casing buoyancy system, liner hanger systems and toe initiation sleeves products.
Product sales represented 70%, 70% and 71% of our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Most of our sales are on a just-in-time basis, as specified in individual purchase orders, with a fixed price for our products. We occasionally supply our customers with large orders that may be filled on negotiated terms. Services represented 30%, 30% and 29% of our revenues for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Services include our tool charges and associated services related to our fracturing systems and tracer diagnostics services (which are classified together as “services” in our financial results). Services are provided at agreed upon rates to customers for the provision of our downhole frac isolation assembly, our personnel and for the provision of tracer diagnostics services.
During periods of low drilling and well completion activity or as may be needed to compete in certain markets we will, in certain instances, lower the prices of our products and services. Our revenues are also impacted by well complexity, with wells with more stages resulting in longer jobs and increased revenue attributable to selling more sliding sleeves or composite frac plugs and the provision of our services.
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, approximately 62%, 45% and 42%, respectively, of our revenues were derived from sales in Canada and were denominated in Canadian dollars. Because our Canadian contracts are typically invoiced in Canadian dollars, the effects of foreign currency fluctuations impact our revenues and are regularly monitored.
Although most of our sales are to North American E&P companies, we also have sales to customers outside of North America and we expect sales to international customers to increase over time. These international sales are made through local NCS entities or to our local operating partners on a free on board or free carrier basis with a point of sale in the United States. Some of the locations in which we have operating partners or sales representatives include China and the Middle East. Our operating partners and representatives do not have authority to contractually bind NCS but market our products in their respective territories as part of their product or services offering.
Costs of Conducting our Business
Our cost of sales is comprised of expenses relating to the manufacture of our products in addition to the costs of our support services. Manufacturing cost of sales includes payments made to our suppliers for raw materials and payments made to machine shops for the manufacturing of product components and finished assemblies and costs related to our employees that perform quality control analysis, assemble and test our products. Our strategic 50% purchase of Repeat Precision has allowed us to reduce our costs for certain product categories. We review forecasted activity levels in our business and either directly procure or ensure that our vendors procure the required raw materials with sufficient lead time to meet our business requirements. On September 24, 2018, the United States implemented a tariff of 10% on a significant number of commodities originating from China, including certain chemicals utilized in our tracer diagnostics business. The tariffs were subsequently increased to 25% in May 2019. The increased tariffs have resulted in an increase in our cost of sales. In addition, we are monitoring prices for certain raw materials, including steel and purchased components, which have increased during 2021, with such increases continuing into 2022. While we strive to pass through some of the increases in raw material and component costs to our customers, there can be no assurance that we will be able to do so. Cost of sales for support services includes compensation and benefit-related expenses for employees who provide direct revenue generating services to customers in addition to the costs incurred by these employees for travel and subsistence while on site. Cost of sales
includes other variable manufacturing costs, such as shrinkage, obsolescence, revaluation and scrap related to our existing inventory and costs related to the chemicals and laboratory analysis associated with our tracer diagnostics services.
Our selling, general and administrative (“SG&A”) expenses are comprised of compensation expense, which includes compensation and benefit-related expenses for our employees who are not directly involved in revenue generating activities, including those involved in our research and development activities, as well as our general operating costs. These general operating costs include, but are not limited to: rent and occupancy for our facilities, information technology infrastructure services, software licensing, advertising and marketing, third party research and development, risk insurance and professional service fees for audit, legal and other consulting services. Our SG&A expenses also include severance expenses, litigation expenses and provisions for doubtful accounts.
During 2021, we began to experience tight labor conditions which is leading to increased employee turnover and delays in filling open positions as well as labor cost inflation, which impacts both our cost of sales and our SG&A expenses. This labor cost inflation, which is continuing into 2022, includes increases in salaries and hourly pay rates and is expected to result in increased benefits costs as well.
The percentage of our operating costs denominated in Canadian dollars (including cost of sales and SG&A expenses but excluding depreciation and amortization expense) approximated 25%, 19% and 22%, for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Results of Operations
The following table summarizes our revenues and expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. A discussion of our results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020 compared to the year ended December 31, 2019 is included in Part II, Item 7. “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on March 8, 2021 and is incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 compared to Year Ended December 31, 2020
Revenues
Revenues were $118.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $107.0 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This increase reflected higher product sales and services volumes in Canada, an increase in services volumes in the United States and higher international product sales partially offset by reductions in international services volumes and decreased U.S. product sales as well as lower pricing for certain products and services, including at Repeat Precision. Year-over-year increases in activity since the second quarter of 2021 as compared to 2020, more than offset the year-over-year decrease in activity in the first quarter of 2021 as compared to 2020. This reflects the timing of the impact of the decline in market conditions primarily related to the COVID-19 pandemic, which had a negative impact on our revenues beginning in March 2020 and resulted in industry activity that reached trough levels during the third quarter of 2020 before beginning to recover. Activity in Canada experienced a stronger recovery from trough levels than the United States and other international markets. Product sales for the year ended December 31, 2021 were $83.2 million as compared to $75.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our services revenue was $35.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $31.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Cost of sales
Cost of sales was $70.0 million, or 59.1% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $62.9 million, or 58.8% of revenues, for the year ended December 31, 2020. Cost of sales as a percentage of total revenues increased slightly despite the modest increase in revenue primarily due to lower activity levels outside of North America and a reduction in pricing for certain products and services. Cost of sales in the first half of 2021 was also impacted by higher scrap expense and inventory reserves at Repeat Precision related to product design changes. We believe that our cost of sales as a percentage of revenue was negatively impacted by pricing reductions that were the result of a decline in oil and gas market activity levels primarily related to the COVID-19 pandemic and which we have not yet been able to recover. Cost of product sales was $51.9 million or 62.4% of product sales revenue and cost of services was $18.1 million or 51.4% of services revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021. For the year ended December 31, 2020, cost of product sales was $46.6 million or 62.0% of product sales revenue and cost of services was $16.3 million or 51.2% of services revenue.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses were $49.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $59.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. This overall decrease in expense reflects reductions in compensation and benefits associated with lower headcount and lower salary and wages, share-based compensation, professional fees, and bad debt expense of $3.0 million, $1.9 million, $1.6 million and $0.9 million, respectively. Severance charges declined by $5.6 million as compared to 2020 due to the timing of workforce reductions. In addition, the decrease reflects a benefit of $2.3 million in 2021 associated with the U.S. employee retention credit claims. See “Note 10. Commitments and Contingencies” of our consolidated financial statements for additional detail. The overall decrease was partially offset by increases in litigation expenses of $3.6 million and bonus accruals of $3.7 million.
Depreciation
Depreciation was $3.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $4.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily attributable to a non-cash impairment charge of $9.7 million during the first quarter of 2020, which reduced the carrying values of our land, building and improvements and machinery and equipment. Additionally, our capital expenditures in 2020 and 2021 have been lower than in prior years and we have sold excess vehicles financed through capital leases. See “Note 6. Property and Equipment” and “Note 15. Leases” of our consolidated financial statements for additional detail.
Amortization
Amortization was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in amortization was related to non-cash impairment charges of $40.5 million during the first quarter of 2020, which reduced the carrying values of technology, internally-developed software, customer relationships, and trademarks. See “Note 7. Goodwill and Identifiable Intangibles” of our consolidated financial statements for additional detail.
Impairment
On March 31, 2020, we evaluated our property and equipment and identifiable intangible assets for impairment due to current industry conditions such as a reduction in global economic growth expectations, a significantly reduced demand for crude oil and refined products, the significant decline in commodity prices and the corresponding impact on future expectations of demand for our products and services primarily related to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the resulting decline in the quoted price of our common
stock. We determined that the carrying amount of certain of our long-lived assets exceeded the corresponding fair value. We recorded impairment charges of $9.7 million in property and equipment and $40.5 million in identifiable intangible assets. See “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” “Note 6. Property and Equipment” and “Note 7. Goodwill and Identifiable Intangibles” of our consolidated financial statements for additional detail related to these charges. There were no additional impairment charges related to our goodwill, property and equipment or identifiable intangible assets during the remainder of 2020 or for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Interest expense, net
Interest expense, net was $0.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $1.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in interest expense, net was primarily a result of the $0.6 million write-off of deferred loan costs associated with the amendment to our Senior Secured Credit Facility in August 2020 and a reduction in the average debt outstanding in 2021 compared to 2020.
Gain on patent infringement settlement
Gain on patent infringement settlement was $25.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, which represents the gain realized from the settlement of the final court judgment against Diamondback Industries, Inc. (“Diamondback”) and includes $1.1 million of proceeds from our directors and officers liability insurance related to the reimbursement of legal expenses that we incurred to defend a director and officer in the Diamondback litigation and is net of related legal fees incurred in 2020 of $2.7 million. See “Note 10. Commitments and Contingencies” of our consolidated financial statements.
Foreign currency exchange gain (loss), net
Foreign currency exchange gain was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to a loss of $(1.1) million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The change was primarily due to the movement in the foreign currency exchange rates between the periods.
Income tax expense (benefit)
Income tax expense (benefit) was $0.3 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to $(7.8) million for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Included in tax expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, was an expense of $1.0 million for tax effects of stock awards and a benefit of $(0.2) million related to effects of taxes on foreign operations.
Included in the tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 were several U.S. tax expense (benefit) adjustments related to the enactment of the CARES Act, including a tax benefit of $(0.9) million for a net operating loss carryback that was previously unavailable and a tax expense of $6.5 million for an increase in a valuation allowance on deferred tax assets not expected to be realized. Also included in the tax benefit for the year ended December 31, 2020 was a tax expense of $1.4 million for a valuation allowance against our Canadian deferred tax asset, a benefit of $(1.5) million related to non-U.S. income taxed at different rates, and an expense of $1.0 million for tax effects of stock awards.
How We Evaluate our Results of Operations
Our management uses a variety of financial and operating metrics to analyze our performance. These metrics are significant factors in assessing our results of operations and profitability and include:
Revenues
We primarily sell our products and services under purchase orders with pricing negotiated with individual customers. Our revenues are generated primarily from the sales of our fracturing systems, enhanced recovery systems, well construction and composite plug products and from services related to the utilization of our downhole frac isolation assembly as well as from the provision of tracer diagnostics services. We compare our actual revenue performance on a monthly, quarterly and annual basis to our annual budget, our most recent estimate for the relevant period, and to applicable market metrics.
Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation
EBITDA is defined as net (loss) income before interest expense, net, income tax (benefit) expense and depreciation and amortization. Adjusted EBITDA is defined as EBITDA adjusted to exclude certain items which we believe are not reflective of ongoing operating performance or which, in the case of impairments and share-based compensation, are non-cash in nature. Adjusted
EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation is calculated in the same manner as Adjusted EBITDA, with the sole exception being that it does not addback non-cash share-based compensation expense. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA is an important measure that excludes costs that management believes do not reflect our ongoing operating performance and certain costs associated with our capital structure. We believe that Adjusted EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation presents our financial performance in a manner that is comparable to the presentation provided by many of our peers. Accordingly, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation are key metrics that management uses to assess the period-to-period performance of our core business operations. We believe that presenting these metrics enables investors to assess our performance from period to period using the same metrics utilized by management and to evaluate our performance relative to other companies that are not subject to such factors. EBITDA, Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation are not defined under GAAP, are not measures of net income, income from operations or any other performance measure derived in accordance with GAAP and are subject to important limitations. Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies in our industry and are not measures of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP.
A reconciliation of net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to Adjusted EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA Less Share-Based Compensation on a consolidated basis for the periods indicated follows (in thousands):
_____________________
(1)Includes the remaining deferred loan costs of $0.6 million related to prior credit agreements that were expensed when the debt was amended and repaid during 2020.
(2)Represents non-cash impairment charges recorded in 2020 related to property and equipment and intangible assets.
(3)Represents gain realized from the final court judgment against Diamondback. See “Note 10. Commitments and Contingencies” of our consolidated financial statements.
(4)Represents non-cash compensation charges related to share-based compensation granted to our officers, employees and directors.
(5)Represents non-capitalizable costs of professional services incurred in connection with legal proceedings and the evaluation of potential acquisitions.
(6)Represents ERC benefits recorded during 2021 less the effect on bonus and associated payroll burden accruals.
(7)Represents unrealized and realized foreign currency translation gains and losses primarily due to movement in the foreign exchange rates during the applicable periods.
(8)Represents charges incurred in connection with the reductions in workforce implemented in 2020.
(9)Represents the impact of a research and development subsidy that is included in income tax expense (benefit) in accordance with GAAP along with other charges and credits.
Free Cash Flow and Free Cash Flow Less Distributions to Non-Controlling Interest
We utilize free cash flow to evaluate the cash generated by our operations and results of operations. We define free cash flow as net cash provided by (used in) operating activities less purchases of property and equipment (inclusive of the purchase and development of software and technology) plus proceeds from sales of property and equipment, as presented in our consolidated statement of cash flows. Management believes free cash flow is useful because it provides information to investors regarding the cash that was available in the period that was in excess of our needs to fund our capital expenditures and other investment needs. We define free cash flow less distributions to non-controlling interest as free cash flow (as defined above) less distributions to non-controlling interest, as presented in the net cash used in financing activities section of our consolidated statements of cash flows. Management believes that free cash flow less distributions to non-controlling interest is useful because it provides information to investors
regarding the cash that was available in the period that was in excess of our needs to fund our capital expenditures, other investment needs, and cash distributions to our joint venture partner. Free cash flow and free cash flow less distributions to non-controlling interest do not represent our residual cash flow available for discretionary expenditures, as we have non-discretionary expenditures, including, but not limited to, repayment of outstanding balances under our Senior Secured Credit Facility, that are not deducted in calculating either free cash flow or free cash flow less distributions to non-controlling interest. Free cash flow and free cash flow less distributions to non-controlling interest are non-GAAP financial measures and should not be considered as an alternative to cash provided by operating activities as a cash flow measurement.
A reconciliation of net cash provided by (used in) operating activities, the most directly comparable GAAP measure, to each of free cash flow and free cash flow less distributions to non-controlling interest for the periods indicated is as follows (in thousands):
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our primary sources of liquidity are our existing cash and cash equivalents, cash provided by operating activities and borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility. As of December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $22.2 million, and total outstanding indebtedness of $7.8 million related to capital lease obligations, of which $1.5 million is due within 12 months. Our Senior Secured Credit Facility consists of a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $25.0 million. Total borrowings are limited to a borrowing base calculated based on eligible receivables, which does not include receivables at Repeat Precision. At December 31, 2021, our borrowing base under the Senior Secured Credit Facility was $15.4 million, with no outstanding borrowings and less than $0.1 million in letter of credit commitments utilized. The amount available to be drawn under the Senior Secured Credit Facility may decline from current levels due to reductions in our borrowing base or a springing financial covenant if our business were to be adversely impacted by a decline in market conditions. We were in compliance with our debt covenants at December 31, 2021. We believe that our cash on hand, cash flows from operations and potential borrowings under our Senior Secured Credit Facility will be sufficient to fund our capital expenditure and liquidity requirements for the next twelve months and after. Our principal liquidity needs have been, and are expected to continue to be, capital expenditures, working capital, debt service and potential mergers and acquisitions.
We plan to incur approximately $2 million to $3 million in capital expenditures during 2022, which includes (i) upgrades to our tracer diagnostics deployment and sampling equipment, (ii) machining equipment and molds to increase manufacturing capacity at Repeat Precision, (iii) new computers and engineering workstations and (iv) equipment to support growth in our Canadian liner hanger operations. Our capital expenditures, including the purchase and development of software and technology, for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $0.8 million and $2.2 million, respectively. Our 2021 capital expenditures included (i) additional machining and other capital equipment at Repeat Precision, (ii) internally-developed software, (iii) additional equipment to support our tracer diagnostics services and (iv) vehicles used in international operations.
To the extent we require additional liquidity to fund our capital requirements or repay existing indebtedness, we would expect to obtain it through the incurrence of additional indebtedness, the proceeds of equity issuances, or a combination thereof. We cannot assure you that we will be able to obtain this additional liquidity on reasonable terms, or at all. Our liquidity and our ability to meet our obligations and fund our capital requirements are also dependent on our future financial performance and ability to manage costs, which is subject to general economic, financial and other factors that are beyond our control, including the COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, we cannot assure you that our business will generate sufficient cash flow from operations or that funds will be available from additional indebtedness, the capital markets or otherwise to meet our liquidity needs. If we decide to pursue one or more significant acquisitions, we may incur additional debt or sell additional equity to finance such acquisitions, which could result in additional expenses or dilution.
Cash Flows
The following table provides a summary of cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities for the periods presented (in thousands):
Operating Activities
Net cash provided by operating activities was $11.6 million compared to $35.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash flow was primarily driven by the receipt of $21.4 million in cash proceeds at Repeat Precision in 2020 associated with a patent infringement settlement and unfavorable changes in accounts receivable, inventories and other liabilities as well as lower non-cash share-based compensation and depreciation and amortization expenses. The decrease was partially offset by higher net income in 2021 as compared to 2020, after adjusting for impairment charges and the gain on patent infringement settlement, due to higher activity levels in 2021 as markets begin to recover from the COVID-19 pandemic shut-downs during 2020. In addition, there were favorable changes in accounts payable, accrued expenses, income taxes receivable/payable and prepaid expenses and other assets.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.4 million and $1.1 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The decrease in cash used in investing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily related to reduced capital expenditures for property and equipment partially offset by an increase in purchase and development of software and technology and lower asset sale proceeds.
Financing Activities
Net cash used in financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $4.3 million and $29.8 million, respectively. Our primary use of funds during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2.8 million of distributions to our joint venture partner and principal payments under finance leases of $1.3 million. The primary use of funds during the year ended December 31, 2020 was distributions to our joint venture partner of $17.6 million, net repayments under the Senior Secured Credit Facility of $10.0 million, and principal payments under finance leases of $1.5 million.
Material Cash Requirements
Our material cash requirements include the following contractual and other obligations.
Financing Arrangements
Our Senior Secured Credit Facility consists of a senior secured revolving credit facility in an aggregate principal amount of $25.0 million. Total borrowings available under the Senior Secured Credit Facility may be limited subject to a borrowing base calculated on eligible receivables, which does not include receivables at Repeat Precision. At December 31, 2021, our borrowing base under the Senior Secured Credit Facility was $15.4 million, we had no outstanding indebtedness under the Senior Secured Credit Facility, and we utilized letter of credit commitments of less than $0.1 million.
Repeat Precision also has an outstanding promissory note with an aggregate borrowing capacity of up to $4.3 million as of December 31, 2021, subject to a borrowing base. As of December 31, 2021, Repeat Precision had no outstanding indebtedness under the promissory note.
See “Note 9. Debt” to our consolidated financial statements for additional details regarding our credit agreement and the promissory note.
Leases
We have operating and finance leases for facilities, vehicles, and equipment. As of December 31, 2021, we had lease payment obligations, including interest payments for finance leases of $15.0 million, with $3.6 million payable within 12 months. See “Note 15. Leases” to our consolidated financial statements for additional information on lease obligations and maturities.
Purchase Obligations
Our purchase obligations in the amount of $9.4 million primarily represent commitments to purchase goods or services to be utilized in the normal course of business, of which $7.8 million is payable within 12 months and is not reflected in the accompanying consolidated balance sheets.
Tax Obligations
Our tax obligations of $0.7 million, of which $0.4 million is due within 12 months, include deferred FICA taxes and a mandatory one-time tax on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries resulting from the 2017 Tax Act. The deferred FICA taxes payable are due in 2022. The income tax payable related to the 2017 Tax Act is due in installments in varying percentages over the next four years.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is derived from the review of our consolidated financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP, which includes our interpretation of accounting guidance and application through accounting policies. See “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies.” The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. Our actual results may differ from these estimates. The accounting estimates that we believe to be the most critical to an understanding of our financial condition and results of operations and that require the most complex and subjective management judgments are discussed below.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
We maintain an allowance for doubtful accounts for estimated losses that may result from the inability of our customers to make required payments. We evaluate collectability of customer accounts based upon credit approval practices, industry and customer historical experience as well as the current and projected financial condition of the specific customer. Amounts deemed to be uncollectible are applied against the allowance for doubtful accounts. Our business has seasonality, and the balance of our outstanding receivables fluctuates during the fiscal year based upon activity levels, sales volume, and general industry conditions. We periodically record bad debt expense or recoveries, which totaled a recovery of $0.1 million and expense of $0.8 million and $3.5 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively, though we have been successful historically recovering some of these amounts over time. Further, to the extent deemed necessary by management, and depending on the circumstances, we may issue customer credits or concessions which reduce our revenues, but do not impact our bad debt expense. The nature of these concessions may be to maintain a customer relationship. Historically, these concessions have not been significant to our financial condition or results of operations and would likely not be significant should there be a 10% change in the level of concessions within a fiscal year.
Inventories
Inventories of raw material, work in progress and finished goods are maintained and valued at the lower of cost or estimated net realizable value, with cost determined at standard costs which approximates the first-in, first-out or average cost basis. Periodically, we evaluate our inventory to determine items that may be obsolete, slow-moving or in excess based upon historical sales experience and projected sales forecasts. Our estimates involve subjectivity and an evaluation of customer preferences over time which may impact our ability to recover the cost of inventory and generate a profitable return. Although we believe our estimates to be reasonable, we cannot assure that our reserves will be adequate to cover potential losses, or that we will have recoveries, if there are significant changes in market preferences or technological advancements by our competitors that render a portion of our current inventory as obsolete. We have incurred charges to cost of sales related to obsolescence of $1.8 million, $1.8 million, and $0.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. An increase of obsolescence expense by 10%, or $0.2 million, would not be deemed material to our financial statements.
Impairments
We evaluate our property and equipment and identifiable intangible assets including goodwill for impairment whenever changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset group may not be recoverable or if there are potential indicators of impairment. Estimating future net cash flows requires us to make judgments regarding long-term forecasts of future revenues and costs related to the assets subject to review. These forecasts are uncertain in that they require assumptions about our revenue growth, operating margins, capital expenditures, future market conditions and technological developments. In addition, if we are required to determine the fair value of our reporting units to test goodwill for impairment, we must apply estimates, assumptions, and judgment regarding revenue growth, operating margins, capital expenditures, future market conditions, weighted average costs of capital and terminal growth rate, and we must evaluate the metrics of a deemed set of comparable companies and market earnings multiples. Actual results may not align with these assumptions, and our expectations regarding future net cash flows may change such that a material impairment could result. In recent periods, we have recorded impairments associated with property and equipment, identifiable intangible assets and goodwill, as further described in the accompanying consolidated financial statements. We believe that the estimates and assumptions used in our impairment assessments are reasonable. However, if market conditions change dramatically, as seen during early 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, the impact on our forecasts and projections may be significant which could result in future impairments for our reportable units with long-term assets including goodwill.
Income Taxes
We are taxed as a corporation as defined under the Internal Revenue Code. The liability method is used in accounting for deferred income taxes. Under this method, deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws that will be in effect when these differences are expected to reverse. The realizability of deferred tax assets is evaluated annually and a valuation allowance is provided if it is more likely than not that the deferred tax assets will not give rise to future benefits. We recognize tax benefits from uncertain tax positions only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained, based upon technical merits, upon examination by the taxing authorities. If the income tax position is expected to meet the more likely than not criteria, the benefit recorded in the consolidated financial statements equals the largest amount that is greater than 50% likely to be realized upon its ultimate settlement. A valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets is established when it is more likely than not that some portion or all the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
We have incurred operating losses during each of the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019. We have applied valuation allowances to reduce our deferred tax assets as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, based upon our forecasts of future taxable income in the jurisdictions in which these deferred tax assets are recorded. Our financial statements could be materially affected if: (i) our actual results differ significantly from our forecast estimates; (ii) there are future changes in enacted tax laws with retroactive application; or (iii) tax authorities do not agree with our application of the tax law to our circumstances and the matter is not ultimately resolved in our favor.
Litigation
In the ordinary course of business, from time to time, we have various claims, lawsuits and administrative proceedings that are pending or threatened with respect to commercial, intellectual property and employee matters. We accrue for contingencies where the occurrence of a material loss is probable and can be reasonably estimated, based on our estimate of the expected liability. Our assessment of the likely outcome of litigation matters is based on our judgment of several factors, including experience with similar matters, prior history, precedents, relevant financial information and other evidence and facts specific to the matter. Although the outcome of any legal proceeding cannot be predicted with any certainty, if a settlement is deemed to be probable and estimable, management would consider relevant facts and circumstances to determine the potential range of loss exposure or gain on settlement, if any. Future settlements which result in loss or awards could be material to our financial statements and cannot be predicted with certainty. For example, during 2020, we received a favorable judgement associated with a Repeat Precision litigation matter which resulted in a gain on patent infringement settlement of $25.7 million.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
See “Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” to our consolidated financial statements for discussion of the accounting pronouncements we recently adopted and the accounting pronouncements recently issued by the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”).
Emerging Growth Company and Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”). We will remain an emerging growth company until the earlier of (i) the last day of our fiscal year (a) following the fifth anniversary of the completion of our IPO, (b) in which we have total annual gross revenue of at least $1.07 billion, or (c) in which we are deemed to be a
large accelerated filer, which means the market value of our common stock that is held by non-affiliates exceeds $700.0 million as of the last business day of our most recently completed second fiscal quarter, and (ii) the date on which we have issued more than $1.0 billion in non-convertible debt securities during the prior three-year period. Additionally, we are also a “smaller reporting company” as defined by Section 12b-2 of the Exchange Act, meaning that we are not an investment company, an asset-backed issuer, or a majority-owned subsidiary of a parent company that is not a smaller reporting company and have a public float of less than $250 million. As an emerging growth company and a smaller reporting company, we may take advantage of specified reduced reporting and other burdens that are otherwise applicable generally to public companies that do not qualify for those classifications.