Item 7. Management's Discussion And Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of the financial condition and results of operations of Nasdaq should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and related notes included in this Form 10-K, as well as the discussion under “Item 1A. Risk Factors.” For further discussion of our growth strategy, products and services, and competitive strengths, see “Item 1. Business.” Unless stated otherwise, the comparisons presented in this discussion and analysis refer to the year-over-year comparison of changes in our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Discussion of fiscal year 2020 items and the year-over year comparison of changes in our financial condition and results of operations as of and for the fiscal years ended December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2019 can be found in Part II, “Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020, which was previously filed with the SEC on February 23, 2021.
Business Segments
We manage, operate and provide our products and services in four business segments: Market Technology, Investment Intelligence, Corporate Platforms and Market Services. See Note 1, “Organization and Nature of Operations,” and Note 19, “Business Segments,” to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion of our reportable segments and geographic data, as well as how management allocates resources, assesses performance and manages these businesses as four separate segments. See “Part I, Item 1. Business” for additional discussion on recent developments and highlights.
Financial Summary
The following table summarizes our financial performance for the year ended December 31, 2021 when compared to the same period in 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2020 when compared to the same period in 2019. The comparability of our results of operations between reported periods is impacted by the acquisition of Verafin in February 2021 and the divestiture of our U.S. Fixed Income business, which was part of our FICC business within our Market Services segment in June 2021. See “2021 Divestiture,” and “2021 Acquisition,” of Note 4, “Acquisitions and Divestiture,” to the consolidated financial statements for further discussion. For a detailed discussion of our results of operations, see “Segment Operating Results” below.
In countries with currencies other than the U.S. dollar, revenues and expenses are translated using monthly average exchange rates. Impacts on our revenues less transaction-based expenses and operating income associated with fluctuations in foreign currency are discussed in more detail under “