ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
The following discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto included in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The information contained below includes statements of management’s beliefs, expectations, hopes, goals and plans that, if not historical, are forward-looking statements subject to certain risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated in the forward-looking statements. For a discussion on forward-looking statements, see the information set forth in the introductory note to this Annual Report under the caption “Forward Looking Statements,” which information is incorporated herein by reference. For discussion and analysis pertaining to 2020 overview and highlights as compared to 2019, please refer to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) on February 25, 2021.
Our Company
NeoGenomics is a high-complexity clinical laboratory that specializes in cancer genetics diagnostic testing and pharma services. Our testing services include cytogenetics, FISH, flow cytometry, IHC, anatomic pathology and molecular genetic testing. We operate CLIA-certified laboratories in Fort Myers and Tampa, Florida; Aliso Viejo, Carlsbad and San Diego, California; Research Triangle Park, North Carolina; Houston, Texas; Atlanta, Georgia; Nashville, Tennessee; and Phoenix, Arizona and CAP accredited laboratories in Cambridge, United Kingdom; Rolle, Switzerland; and Singapore. NeoGenomics
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
serves the needs of pathologists, oncologists, academic centers, hospital systems, pharmaceutical firms, integrated service delivery networks, and managed care organizations throughout the United States and pharmaceutical firms in Europe and Asia.
2021 Overview and Highlights
•We increased consolidated revenue by 9.0% compared to 2020, including increases in Clinical Services revenue of 5.7% and in Pharma Services revenue of 29.1%;
•Pharma Services backlog increased to approximately $267 million;
•Financial position strengthened with $743 million net convertible note and equity offerings;
•We acquired Trapelo;
•We acquired Inivata;
•With the Inivata acquisition, we added liquid biopsy platform technology, including MRD testing capabilities, to our comprehensive portfolio of oncology testing solutions; and
•Transitioned the majority of our testing in Fort Myers to our new headquarters and laboratory facility, providing significant additional capacity for future growth.
Company Outlook
Advances in science and technology are driving a proliferation of oncology therapies and associated diagnostic tests. These diagnostic tools and therapies are increasing survival and enhancing quality-of-life for cancer patients. As a leading global oncology diagnostics company serving biopharmaceutical companies as well as practicing oncologists and pathologists, NeoGenomics facilitates the adoption of these advanced oncology diagnostic tools beyond the academic environment into the community setting. We are continuously enhancing and expanding our test menu to ensure that providers and patients have access to leading edge solutions such as advanced molecular testing and state-of-the art digital pathology. Moreover, our team of MDs and PhDs, along with our highly-trained oncology-focused sales team, provides ongoing education to our clients to ensure that they remain abreast of cutting-edge developments in oncology.
We are a leading provider of oncology-diagnostic services to biopharma companies. We will continue to work with these clients across the drug development continuum-from research and development through clinical trials testing-to commercialization of companion diagnostic tests. We expect to continue to grow our Pharma Services business through (i) global expansion in both Europe and Asia, (ii) expansion of our test offerings (including leading edge NGS tools), and (iii) our unique capabilities for developing and commercializing companion diagnostic tests.
We are continuing to develop and broaden our informatics and data-related tools to leverage our strategic market position and oncology expertise to help our stakeholders solve real-world problems such as identifying patients for clinical trials or providing clinical decision support tools for physicians and providers. We are committed to connecting patients with life altering therapies and trials. In carrying out these commitments, NeoGenomics aims to provide transparency and choice to patients regarding the handling and use of their data through our Notice of Privacy Practices, and has invested in leading technologies to help ensure the data we maintain is secured at all times.
We believe lower cost and increased value of testing is extremely important to the healthcare industry and creates a competitive advantage. We will invest in information technology, automation and best practices to continually improve our processes and drive down the cost of testing. We will continue to expand our test menu and expect to remain at the forefront of the ongoing revolution in cancer related genetic and molecular testing to achieve our vision of becoming one of the world’s leading cancer testing and information companies.
We continue to develop our company-wide focus, which includes the following three critical success factors for 2022:
Growth through Innovation
•Successfully launch new test offerings and secure reimbursement;
•Expand development of new cancer treatments; and
•Accelerate precision medicine in the community.
Excellence In Service and Performance
•Achieve turnaround time targets;
•Grow consolidated revenue and profitability; and
•Design next-generation LIMS platform.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Purpose Driven Culture
•Drive an engaged and committed workforce; and
•Foster inclusive and effective leadership by expanding our culture of inclusion and developing our future leaders.
These critical success factors have been communicated throughout our Company. We have structured departmental goals around these factors and have created employee incentive plans in which every employee will have a meaningful incentive for our success.
Regulatory Environment
The FDA is currently considering changes which may include increased regulation of LDTs by the FDA. In October 2014 the FDA announced its proposed framework and timetable and indicated it would move toward greater oversight of LDTs. The FDA has not finalized the framework they announced in 2014. In 2017 the FDA shifted its approach to oversight of LDTs, indicating that they would work with Congress and stakeholders on a new legislative framework and pathway for all diagnostic testing. In 2018 the FDA began limited enforcement activities on a subset of LDTs known as pharmacogenetic testing (“PGx”). NeoGenomics is a member of the American Clinical Laboratory Association (“ACLA”), which has been in active discussions with the FDA and Congress regarding FDA oversight of LDT’s. However, recent agency announcements made in the context of the COVID-19 public health emergency have produced a shifting policy landscape and further uncertainty regarding FDA’s role in regulating LDTs: in August 2020, HHS announced that FDA would not require premarket review of LDTs absent notice-and-comment rulemaking, but in November 2021, HHS issued a statement withdrawing that prior announcement, indicating a return to FDA’s longstanding approach to the regulation and enforcement discretion toward LDTs. At this time, we cannot predict what the current administration impact will be on the oversight and regulation of LDTs or if there will be any additional changes to current rules and regulations.
We closely monitor changes in legislation and take specific actions to identify and estimate the impact of changes in legislation whenever possible as regulatory changes can affect reimbursement for clinical laboratory services. We do not anticipate significant changes to our clinical revenue in 2022 resulting from known changes in legislation.
Reportable Segments
We report our activities in two reportable segments-the Clinical Services Segment and the Pharma Services Segment. We have presented the financial information reviewed by the Chief Operating Decision Maker including revenues, cost of revenue, and gross margin for each of our reportable segments. Assets are not presented at the segment level as that information is not used by the CODM.
Clinical Services
The clinical cancer testing services we offer to community-based pathologists are designed to be a natural extension of, and complementary to, the services that they perform within their own practices. We believe our relationships as a non-competitive partner to community-based pathology practices, to hospital pathology labs, and to academic centers empower them to expand their breadth of testing and provide a menu of services to match or exceed the level of service found in any center of excellence around the world. Community-based pathology practices and hospital pathology labs may order certain testing services on a tech-only basis, which allows them to participate in the diagnostic process by performing the PC interpretation services without having to hire laboratory technologists or purchase the sophisticated equipment needed to perform the technical component of the tests. We also support our pathology clients with interpretation and consultative services using our own specialized team of pathologists for difficult or complex cases and provide overflow interpretation services when requested by clients.
We are a leading provider of Molecular and NGS testing. These tests are interpreted by NeoGenomics’ team of Molecular experts and are often ordered in conjunction with other testing modalities. NGS panels are one of our fastest growing testing areas and clients can often receive a significant amount of biomarker information from very limited samples. These comprehensive panels can allow for faster treatment decisions for patients as compared to a series of single-gene molecular tests being ordered sequentially. We believe that we have one of the broadest Molecular menus in the industry and our targeted NeoTYPE panels include genes relevant to a particular cancer type, as well as other complementary tests, such as immunohistochemistry and FISH. This comprehensive menu means that NeoGenomics can be a “one-stop shop” for our clients who can get all of their oncology testing needs satisfied by our laboratory. This is attractive to our clients as patient samples do not need to be split and then managed across several laboratories. We expect our Molecular laboratory and NGS capabilities to be a key growth driver in the coming years.
In addition we directly serve oncology, dermatology, and other clinician practices that prefer to have a direct relationship with a laboratory for cancer-related genetic testing services. We typically serve these types of clients with a comprehensive
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
service offering where we perform both the technical and professional components of the tests ordered. In certain instances, larger clinician practices have begun to internalize pathology interpretation services and our tech-only service offering allows these larger clinician practices to also participate in the diagnostic process by performing the PC interpretation services on TC testing performed by us. In these instances, we will typically provide all of the more complex, molecular testing services.
Pharma Services
Our Pharma Services revenue consists of three revenue streams:
•Clinical trials and research;
•Validation laboratory services; and
•Informatics.
Our Pharma Services segment supports pharmaceutical firms in their drug development programs by supporting various clinical trials and research. This portion of our business often involves working with the sponsors on study design as well as performing the required testing. Our medical team often advises the sponsor and works closely with them as specimens are received from the enrolled sites. We also work on developing tests that will be used as part of a companion diagnostic to determine patients’ responses to a particular drug. As studies unfold our clinical trials team reports the data and often provides key analysis and insights back to the sponsors.
Our Pharma Services segment provides comprehensive testing services in support of our pharmaceutical clients’ oncology programs from discovery to commercialization. In biomarker discovery our aim is to help our clients discover the right content. We help our clients develop a biomarker hypothesis by recommending an optimal platform for molecular screening and backing our discovery tools with the informatics to capture meaningful data. In other pre-clinical and non-clinical work we can use our platforms to characterize markers of interest. Moving from discovery to development, we seek to help our clients refine their biomarker strategy and, if applicable, to develop a companion diagnostic pathway using the optimal technology for large-scale clinical trial testing.
Whether serving as the single contract research organization or partnering with one, our Pharma Services team provides significant technical expertise, working closely with our clients to support each stage of clinical trial development. Each trial we support comes with rapid turnaround time, dedicated project management, and quality assurance oversight. We have experience in supporting submissions to the FDA for companion diagnostics. Our Pharma Services strategy is focused on helping bring more effective oncology treatments to market through providing world-class laboratory services in oncology to key pharmaceutical companies in the industry.
We believe we are well positioned to service Pharma sponsors across the full continuum of the drug development process. Our Pharma Services team can work with them during the basic research and development phase as compounds come out of translational research departments as well as work with clients from Phase I clinical trials through Phases II and III as the sponsors work to prove the efficacy of their drugs. The laboratory biomarker tests that are developed during this process may become CDx tests that will be used on patients to determine if they could respond to a certain therapy. We are able to offer these CDx tests to the market immediately after FDA approval as part of our Day 1 readiness program. This ability helps to speed the commercialization of a drug and can enable Pharma sponsors to reach patients through our broad distribution channel in the Clinical Services segment.
We are continuing to develop and broaden our informatics and data-related tools to leverage our strategic market position and oncology expertise to help our stakeholders solve real-world problems such as identifying patients for clinical trials or providing clinical decision support tools for physicians and providers. We are committed to connecting patients with life altering therapies and trials. In carrying out these commitments, we aim to provide transparency and choice to patients regarding the handling and use of their data through our Notice of Privacy Practices, and have invested in leading technologies to seek to ensure the data we maintain is secured at all times.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the dates of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting periods. Actual results could differ from those estimates. Our management routinely makes judgments and estimates about the effects of matters that are inherently uncertain. Please refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a complete description of our significant accounting policies.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Our critical accounting policies are those where we have made difficult, subjective, or complex judgments in making estimates and/or where these estimates can significantly impact our financial results under different assumptions and conditions. Our critical accounting policies are:
•Business Combinations;
•Accounts Receivable;
•Recoverability and Impairment of Long-Lived Assets;
•Contingencies;
•Stock-based Compensation;
•Revenue Recognition; and
•Deferred Taxes.
Business Combinations
Results of operations and cash flows of acquired companies are included in our operating results from the date of acquisition. We allocate the purchase price of acquisitions to the assets acquired and liabilities assumed based on their estimated fair values. Any excess purchase price over the estimated fair value assigned to the net tangible and identifiable intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed is recorded to goodwill. Transaction costs associated with acquisitions are expensed as incurred in general and administrative expenses.
Accounts Receivable
Accounts receivable are reported for all Clinical Services payers based on the amount expected to be collected, which considers implicit price concessions.
For Pharma Services, we negotiate billing schedules and payment terms on a contract-by-contract basis, which often includes payments based on certain milestones being achieved. Receivables are generally reported over time based on the number of units completed, which aligns with the progress towards fulfilling its obligations under the contract.
Days Sales Outstanding (“DSO”) increased to 82 days at December 31, 2021 from 78 days at December 31, 2020 due to timing of cash receipts.
Recoverability and Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
We review the recoverability of its long-lived assets (including definite-lived intangible assets) if events or changes in circumstances indicate the assets may be impaired. Evaluation of possible impairment is based on our ability to recover the asset from the expected future pretax cash flows (undiscounted and without interest charges) of the related operations. If the expected undiscounted pretax cash flows are less than the carrying amount of such asset, an impairment loss is recognized for the difference between the estimated fair value to the carrying amount of the asset.
Contingencies
We accrue contingent losses when estimated impacts of various conditions, situations or circumstances involve uncertain outcomes. Contingent losses are recorded based on management judgment along with internal and external advice from legal counsel and/or technical consultants. Estimated losses from contingencies are recorded when both of the following conditions are met: (i) information available before the financial statements are issued (or available to be issued) indicates that it is probable that an asset has been impaired or a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and (ii) the amount of loss can be reasonably estimated. If some amount within a range of loss appears at the time to be a better estimate than any other amount within the range, that amount shall be accrued. When no amount within the range is a better estimate than any other amount, however, the minimum amount in the range shall be accrued.
Stock-based Compensation
We recognize compensation costs for all share-based payment awards made to employees, non-employee contracted physicians and directors based upon the awards’ initial grant-date fair value. Prior to 2021, we estimated the fair value of stock options using a trinomial lattice model. On January 1, 2021, we began applying the Black-Scholes option valuation model on a prospective basis to new awards. Stock compensation is recognized on a straight-line basis over the awards’ requisite service periods. The periodic expense is adjusted for actual forfeitures.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Revenue Recognition
Clinical Services Revenue
Our specialized diagnostic services are performed based on an online test order or a written test requisition form. The performance obligation is satisfied and revenues are recognized once the diagnostic services have been performed and the results have been delivered to the ordering physician. These diagnostic services are billed to various payers, including client direct billing, commercial insurance, Medicare and other government payers, and patients. Revenue is recorded for all payers based on the amount expected to be collected, which considers implicit price concessions. Implicit price concessions represent differences between amounts billed and the estimated consideration we expect to receive based on negotiated discounts, historical collection experience and other anticipated adjustments, including anticipated payer denials. Collection of consideration we expect to receive typically occurs within 30 to 60 days of billing for commercial insurance, Medicare and other governmental and self-pay patients and within 60 to 90 days of billing for client payers.
The following table reflects our estimate of the breakdown of net clinical revenue by type of payer for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019:
Pharma Services Revenue
All of our Pharma Services revenue is billed directly to clients, or the pharmaceutical sponsor. Our Pharma Services segment generally enters into contracts with pharmaceutical and biotech customers as well as other CROs to provide research and clinical trial services ranging in duration from one month to several years. We record revenue on a unit-of-service basis based on number of units completed and the total expected contract value. The total expected contract value is estimated based on historical experience of total contracted units compared to realized units as well as known factors on a specific contract-by-contract basis. Certain contracts include upfront fees, final settlement amounts or billing milestones that may not align with the completion of performance obligations. The value of these upfront fees or final settlement amounts is usually recognized over time based on the number of units completed, which aligns with our progress towards fulfilling our obligations under the contract. We also enter into other contracts, such as validation studies, for which the sole deliverable is a final report that is sent to sponsors at the completion of contracted activities. For these contracts, revenue is recognized at a point in time upon delivery of the final report to the sponsor. Any contracts that contain multiple performance obligations and include both units-of-service and point in time deliverables are accounted for as separate performance obligations and revenue is recognized as previously disclosed. We negotiate billing schedules and payment terms on a contract-by-contract basis. While the contract terms generally provide for payments based on a unit-of-service arrangement, the billing schedules, payment terms and related cash payments may not align with the performance of services and, as such, may not correspond to revenue recognized in any given period.
Amounts collected in advance of services being provided are deferred as contract liabilities on the balance sheet. The associated revenue is recognized and the contract liability is reduced as the contracted services are subsequently performed. Contract assets are established for revenue that has been recognized but not yet billed. These contract assets are reduced once the customer is invoiced and a corresponding account receivable is recorded. Additionally, certain costs to obtain contracts, primarily for sales commissions, are capitalized when incurred and are amortized over the term of the contract. Amounts capitalized for contracts with an initial contract term of twelve months or less are classified as current assets and all others are classified as non-current assets.
Most contracts are terminable by the customer, either immediately or according to advance notice terms specified within the contracts. All contracts require payment of fees for services rendered through the date of termination and may require payment for subsequent services necessary to conclude the study or close out the contract.
Deferred Taxes
Our accounting for deferred tax consequences represents our best estimate of future events that can be appropriately reflected in accounting estimates. The factors included in the analysis are historical and projected future taxable income including evolving business practices of our industry. Changes in existing tax laws, regulations, rates and future operating results may impact the amount of deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets over time.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Management assesses the available positive and negative evidence to estimate if sufficient future taxable income will be generated to realize the existing deferred tax assets.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we determined that sufficient positive evidence did not exist to conclude that it is more likely than not that net operating losses generated by our operations in the U.S., Switzerland, Singapore, and China would be able to be utilized in future periods and has therefore established a valuation allowance against the deferred tax assets generated by such losses.
Results of Operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared with the year ended December 31, 2020
The following table presents the condensed Consolidated Statements of Operations as a percentage of revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
(1) Cost of revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021, includes $10.4 million of amortization of acquired Inivata developed technology intangible assets and write-offs of $5.3 million for COVID-19 PCR testing inventory.
Revenue
Clinical Services and Pharma Services net revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Consolidated revenue in 2021 increased $39.9 million, or 9.0%, as compared to 2020. Clinical Services revenue increased $21.8 million, or 5.7%, to $404.2 million in 2021 as compared to $382.3 million in 2020. Decreases in Clinical Services revenue in 2021 due to the exit of COVID-19 PCR testing were offset by increases in Clinical Services non-COVID-19 PCR test volumes.
Due to the broad roll-out of the COVID-19 vaccine and a sharp decline in the demand for COVID-19 PCR testing, we made the decision at the end of the first quarter 2021 to exit from COVID-19 PCR testing which was included in Clinical Services segment revenue. The Clinical Services segment’s continued focus is its broad and innovative testing menu as well as any future new product offerings. COVID-19 PCR testing revenue was $1.6 million in 2021 compared to $27.8 million in 2020.
Pharma Services revenue increased $18.0 million, or 29.1%, to $80.2 million in 2021 as compared to $62.1 million in 2020, primarily driven by an increase in revenue related to research studies and informatics. In addition our backlog of signed contracts has continued to grow 27.8% to approximately $267 million as of December 31, 2021, from $209 million as of
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
December 31, 2020. We define backlog as the stated amount of signed contracts less dormant contracts with no activity for twelve months, contingencies and cancellations.
Cost of Revenue and Gross Profit
Cost of revenue includes payroll and payroll related costs for performing tests, maintenance and/or depreciation of laboratory equipment, rent for laboratory facilities, laboratory reagents, probes and supplies, delivery and courier costs relating to the transportation of specimens to be tested, and amortization for acquired Inivata developed technology intangible assets.
The consolidated cost of revenue and gross profit metrics for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows (dollars in thousands):
(2) Clinical Services cost of revenue in 2021 includes $9.2 million of amortization of acquired Inivata developed technology intangible assets and write-offs of $5.3 million for COVID-19 PCR testing inventory.
(3) Pharma Services cost of revenue in 2021 includes $1.2 million of amortization of acquired Inivata developed technology intangible assets.
The consolidated cost of revenue increase in 2021 when compared to 2020 is due to the amortization of acquired Inivata developed technology intangibles, the write-off of COVID-19 PCR testing inventory due to the termination of COVID-19 PCR testing, and higher payroll and payroll-related costs.
Gross profit margin for 2021 was 38.6% compared to 41.8% in 2020. This 3.2% decrease is primarily due to the amortization of acquired Inivata developed technology intangibles and the fixed nature of many of our laboratory costs.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses consist of payroll and payroll related costs for our executive, billing, finance, human resources, information technology, and other administrative personnel, as well as stock-based compensation. We also allocate professional services, facilities expense, IT infrastructure costs, depreciation, amortization, and other administrative-related costs to general and administrative expenses.
Consolidated general and administrative expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows (dollars in thousands):
General and administrative expenses increased $77.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase reflects acquisition and integration costs related to the acquisitions of Inivata and Trapelo, an increase in payroll and payroll-related costs due to increases in personnel to support our near and long-term growth, higher non-cash stock-based compensation expenses, an increase in professional fees, and a loss contingency for the regulatory matter.
We expect our general and administrative expenses to increase in total but decrease as a percentage of revenue as we add employee and compensation expenses and continue to expand our physical and technological infrastructure to support our anticipated growth.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses relate to costs of developing new proprietary and non-proprietary genetic tests, including payroll and payroll related costs, maintenance of laboratory equipment, laboratory supplies (reagents), and outside consultants and experts assisting our research and development team.
Consolidated research and development expense for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Research and development expenses increased $13.6 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase is driven by additional focus and commitment to new test development and FDA initiatives.
We anticipate research and development expenditures will significantly increase in the future as we continue to invest in development costs for innovation projects and bringing new tests to market.
Sales and Marketing Expenses
Sales and marketing expenses are primarily attributable to employee-related costs including sales management, sales representatives, sales and marketing consultants, and marketing and customer service personnel.
Consolidated sales and marketing expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, are as follows (dollars in thousands):
Sales and marketing expenses increased $14.7 million in 2021 compared to 2020. The increase primarily reflects higher commissions due to our increase in consolidated revenue, the expansion of our sales team, increased sales travel expenses due to the easing of COVID-19 pandemic related sales travel restrictions, and increased investment in marketing.
We expect higher commissions expense in the coming years as our sales representatives continue generating new business in both of our business segments. We expect our sales and marketing expenses over the long term to align with changes in revenue.
Interest Expense, Net
Interest expense, net, decreased $1.9 million in 2021 compared to 2020. This reduction in interest expense primarily results from the termination of the higher interest rate term loan replaced by the lower interest rate convertible debt in May 2020. Interest expense for the year ended December 31, 2021 reflects the effective interest rate on the 2028 Convertible Notes and the 2025 Convertible Notes which is 0.70% and 1.96%, respectively. Interest on the 2028 Convertible Notes and 2025 Convertible Notes began accruing upon issuance and is payable semi-annually. For further details regarding the convertible notes, please refer to Note 9. Debt, in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Expense (Income), Net
Other expense (income), net, was expense of $0.5 million in 2021 compared to income of $7.9 million in 2020. This $8.4 million decrease was primarily due to grant income related to the CARES Act Public Health and Social Service Emergency Fund for the year ended December 31, 2020. Please refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies for further details regarding the grant income.
Gain on Investment in and Loan Receivable from Non-Consolidated Affiliate, Net
We recorded a gain on investment in and loan receivable from non-consolidated affiliate, net, in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Statements of Operations of $109.3 million in 2021 for the excess of the acquisition-date fair value of the previously-held equity interest, Purchase Option, and Line of Credit over their carrying values. For the year ended December 31, 2020, we reported a net unrealized gain of $4.0 million due to a remeasurement of our investment in Inivata. For further details regarding the previously-held equity investment, purchase option in Inivata and the related gain, please refer to Note 3. Acquisitions and Note 8. Investment in Non-Consolidated Affiliate, in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Net (Loss) Income
The following table provides the net (loss) income for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, along with the computation of basic and diluted net (loss) income per share (in thousands, except per share amounts):
Non-GAAP Measures
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
In order to provide greater transparency regarding our operating performance, the financial results and financial guidance in this press release refer to certain non-GAAP financial measures that involve adjustments to GAAP results. Non-GAAP financial measures exclude certain income and/or expense items that management believes are not directly attributable to the Company’s core operating results and/or certain items that are inconsistent in amounts and frequency, making it difficult to perform a meaningful evaluation of our current or past operating performance. Management believes that the presentation of operating results using non-GAAP financial measures provides useful supplemental information to investors by facilitating the analysis of the Company’s core, test-level operating results across reporting periods and when comparing those same results to those published by our peers. These non-GAAP financial measures may also assist investors in evaluating future prospects. Management also uses non-GAAP financial measures for financial and operational decision making, planning and forecasting purposes and to manage the business. These non-GAAP financial measures do not replace the presentation of financial information in accordance with U.S. GAAP financial results, should not be considered measures of liquidity, and are unlikely to be comparable to non-GAAP financial measures provided by other companies.
Definitions of Non-GAAP Measures
Non-GAAP Adjusted EBITDA
“Adjusted EBITDA” is defined by NeoGenomics as net (loss) income from continuing operations before: (i) interest expense, (ii) tax (benefit) or expense, (iii) depreciation and amortization expense, (iv) non-cash stock-based compensation expense, and, if applicable in a reporting period, (v) acquisition and integration related expenses, (vi) write-off of COVID-19 PCR testing inventory and equipment, (vii) new headquarters moving expenses, (viii) gain on investment in and loan receivable from non-consolidated affiliate, net, (x) loss contingency for regulatory matter, (xi) loss on extinguishment of debt, and (xii) other significant or non-operating (income) or expenses, net.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
The following is a reconciliation of GAAP net (loss) income to Non-GAAP EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (dollars in thousands):
(4) Other significant expenses (income), net, includes strategic deal costs, CEO transition costs, amounts received related to the CARES Act, cash flow hedge termination fees, debt retirement fees, and certain non-recurring items.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
To date, we have financed our operations primarily through cash generated from operations, public and private sales of debt and equity securities, and bank debt borrowings.
The following table presents a summary of our consolidated cash flows for operating, investing, and financing activities for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, as well as the period ending cash and cash equivalents and working capital (in thousands):
(5) Defined as current assets less current liabilities.
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, was $26.7 million. The net loss of $8.3 million includes $15.7 million of acquisition and integration costs as well as non-cash charges resulting from $53.4 million depreciation and amortization, $22.5 million of stock-based compensation, $8.7 million of operating lease expense, $2.7 million of debt amortization, $6.1 million of write-offs of COVID-19 PCR testing inventory and equipment related to the exit from COVID-19 PCR testing, and $2.2 million of other non-cash items. These charges were offset by $109.3 million of realized net gain on investment in and loan receivable from non-consolidated affiliate. Operating assets had cash outflows of $9.8 million resulting from a $4.7 million increase in accounts receivable, net, and a $6.7 million increase of prepaids and
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
other asset, offset by a $1.6 million decrease in inventory. Operating liabilities generated cash inflows of $5.2 million from a $12.3 million increase in accrued compensation and other accruals offset by a $7.1 million decrease in accounts payable.
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash used in investing activities was $632.4 million, an increase of approximately $472.9 million compared to the same period in 2020. This was due to $419.4 million of net cash used for the acquisitions of Inivata and Trapelo as well as net investments in marketable securities of $133.8 million, $64.1 million of cash used for capital expenditures and the disbursement of a $15.0 million loan receivable from non-consolidated affiliate.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash provided by financing activities was $725.3 million compared to $235.6 million for the same period in 2020. Cash provided by financing activities during the year ended December 31, 2021, consisted $408.1 million of net proceeds from equity offerings, convertible debt proceeds of $334.4 million net of issuance costs, and $15.1 million for the issuance of common stock net of issuance costs. This activity was partially offset by the use of cash in amounts of $29.3 million for premiums paid for capped call confirmations and $3.0 million for the net repayment of equipment financing obligations.
Liquidity Outlook
As of December 31, 2021, we had $316.8 million in cash and cash equivalents in addition to $198.6 million of marketable securities available to support current operational liquidity needs. We anticipate that the cash on hand, marketable securities, and cash collections are sufficient to fund our near-term capital and operating needs for at least the next 12 months. Operating needs include, but are not limited to, the planned costs to operate our business (including amounts required to fund working capital and capital expenditures, continued research, and development efforts) and potential strategic acquisitions and investments.
On January 6, 2021, we entered into an underwriting agreement relating to the issuance and sale of 4,081,632 shares of our common stock (the “2021 Common Stock Offering”), $0.001 par value per share. The price to the public in this offering was $49.00 per share and we agreed to sell the shares to the underwriters at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commission of $2.45 per share. Under the terms of the underwriting agreement, we also granted the underwriters a 30-day option to purchase up to 612,244 additional shares of common stock at the public offering price, less underwriting discounts and commissions. On January 6, 2021, the underwriters exercised their option in full and purchased all 612,244 shares. The net proceeds from the 2021 Common Stock Offering and full exercise of the underwriters’ option were approximately $218.3 million, net of underwriting commissions of approximately $11.7 million.
On January 11, 2021, we completed the sale of $345.0 million of the 2028 Convertible Notes, including the full exercise of the underwriters’ option to purchase an additional $45.0 million aggregate principal amount of the 2028 Convertible Notes (the “2028 Over-allotment Option”) on the same terms and conditions, solely to cover over-allotments with respect to the 2028 Convertible Notes offering. The total net proceeds from the issuance of the 2028 Convertible Notes and the total exercise of the 2028 Over-allotment Option was approximately $334.4 million, which includes approximately $10.6 million of discounts, commissions and offering expenses. For further details regarding the 2028 Convertible Notes, please refer to Note 9. Debt, in the accompanying notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
We used $29.3 million of the net proceeds from the offerings to enter into capped call transactions. We intend to use the remaining net proceeds from the offerings for general corporate purposes and/or to acquire or invest in complementary businesses and technologies.
On June 18, 2021, we completed a private placement (“Private Placement”) to certain accredited investors of an aggregate of 4,444,445 shares of our common stock at a price of $45.00 per share. The net proceeds from the Private Placement were approximately $189.9 million, after deducting fees to the placement agents and other offering expenses of approximately $10.1 million. We used the net proceeds from the Private Placement for the acquisition of Inivata.
Related Party Transactions
Please refer to Note 18. Related Party Transactions, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of our related party transactions.
NEOGENOMICS, INC.
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our significant contractual obligations as of December 31, 2021 (in thousands):
(6) Amounts represent required principal debt payments on our 2025 Convertible Notes and 2028 Convertible Notes. Please refer to Note 9. Debt, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a full description of the terms of our indebtedness and the related debt service requirements.
Capital Expenditures
We forecast capital expenditures in order to execute on our business plan and maintain growth; however, the actual amount and timing of such capital expenditures will ultimately be determined by the volume of business. We currently anticipate that our capital expenditures for the year ended December 31, 2022, will be in the range of $25.0 million to $35.0 million. We have funded and plan to continue funding these capital expenditures with cash and financing.
Recently Adopted Accounting Guidance
Please refer to Note 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies, to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a discussion of recently adopted accounting pronouncements and accounting pronouncements pending adoption.
Effects of Inflation
During the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, inflation did not have a material effect on our business. Widely reported inflation has occurred, however, and may be ongoing for the foreseeable future. Depending on the severity and persistence of these inflationary pressures, we could see, in the future, a negative impact on our financial results.