Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion includes forward-looking statements about our business, financial condition and results of operations including discussions about management’s expectations for our business. These statements represent projections, beliefs and expectations based on current circumstances and conditions and in light of recent events and trends, and these statements should not be construed either as assurances of performances or as promises of a given course of action. Instead, various known and unknown factors are likely to cause our actual performance and management’s actions to vary, and the results of these variances may be both material and adverse. A list of the known material factors that may cause our results to vary, or may cause management to deviate from its current plans and expectations, is included in Item 1A, “Risk Factors,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K. The following discussion should also be read in conjunction with the consolidated financial statements and notes included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplemental Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Business Overview
We are a commercial-stage company that develops and sells high performance water solutions to the medical and commercial markets.
In medical markets, we sell water filtration products and waterborne pathogen detection products. Our medical water filters, mostly classified as ultrafilters, are used primarily by hospitals for the prevention of infection from waterborne pathogens, such as legionella and pseudomonas, and in dialysis centers for the removal of biological contaminants from water and bicarbonate concentrate. Because our ultrafilters capture contaminants as small as 0.005 microns in size, they minimize exposure to a wide variety of bacteria, viruses, fungi, parasites, and endotoxins.
In commercial markets, we manufacture and sell water filters that improve the taste and odor of water and reduce biofilm, bacteria, and scale build-up in downstream equipment. Marketed under both the Nephros and AETHER brands, our products are marketed primarily to the food service, hospitality, convenience store, and health care markets.
Our pathogen detection systems are portable, near real-time systems designed to provide actionable data for infection control teams, biomedical engineers in dialysis clinics, and water quality teams in building management organizations.
We also have a subsidiary, Specialty Renal Products, Inc. (“SRP”), a development-stage medical device company, focused primarily on developing hemodiafiltration (“HDF”) technology. SRP is developing a second-generation of the Nephros OLpūr H2H Hemodiafiltration System, the FDA 510(k)-cleared medical device that enables nephrologists to provide HDF treatment to patients with end stage renal disease (“ESRD”).
We were founded in 1997 by healthcare professionals affiliated with Columbia University Medical Center/New York-Presbyterian Hospital to develop and commercialize an alternative method to hemodialysis. We have extended our filtration technologies to meet the demand for liquid purification in other areas, in particular, water purification.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
We are subject to recently issued accounting standards, accounting guidance and disclosure requirements. For a description of these new accounting standards, see “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires application of management’s subjective judgments, often requiring estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain and may change in subsequent periods. Our actual results may differ substantially from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. While our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in “Note 2 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies,” to our consolidated financial statements included in Item 8, “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data,” of this Annual Report on Form 10-K, we believe that the following accounting policies require the application of significant judgments and estimates.
Inventories
Our inventory reserve requirements are based on various factors including product expiration date and estimates for the future sales of the product. Reserve assessments include inventory obsolescence based upon expiration date, damaged, or rejected product, slow-moving products, and other considerations. During the year ended December 31, 2021, inventory reserves increased $0.2 million to $0.3 million primarily due to expiration of products that were manufactured in advance of demand, and which expired before sales began to accelerate. We continue to monitor our inventory reserves amounts and policies, and to update both as required by relevant circumstances.
Results of Operations
Fluctuations in Operating Results
Our results of operations have fluctuated significantly from period to period in the past and are likely to continue to do so in the future. We anticipate that our annual results of operations will be impacted for the foreseeable future by several factors, including the progress and timing of expenditures related to our research and development efforts, marketing expenses related to product launches, timing of regulatory approval of our various products and market acceptance of our products. Due to these fluctuations, we believe that the period-to-period comparisons of our operating results are not a good indication of our future performance.
Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2020
The following table sets forth our summarized, consolidated results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands except percentages):
Net Revenues. Our business is reported in three reportable segments: Water Filtration, Pathogen Detection and Renal Products. Our net revenues in each of these segments for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages) were as follows:
The increase of approximately $1.8 million or 22%, was driven by several factors. These factors include new customer site acquisition which averaged more than one per day in 2021 and a customer retention rate of 90%. In addition, revenues related to install in base hospital increased 29%.
Total net revenues in the Pathogen Detection segment increased 545% reflecting early receptivity of the market to our pathogen detection products.
Gross Profit Margin
Consolidated gross profit margin was approximately 55% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to approximately 57% for the year ended December 31, 2021. The decrease of approximately 2% was driven by the Water Filtration segment primarily as a result of an increase in inventory obsolescence.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses by segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages) were as follows:
Consolidated research and development expenses decreased $0.6 million primarily due to decreasing investment in the second-generation HDF product in the Renal Products segment, partially offset by increased research and development investments in our Pathogen Detection products.
Depreciation and Amortization Expense
Depreciation and amortization expenses were $0.2 million for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Selling, General and Administrative Expenses
Selling, general and administrative expenses by segment for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 (in thousands, except percentages) were as follows:
Consolidated selling, general and administrative expenses increased $1.2 million primarily due to increased headcount related expenditures of $1.2 million and increased travel and marketing expenses of $0.2 million in the Water Filtration segment. This increase was partially offset by a decrease in headcount related expenditures of $0.2 million in the Renal Products segment.
Interest Expense
Interest expense was approximately $41,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $110,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020. Both expenses included our secured note payable. The $69,000 reduction is primarily due to elimination of both our secured revolving credit facility and contingent consideration accretion expense.
Extinguishment of PPP loan
Our outstanding PPP loan was forgiven in January 2021 resulting in an extinguishment of approximately $482,000.
Other Income (Expense), net
Other income was approximately $17,000 for the year ended December 31, 2021 as a result of gains on foreign currency transactions. Other expense was approximately $152,000 for the year ended December 31, 2020 as a result of losses on foreign currency transactions.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The following table summarizes our liquidity and capital resources as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 and is intended to supplement the more detailed discussion that follows. The amounts stated are expressed in thousands.
We operate under an Investment, Risk Management and Accounting Policy adopted by our Board of Directors. Such policy limits the types of instruments or securities in which we may invest our excess funds: U.S. Treasury Securities; Certificates of Deposit issued by money center banks; Money Funds by money center banks; Repurchase Agreements; and Eurodollar Certificates of Deposit issued by money center banks. This policy provides that our primary objectives for investments are the preservation of principal and achieving sufficient liquidity to meet our forecasted cash requirements. In addition, provided that such primary objectives are met, we may seek to achieve the maximum yield available under such constraints.
At December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $135.7 million, and we expect to incur additional operating losses from operations until such time, if ever, that we are able to increase product sales and/or licensing revenue to achieve profitability.
Based on cash that is available for our operations and projections of our future operations, we believe that our cash balances will be sufficient to fund our current operating plan through at least the next twelve months from the date of issuance of the consolidated financial statements in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. Additionally, our operating plans are designed to help control operating costs, to increase revenue and to raise additional capital until such time as we generate sufficient cash flows from operations. If there were a decrease in the demand for our products due to either economic or competitive conditions, or we are unable to achieve our plan, there could be a significant reduction in liquidity due to our possible inability to cut costs sufficiently.
Our future liquidity sources and requirements will depend on many factors, including:
● the market acceptance of our products, and our ability to effectively and efficiently produce and market our products;
● the continued progress in, and the costs of, clinical studies and other research and development programs;
● the costs involved in filing and enforcing patent claims and the status of competitive products; and
● the cost of litigation, including potential patent litigation and any other actual or threatened litigation.
We expect to put our current capital resources to the following uses:
● the development, marketing, and sales of our water-filtration and water diagnostics product;
● the development of our second-generation HDF product; and
● working capital purposes.
Net cash used in operating activities was $1.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $6.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020, a decrease of $5.5 million. The decrease of $5.5 million is due primarily to decreased expenditures on inventory, which were incurred in the first half of fiscal year 2020 to reduce the risk of possible supply chain interruptions early in the COVID-19 pandemic, and an increase in revenue for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020.
Net cash used in investing activities was $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. The change is due primarily due to decreased purchases of property and equipment.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $0.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 resulted from proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options of $0.5 million partially offset by payments on our secured note payable of $0.3 million.
Net cash provided by financing activities of $11.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 resulted from net proceeds from the issuance of common stock of $11.5 million, proceeds from a PPP loan of $0.5 million and proceeds from the exercise of warrants and stock options of $0.2 million, partially offset by net payments on our secured revolving credit facility of $0.6 million, payments on our secured note payable of $0.2 million and payment of contingent consideration related to the Aether Acquisition of $0.1 million.
Purchase Commitments
In exchange for the rights granted under the License and Supply Agreement with Medica, we agreed to make certain minimum annual aggregate purchases from Medica over the term of the License and Supply Agreement. For the year ended December 31, 2021, the Company agreed to make minimum annual aggregate purchases from Medica of €3.3 million (approximately $3.9 million). For the year ended December 31, 2021, the aggregate purchase commitments totaled €3.5 million (approximately $4.2 million).