Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
References to the “Company,” “NETC” “our,” “us” or “we” refer to Nabors Energy Transition Corporation. The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses. We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
The registration statement for the Initial Public Offering was declared effective on November 16, 2021. On November 19, 2021, the Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 units, including 3,600,000 additional units to cover Over-Allotment Units, at $10.00 per unit, generating gross proceeds of approximately $276.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $16.6 million, of which approximately $9.7 million was deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 13,730,000 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of $13.7 million.
Upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, approximately $281.5 million ($10.20 per Unit) of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of the proceeds of the Private Placement were placed in a trust (“Trust Account”) with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee and were invested in United States “government securities” within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”), which have been invested only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by the Company, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account .
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds from its Initial Public Offering and the sale of private placement warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination.
If we are unable to complete our initial business combination within such 15-month (or up to 21-month if we extend the period of time to consummate our initial business combination) period, we will (i) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up, (ii) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the
public shares, at a per-share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the trust account, including interest earned on the funds held in the trust account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes (net of any taxes payable by us and less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding public shares, which redemption will completely extinguish public stockholders’ rights as stockholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any), subject to applicable law, and (iii) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of our remaining stockholders and our board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Delaware law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity from inception through December 31, 2021 was in preparation for our Initial Public Offering, and since our Initial Public Offering, our activity has been limited to the search for a prospective initial business combination. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the completion of our initial business combination, at the earliest.
For the period from March 24, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $0.3 million, which consisted of mostly of general and administrative expenses.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had cash of $2.5 million and a working capital of approximately $1.7 million.
Our liquidity needs up to November 19, 2021 had been satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from our sponsor to cover certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the founder shares and a loan of approximately $300,000 from our sponsor pursuant to the Note, of which approximately $141,656 was borrowed which was repaid in full on November 19, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs have been satisfied from the proceeds from the consummation of the Private Placement not held in the Trust. In order to finance transaction costs in connection with an intended initial business combination, our Sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us Working Capital Loans. As of December 31, 2021, there were no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loan.
Based on the foregoing, management believes that it will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of an initial business combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we intend to use these funds for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial business combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the initial business combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and has concluded that the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On March 30, 2021, our sponsor paid an aggregate of $25,000 in exchange for issuance of 8,625,000 shares of the Company’s founder shares. On November 16, 2021, our sponsor surrendered an aggregate of 1,900,000 of founder shares to the Company at no cost. An aggregate of 175,000 founder shares were issued to the independent directors for an aggregate of $700. As of November 19, 2021, there were 6,900,000 founder shares outstanding. The founder shares represent 20.0% of the Company’s issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, the Company consummated the Private Placement of 13,730,000 private placement warrants, at a price of $1.00 per private placement warrant, generating gross proceeds of approximately $13.7 million.
Related Party Loans
On March 26, 2021, an affiliate of our sponsor agreed to loan the Company up to $300,000 pursuant to a promissory note (as amended and restated on October 27, 2021, the “Note”). The Note was non-interest bearing, unsecured and due on the earlier of April 30, 2022 and the closing of the Initial Public Offering. The Company borrowed $141,656 under the Note and repaid the balance in full on November 19, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, our sponsor or an affiliate of our sponsor, or certain of the Company’s officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan the Company funds as may be required (“Working Capital Loans”). If the Company completes a Business Combination, the Company would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to the Company. Otherwise, the Working Capital Loans would be repaid only out of funds held outside the Trust Account. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, the Company may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans, but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined, and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination, without interest, or, at the lender’s discretion, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the private placement warrants. As of December 31, 2021, the Company had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Support Agreement
On November 16, 2021, the Company entered into an agreement pursuant to which, commencing on the date that the Company’s securities were first listed on the New York Stock Exchange through the earlier of consummation of the initial business combination and the Company’s liquidation, the Company will reimburse our sponsor or an affiliate thereof $15,000 per month for office space, utilities, secretarial and administrative support.
In addition, our sponsor, executive officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on the Company’s behalf such as identifying potential partner businesses and performing due diligence on suitable Business Combinations. Any such payments prior to an initial business combination will be made using funds held outside the Trust Account.
Contractual Obligations
Registration and Stockholder Rights
The holders of founder shares, private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans (and any shares of Class A common stock issuable upon the exercise of the private placement warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of Working Capital Loans and upon conversion of the founder shares) are entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration rights agreement. These holders are entitled to certain demand and “piggyback” registration rights. The Company will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The Company granted the underwriters a 45-day option from the date of the final prospectus to purchase up to 3,600,000 additional Units at the Initial Public Offering price less the underwriting discounts and commissions. On November 17, 2021, the underwriters fully exercised their over-allotment option.
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.5 million in the aggregate (including with respect to the Over-Allotment Units), paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate (including with respect to the Over-Allotment Units) will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that the Company completes an initial business combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement for the Initial Public Offering.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires the Company’s management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of expenses during the reporting period.
Making estimates requires management to exercise significant judgment. It is at least reasonably possible that the estimate of the effect of a condition, situation or set of circumstances that existed at the date of the financial statements, which management considered in formulating its estimate, could change in the near term due to one or more future confirming events. Accordingly, the actual results could differ significantly from those estimates.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A common stock subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” The Class A common stock subject to mandatory redemption (if any) is classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A common stock (including Class A common stock that features redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) is classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A common stock is classified as stockholders’ equity. Our Class A common stock feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 27,600,000 shares of Class A common stock subject to possible redemption is presented at redemption value as temporary equity, outside of the stockholders’ equity section of our condensed balance sheet.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting pronouncements, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the Company’s financial statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K.
JOBS ACT
On April 5, 2012, the JOBS Act was signed into law. The JOBS Act contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” under the JOBS Act and are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We elected to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, our financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
As an “emerging growth company,” we are not required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis), and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.