Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis Of Financial Condition And Results Of Operations
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on March 29, 2021 as a Cayman Islands exempted company for the purpose of effecting a merger, share exchange, asset acquisition, share purchase, recapitalization, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Business Combination”). We are an emerging growth company and, as such, we are subject to all of the risks associated with emerging growth companies.
Our sponsor is Infinite Sponsor, LLC, a Delaware limited liability company (the “Sponsor”). The registration statement for our initial public offering (the “Initial Public Offering”) was declared effective on November 18, 2021. On November 23, 2021, we consummated our Initial Public Offering of 27,600,000 units (the “Units” and, with respect to the Class A ordinary shares included in the Units being offered, the “Public Shares”), including the issuance of 3,600,000 Units as a result of the underwriters’ full exercise of their over-allotment option, at $10.00 per Unit, generating gross proceeds of $276.0 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $16.0 million, of which approximately $9.7 million was for deferred underwriting commissions.
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the private placement (“Private Placement”) of 13,540,000 warrants (each, a “Private Placement Warrant” and collectively, the “Private Placement Warrants”) at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $13.5 million, and incurring offering costs of approximately $23,000.
Upon the closing of Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement, approximately $281.5 million ($10.20 per Unit) of net proceeds, including the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and certain of a portion of the proceeds of the Private Placement, was placed in a trust account (“Trust Account”) located in the United States with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee, and invested only in U.S. government securities within the meaning of Section 2(a)(16) of the Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended (the “Investment Company Act”) having a maturity of 185 days or less or in money market funds meeting certain conditions under Rule 2a-7 promulgated under the Investment Company Act which invest only in direct U.S. government treasury obligations, as determined by us, until the earlier of: (i) the completion of a Business Combination and (ii) the distribution of the Trust Account.
Our management has broad discretion with respect to the specific application of the net proceeds of the Initial Public Offering and the sale of Private Placement Warrants, although substantially all of the net proceeds are intended to be applied generally toward consummating a Business Combination. There is no assurance that we will be able to complete a Business Combination successfully. Our initial Business Combination must be with one or more operating businesses or assets with a fair market value of at least 80% of the net assets held in the Trust Account (excluding the deferred underwriting commissions and taxes payable, if any, on the interest earned on the Trust Account) at the time we sign a definitive agreement in connection with the initial Business Combination. However, we will only complete a Business Combination if the post-transaction company owns or acquires 50% or more of the voting securities of the target or otherwise acquires a controlling interest in the target sufficient for it not to be required to register as an investment company under the Investment Company Act.
If we are unable to complete a Business Combination within 21 months from the closing of the Initial Public Offering, or August 23, 2023 (the “Combination Period”), we will (1) cease all operations except for the purpose of winding up; (2) as promptly as reasonably possible but not more than ten business days thereafter, redeem the Public Shares, at a per share price, payable in cash, equal to the aggregate amount then on deposit in the Trust Account calculated as of two business days prior to the consummation of the initial Business Combination, including interest earned on the funds held in the Trust Account and not previously released to us to pay our taxes, if any (less up to $100,000 of interest to pay dissolution expenses), divided by the number of then outstanding Public Shares, which redemption will completely extinguish Public Shareholders’ rights as shareholders (including the right to receive further liquidating distributions, if any); and (3) as promptly as reasonably possible following such redemption, subject to the approval of the remaining shareholders and the board of directors, dissolve and liquidate, subject in each case to our obligations under Cayman Islands law to provide for claims of creditors and the requirements of other applicable law. There will be no redemption rights or liquidating distributions with respect to our warrants, which will expire worthless if we fail to consummate a Business Combination within the Combination Period.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $490,000 in our operating bank account and working capital of approximately $978,000.
Prior to the completion of the Initial Public Offering and Private Placement, our liquidity needs were satisfied through a contribution of $25,000 from Sponsor to cover for certain expenses in exchange for the issuance of the Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share (the “Founder Shares”), and a loan of approximately $269,000 from the Sponsor pursuant to a promissory note originally issued on April 9, 2021 (the “Note”). We repaid the Note in full on November 24, 2021. Subsequent to the consummation of the Initial Public Offering, our liquidity has been satisfied through the certain proceeds from the Private Placement held outside of the Trust Account. In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, provide us loans in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination (“Working Capital Loans”). As of December 31, 2021, there was no amounts outstanding under any Working Capital Loans.
In February 2022, the Sponsor committed to provide us an aggregated of up to $900,000 in loans in order to finance our working capital needs (including transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination) (the “Sponsor Loan Commitment”). As described above, up to $1.5 million of the Sponsor Loan Commitment (in the aggregate with any other Working Capital Loans) may be convertible into units of the post-Business Combination entity at a price of $10.00 per unit at the option of the lender.
Based on the foregoing, management has since reevaluated our liquidity and financial condition and believes that we will have sufficient working capital and borrowing capacity to meet its needs through the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or one year from this filing. Over this time period, we will be using the funds held outside of the Trust Account for paying existing accounts payable, identifying and evaluating prospective initial Business Combination candidates, performing due diligence on prospective target businesses, paying for travel expenditures, selecting the target business to merge with or acquire, and structuring, negotiating and consummating the Business Combination.
Management continues to evaluate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the industry and has concluded that while it is reasonably possible that the virus could have a negative effect on our financial position, results of our operations and/or search for a target company, the specific impact is not readily determinable as of the date of the financial statements included in this Report. The financial statements included in this Report do not include any adjustments that might result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
In February 2022, the Russian Federation and Belarus commenced a military action with the country of Ukraine. As a result of this action, various nations, including the United States, have instituted economic sanctions against the Russian Federation and Belarus. The impact of this action and related sanctions on the world economy are not determinable as of the date of this Report. Further, the specific impact of this action on our financial condition, results of operations, and cash flows is also not determinable as of the date of this Report.
Results of Operations
Our entire activity since inception up to December 31, 2021, was in preparation for our formation and the Initial Public Offering, and since the completion of the Initial Public Offering, the search for business combination candidates. We will not be generating any operating revenues until the closing and completion of our initial Business Combination.
For the period from March 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $381,000, which consisted of approximately $226,000 in general and administrative expenses and related party administrative fees of approximately $158,000, partially offset by approximately $3,000 of net income on the investments held in the Trust Account.
Related Party Transactions
Founder Shares
On April 9, 2021, the Sponsor paid $25,000 to cover for certain offering costs on behalf of us in exchange for issuance of 5,750,000 Class B ordinary shares, par value $0.0001 per share. On November 2, 2021, the Sponsor transferred 25,000 Founder Shares to each of our board of directors (the holders of our Founder Shares, the “initial shareholders”). On November 18, 2021, we effected a share capitalization resulting in an aggregate of 6,900,000 Founder Shares outstanding. The Sponsor agreed to forfeit up to 900,000 Founder Shares to the extent that the over-allotment option is not exercised in full by the underwriters, so that the Founder Shares would represent 20% of our issued and outstanding shares after the Initial Public Offering. On November 23, 2021, the underwriters exercised the over-allotment option in full; thus, these 900,000 Founder Shares were no longer subject forfeiture.
The initial shareholders agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of the Founder Shares until the earlier to occur of: (A) one year after the completion of the initial Business Combination or earlier if, subsequent to the initial Business Combination, the closing price of the Class A ordinary share equals or exceeds $12.00 per share (as adjusted for share sub-divisions, capitalization of shares, share dividends, rights issuances, subdivisions reorganizations, recapitalizations and the like) for any 20 trading days within any 30-trading day period commencing at least 150 days after the initial Business Combination, and (B) the date following the completion of the initial Business Combination on which we complete a liquidation, merger, share exchange or other similar transaction that results in all of our shareholders having the right to exchange their Class A ordinary shares for cash, securities or other property.
Private Placement Warrants
Simultaneously with the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 13,540,000 Private Placement Warrants, at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, to the Sponsor, generating proceeds of approximately $13.5 million.
Each Private Placement Warrant is exercisable for one whole Class A ordinary share at a price of $11.50 per share. A portion of the proceeds from the sale of the Private Placement Warrants was added to the proceeds from the Initial Public Offering held in the Trust Account. If we do not complete a Business Combination within the Combination Period, the Private Placement Warrants will expire worthless. The Private Placement Warrants are non-redeemable for cash and exercisable on a cashless basis.
The Sponsor and the officers and directors agreed, subject to limited exceptions, not to transfer, assign or sell any of their Private Placement Warrants until 30 days after the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Related Party Loans
On April 9, 2021, the Sponsor agreed to loan us an aggregate of up to $300,000 to cover expenses related to the Initial Public Offering pursuant the Note. This loan was non-interest bearing and payable upon the completion of the Initial Public Offering. We borrowed approximately $269,000 under the Note and repaid in full on November 24, 2021.
In addition, in order to finance transaction costs in connection with a Business Combination, the Sponsor or an affiliate of the Sponsor, or certain of our officers and directors may, but are not obligated to, loan us the Working Capital Loans. If we complete a Business Combination, we would repay the Working Capital Loans out of the proceeds of the Trust Account released to us. In the event that a Business Combination does not close, we may use a portion of proceeds held outside the Trust Account to repay the Working Capital Loans but no proceeds held in the Trust Account would be used to repay the Working Capital Loans. The Working Capital Loans would either be repaid upon consummation of a Business Combination or, at the lender’s discretion, without interest, up to $1.5 million of such Working Capital Loans may be convertible into warrants of the post Business Combination entity at a price of $1.00 per warrant. The warrants would be identical to the Private Placement Warrants. Except for the foregoing, the terms of such Working Capital Loans, if any, have not been determined and no written agreements exist with respect to such loans. As of December 31, 2021, we had no borrowings under the Working Capital Loans.
Administrative Services Agreement
On November 23, 2021, we entered into an agreement with the Sponsor, pursuant to which we agreed to pay the Sponsor a total of $10,000 per month for office space, secretarial and administrative services provided to us until the earlier of the consummation of a Business Combination or liquidation. Through December 31, 2021, we incurred approximately $13,000 in expense for these services, which was included in related party accounts payable as reflected in the accompanying balance sheet.
We may pay the Sponsor or any of our existing officers or directors, or any entity with which they are affiliated, a consulting fee or other compensation in connection with identifying, investigating and completing an initial Business Combination. The Sponsor, or any of our existing executive officers and directors, or any of their respective affiliates, including LionTree Advisors LLC (“LionTree Advisors”) and LionTree LLC (“LionTree”), and other entities affiliated with LionTree, will be reimbursed for any out-of-pocket expenses incurred in connection with activities on our behalf such as identifying potential target businesses and performing due diligence on suitable business combinations. Our audit committee will review on a quarterly basis all payments that were made to the Sponsor, officers, directors of us or their affiliates and will determine which expenses and the amount of expenses that will be reimbursed. There is no cap or ceiling on the reimbursement of out-of-pocket expenses incurred by such persons in connection with activities on behalf of us. For the period from March 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we recorded approximately $145,000 in expenses in connection with compliance services with related party. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately $31,000 outstanding in the related party accounts payable, as reflected in the accompanying balance sheet.
Financial Advisory Fees
In addition, LionTree Advisors was acting as our independent financial advisor as defined under FINRA Rule 5110(j)(9) to provide independent financial consulting services, consisting of a review of deal structure and terms and related structuring advice in connection with the Initial Public Offering. LionTree Advisors was entitled to receive a fee of approximately $2.2 million, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. In addition, LionTree Advisors will receive approximately $3.9 million, which will be payable at the closing of the initial Business Combination.
The underwriters have agreed and reimbursed us approximately $2.2 million for such fees at the closing of the Initial Public Offering. And the underwriters have also agreed to reimburse us for approximately $3.9 million upon the completion of the initial Business Combination.
Commitments and Contractual Obligations
Registration and Shareholder Rights
The holders of Founder Shares and Private Placement Warrants (and any ordinary shares issuable upon the exercise of the Private Placement Warrants and warrants that may be issued upon conversion of the Working Capital Loans) were entitled to registration rights pursuant to a registration and shareholder rights agreement signed upon consummation of the Initial Public Offering. These holders were entitled to certain demands and “piggyback” registration rights. We will bear the expenses incurred in connection with the filing of any such registration statements.
Underwriting Agreement
The underwriters were entitled to an underwriting discount of $0.20 per unit, or approximately $5.5 million in the aggregate, paid upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering. An additional fee of $0.35 per unit, or approximately $9.7 million in the aggregate will be payable to the underwriters for deferred underwriting commissions. The deferred fee will become payable to the underwriters from the amounts held in the Trust Account solely in the event that we complete a Business Combination, subject to the terms of the underwriting agreement.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Class A Ordinary Shares Subject to Possible Redemption
We account for our Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption in accordance with the guidance in ASC Topic 480 “Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity.” Class A ordinary shares subject to mandatory redemption (if any) are classified as liability instruments and are measured at fair value. Conditionally redeemable Class A ordinary shares (including Class A ordinary shares that feature redemption rights that are either within the control of the holder or subject to redemption upon the occurrence of uncertain events not solely within our control) are classified as temporary equity. At all other times, Class A ordinary shares are classified as shareholders’ equity. Our Class A ordinary shares feature certain redemption rights that are considered to be outside of our control and subject to the occurrence of uncertain future events. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2021, 27,600,000 Class A ordinary shares subject to possible redemption are presented as temporary equity, outside of the shareholders’ equity section of our balance sheets.
Under ASC 480-10S99, we have elected to recognize changes in the redemption value immediately as they occur and adjust the carrying value of the security to equal the redemption value at the end of each reporting period. This method would view the end of the reporting period as if it were also the redemption date for the security. Immediately upon the closing of the Initial Public Offering, we recognized the accretion from initial book value to redemption amount value. The change in the carrying value of the redeemable Class A ordinary shares resulted in charges against additional paid-in capital (to the extent available) and accumulated deficit.
Net Loss per Ordinary Share
We comply with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” We have two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A ordinary shares and Class B ordinary shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata between the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per ordinary share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of ordinary shares outstanding for the respective period.
The calculation of diluted net income (loss) per ordinary share does not consider the effect of the warrants underlying the Units sold in the Initial Public Offering and the Private Placement Warrants to purchase 27,340,000 Class A ordinary shares since their exercise is contingent upon future events. As a result, diluted net loss per share is the same as basic net loss per share for the period from March 29, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021. Accretion associated with the redeemable Class A ordinary shares is excluded from earnings per share as the redemption value approximates fair value.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity (“ASU 2020-06”), which simplifies accounting for convertible instruments by removing major separation models required under current GAAP. The ASU also removes certain settlement conditions that are required for equity-linked contracts to qualify for the derivative scope exception, and it simplifies the diluted earnings per share calculation in certain areas. We adopted ASU 2020-06 on March 29, 2021 (inception) using a modified retrospective method for transition. Adoption of the ASU did not impact our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Our management does not believe that any recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards updates, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on the accompanying financial statements.
Off-balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K and did not have any commitments or contractual obligations.
JOBS Act
The Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012 (the “JOBS Act”) contains provisions that, among other things, relax certain reporting requirements for qualifying public companies. We qualify as an “emerging growth company” and under the JOBS Act are allowed to comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements based on the effective date for private (not publicly traded) companies. We are electing to delay the adoption of new or revised accounting standards, and as a result, we may not comply with new or revised accounting standards on the relevant dates on which adoption of such standards is required for non-emerging growth companies. As a result, the financial statements may not be comparable to companies that comply with new or revised accounting pronouncements as of public company effective dates.
Additionally, we are in the process of evaluating the benefits of relying on the other reduced reporting requirements provided by the JOBS Act. Subject to certain conditions set forth in the JOBS Act, if, as an “emerging growth company,” we choose to rely on such exemptions we may not be required to, among other things, (i) provide an auditor’s attestation report on our system of internal controls over financial reporting pursuant to Section 404, (ii) provide all of the compensation disclosure that may be required of non-emerging growth public companies under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, (iii) comply with any requirement that may be adopted by the PCAOB regarding mandatory audit firm rotation or a supplement to the auditor’s report providing additional information about the audit and the financial statements (auditor discussion and analysis) and (iv) disclose certain executive compensation related items such as the correlation between executive compensation and performance and comparisons of the CEO’s compensation to median employee compensation. These exemptions will apply for a period of five years following the completion of our Initial Public Offering or until we are no longer an “emerging growth company,” whichever is earlier.