ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion is intended to assist you in understanding our financial position and results of operations for each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. You should read the following discussion and analysis in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes.
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements. For a description of limitations inherent in forward-looking statements, see “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” on page ii.
Overview
We fabricate, manufacture, rent and sell natural gas compressors and related equipment. Our primary focus is on the rental of natural gas compressors. Our rental contracts generally provide for initial terms of six to 60 months, with our larger horsepower units having longer initial terms. After the initial term of our rental contracts, most of our customers have continued to rent our compressors on a month-to-month basis. Rental amounts are billed monthly in advance and include maintenance of the rented compressors. As of December 31, 2021, we had 1,254 natural gas compressors totaling 297,808 horsepower rented to 83 customers, compared to 1,274 natural gas compressors totaling 287,646 horsepower rented to 80 customers at December 31, 2020. Of the 1,254 compressors rented at December 31, 2021, 827 were rented on a month-to-month basis.
We also fabricate natural gas compressors for sale to our customers, designing compressors to meet unique specifications dictated by well pressures, production characteristics and particular applications for which compression is sought. Fabrication of compressors involves our purchase of engines, compressors, coolers and other components, and our assembling of these components on skids for delivery to customer locations. These major components of our compressors are acquired through periodic purchase orders placed with third-party suppliers on an “as needed” basis, which presently requires a a minimum three to six month lead time with delivery dates scheduled to coincide with our estimated production schedules. Although we do not have formal continuing supply contracts with any major supplier, we believe we have adequate alternative sources available. In the past, we have not experienced any sudden and dramatic increases in the prices of the major components for our compressors; however, the occurrence of such an event could have a material adverse effect on the results of our operations and financial condition, particularly if we were unable to increase our rental rates and sales prices proportionate to any such component price increases.
We also manufacture a line of compressor frames, cylinders and parts, known as our CiP (Cylinder-in-Plane) product line. We use finished CiP component products in the fabrication of compressor units for sale or rental by us or sell the finished component products to other compressor fabricators. We also design, fabricate, sell, install and service flare stacks and related ignition and control devices for onshore and offshore incineration of gas compounds such as hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide, natural gas and liquefied petroleum gases. To provide customer support for our compressor and flare sales businesses, we stock varying levels of replacement parts at our Midland, Texas facility and at field service locations. We also provide an exchange and rebuild program for screw compressors and maintain an inventory of new and used compressors to facilitate this business.
We provide service and maintenance to our non-rental customers under written maintenance contracts or on an as-required basis in the absence of a service contract. Maintenance agreements typically have terms of six months to one year and require payment of a monthly fee.
The following table sets forth our revenues from each of our three operating categories for the periods presented:
Our strategy for growth is focused on our compressor rental business. Margins, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, for our rental business historically run in the mid-40% to low-60% range, while margins for the compressor sales business tend to be in the mid-20% range. If our rental business grows and contributes a larger percentage of our total revenues, we expect our overall company-wide margins, exclusive of depreciation and amortization, to improve over time.
The oil and natural gas equipment rental and services industry is cyclical in nature. The most critical factor in assessing the outlook for the industry is the worldwide supply and demand for oil and natural gas and the corresponding changes in commodity prices. As demand and prices increase, oil and natural gas producers typically increase their capital expenditures for drilling, development and production activities, although recent equity capital constraints and demands from institutional investors to keep spending within operating cash flow have meaningfully restrained capital expenditure budgets of domestic exploration and production companies. Generally, increased capital expenditures ultimately result in greater revenues and profits for service and equipment companies.
In general, we expect our overall business activity and revenues to track the level of activity in the oil and natural gas industry, with changes in crude oil and condensate production and consumption levels and prices affecting our business more than changes in domestic natural gas production and consumption levels and prices. In recent years we have increased our rental and sales in unconventional oil shale plays, which are more dependent on crude oil prices. With this shift towards oil production the demand for overall compression services and products is driven by two general factors; an increased focus by producers on artificial lift applications, e.g., production enhancement with compression assisted gas lift; and declining reservoir pressure in maturing natural gas producing fields, especially non-conventional production. These types of applications have historically been serviced by wellhead size compressors, and continue to be, but there has also been an economic move by our customers towards centralized drilling and production facilities, which have increased the market need for larger horsepower compressor packages. We recognized this need in recent years and have shifted our cash and fabrication resources towards designing, fabricating and renting gas compressor packages that range from 400 horsepower up to 1,500 horsepower. While this is a response to market conditions and trends, it also provides us with the opportunity to compete as a full-line compression provider.
We typically experience a decline in demand during periods of low crude oil and natural gas prices. During 2019, we witnessed a moderation of crude oil prices as well as drilling and completion activity levels. During the first quarter of 2020, we saw a substantial decline in the prices for oil and natural gas. Activity levels of exploration and production companies have been and will continue to be dependent not only on commodity prices, but also on their ability to generate sufficient operational cash flow to fund their activities. Generally, though, we feel that production activities (in which we are involved) will fare better than drilling activity.
For fiscal year 2022, our forecasted capital expenditures will be directly dependent upon our customers’ compression requirements and are not anticipated to exceed our internally generated cash flows. Any required capital will be for additions to our compressor rental fleet and/or addition or replacement of service vehicles. We believe that cash on hand and cash flows from operations will be sufficient to satisfy our capital and liquidity requirements through 2022. If we require additional capital to fund any significant unanticipated expenditures, including any material acquisitions of other businesses, joint ventures or other opportunities, this additional capital could exceed our current resources, might not be available to us when we need it, or might not be on acceptable terms.
Critical Accounting Policies and Practices
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. In the ordinary course of business, we have made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial condition in the preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain. We describe our significant accounting policies more fully in Note 2 ("Summary of Significant Accounting Policies") to our consolidated financial statements.
Our critical accounting policies are as follows:
•revenue recognition;
•estimating the allowance for doubtful accounts receivable;
•accounting for income taxes;
•accounting for long-lived assets; and
•accounting for inventory.
Revenue Recognition Policy
The Company adopted ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers ("ASC 606") on January, 1, 2018. Revenue is measured based on a consideration specified in a customer’s contract, excluding any sale incentives and taxes collected on behalf of third parties (i.e. sales and property taxes). We recognize revenue once a performance obligation has been satisfied and control over a product or service has transferred to the customer. Shipping and handling costs incurred are accounted for as fulfillment costs and are included in cost of revenues in our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Nature of Goods and Services
Rental Revenue. The Company generates revenue from renting compressors and flare systems to our customers. These contracts may also include a fee for servicing the compressor or flare during the rental contract. Our rental contracts typically range from six to 60 months, with our larger horsepower compressors having longer minimum contract terms. Our rental revenue is recognized over time, with equal monthly payments over the term of the contract. After the terms of the contract have expired, a customer may renew their contract or continue renting on a monthly basis thereafter.
Sales Revenue. The Company generates revenue by the sale of custom/fabricated compressors, flare systems and parts, as well as, exchange/rebuilding customer owned compressors and sale of used rental equipment. The Company designs and fabricates compressors and flares based on the customer’s specifications outlined in their contract. Though the equipment being built is customized by the customer, control under these contracts does not pass to the customer until the compressor or flare package is completed and shipped, or, in accordance with a bill and hold arrangements, the customer accepts title and assumes the risk and rewards of ownership. We request some of our customers to make progressive payments as the product is being built; these payments are recorded as a contract liability on the Deferred Income line on the consolidated balance sheet until control has been transferred. These contracts also may include an assurance warranty clause to guarantee the product is free from defects in material and workmanship for a set duration of time; this is a standard industry practice and is not considered a performance obligation.
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts Receivable
We perform ongoing credit evaluations of our customers and adjust credit limits based on management's assessment of the customer's financial condition and payment history, as well as industry conditions and general economic conditions. We continuously monitor collections and payments from our customers and maintain a provision for estimated credit losses based upon our historical experience and any specific customer collection issues that we have identified. While such credit losses have historically been within our expectations and the provisions established, we cannot guarantee that we will continue to experience the same credit loss rates that we have in the past. Management believes that its allowance for doubtful accounts is adequate; however, actual write-offs may exceed the recorded allowance.
Accounting for Income Taxes
As part of the process of preparing our financial statements, we are required to estimate our federal income taxes as well as income taxes in each of the states in which we operate. This process involves us estimating our actual current tax exposure together with assessing temporary differences resulting from differing treatment of items for tax and accounting purposes. These differences result in deferred tax assets and liabilities, which are included in our consolidated balance
sheet. We must then assess the likelihood that our deferred tax assets will be recovered from future taxable income and, to the extent we believe that recovery is not probable, we must establish a valuation allowance. To the extent we establish a valuation allowance or increase this allowance in a period, we must include an expense in the tax provision in the statement of income.
Significant management judgment is required in determining our provision for income taxes, our deferred tax assets and liabilities and any valuation allowance recorded against our net deferred tax assets. We currently have no valuation allowance and fully expect to utilize all of our deferred tax assets.
ASC 740 also prescribes a recognition threshold and measurement attribute for the financial statement recognition and measurement of a tax position taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. In order to record any financial statement benefit, we are required to determine, based on technical merits of the position, whether it is more likely than not (a likelihood of more than 50 percent) that a tax position will be sustained upon examination, including resolution of any related appeals or litigation processes. If that step is satisfied, then we must measure the tax position to determine the amount of benefit to recognize in the financial statements. The tax position is measured at the largest amount of the benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. Our policy regarding income tax interest and penalties is to expense those items as other expense.
Long-Lived Assets
Rental Equipment, Property and Equipment (Including Retirement of Rental Equipment)
Rental equipment and property and equipment are recorded at cost less accumulated depreciation, except for work-in-progress on new rental equipment which is recorded at cost until it’s complete and added to the fleet. Depreciation is computed using the straight-line method over the estimated useful lives of the assets. Our rental equipment has an estimated useful life between 15 and 25 years, while our property and equipment has an estimate useful lives which range from 3 to 39 years. The majority of our property and equipment, including rental equipment, is a direct cost to generating revenue.
We assess the impairment of rental equipment and property and equipment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the net recorded amount may not be recoverable. The following factors could trigger an impairment review: significant underperformance relative to historical or projected future cash flows; significant adverse changes in the extent or manner in which asset (or asset group) is being used or its condition, including a meaningful drop in fleet utilization over the prior four quarters; significant negative industry or company-specific trends or actions, including meaningful capital expenditure budget reductions by our major customers or other sizable exploration and production or midstream companies, as well as significant declines in oil and natural gas prices; legislative changes prohibiting us from leasing our units or flares; or poor general economic conditions. An impairment loss is recognized if the future undiscounted cash flows associated with the asset (or asset group) and the estimated fair value of the asset are less than the asset's carrying value.
Inventories
We value our total inventory (current and long-term) at the lower of the actual cost and net realizable value of the inventory. We regularly review inventory quantities on hand and record a provision for excess and obsolete inventory based primarily on current and anticipated customer demand and production requirements. The Company accesses anticipated customer demand based on current and upcoming capital expenditure budgets of its major customers as well as other significant companies in the industry, along with oil and natural gas price forecasts and other factors affecting the industry. For the year ended December 31, 2021, inventory allowance and write-off totaled $0.2 million. We ended 2021 with an inventory allowance balance of $64,000.
Our Performance Trends and Outlook
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization (“WHO”) announced a global health emergency because of a new strain of coronavirus known as COVID-19 due to the risks it imposes on the international community as the virus spreads globally. In March 2020, the WHO classified the COVID-19 outbreak as a pandemic, based on the rapid increase in exposure globally. During this time, the market began to experience a decline in oil prices in response to oil demand concerns due to the global economic impacts of COVID-19. These developments led to significant weaknesses in oil prices and ensuing reductions of exploration and production company capital and operating budgets. Oil markets largely recovered in 2021, and prices have continued to rise in the early months of 2022.
With the increases in oil prices, we expect rental demand for our large and medium horsepower units to remain strong for the remainder of 2022. In terms of sales, we expect minimal compressor sales for the year due to shifts in capital
expenditure budget concentrations throughout the industry, including those of our major customers, as many upstream producers prefer to rent compression as opposed to purchasing units as part of their capital budget allocations. Finally, we have recently experienced and expect to continue to experience supply chain disruptions. While we believe we have a strong vendor network that provides flexibility in sourcing needed materials, we have incurred longer than normal wait times for certain components as well as increases in costs. Lastly, our relationship with our major customers continues to be strong, and they have continued to pay our invoices in a timely, consistent manner. Nevertheless, if any of these circumstances change, our business could be adversely affected.
While management anticipates that the industry and economic impact of the pandemic may have a negative effect on its results of operations in 2022 and perhaps beyond, the degree to which these factors will impact our business remains uncertain. Please read Item 1A, Risk Factors, in this report.
Results of Operations
Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The table below shows our revenues and percentage of total revenues for each of our product lines for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Total revenue increased to $72.4 million from $68.1 million, or 6.4%, for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. This increase was mainly a result of increased rental revenue (4.6% increase) primarily due to a greater number of large horsepower units being rented as well as higher sales revenue (21.7% increase) primarily due to increased parts sales partially offset by decreased compressor sales.
Rental revenue increased to $63.6 million (4.6%) from $60.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we had 2,023 natural gas compressors in our rental fleet, down from 2,224 units at year end 2020. In addition, the Company's total unit horsepower decreased by 4.7% to 418,041 at December 31, 2021 compared to 438,524 horsepower year end 2020. However, as of December 31, 2021, we had 1,254 natural gas compressors totaling 297,808 horsepower rented to 83 customers, compared to 1,274 natural gas compressors totaling 287,646 horsepower rented to 80 customers as of December 31, 2020. This increase in rented horsepower reflects the addition of 25 high horsepower compressors with 10,020 horsepower to the Company's fleet during 2021. The rental fleet had a unit utilization as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 of 62.0% and 57.3%, respectively, while our horsepower utilization for the same periods was 71.2% and 65.6%, respectively. The increase in both utilization metrics was mainly the result of the addition and increased demand for our higher horsepower units.
Sales revenue increased to $6.9 million from $5.7 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. This increase in largely attributable to an increase in parts sales during 2021. Sales are subject to fluctuations in timing of industry activity related to capital projects and, as such, can vary substantially between periods.
Company management routinely reviews its inventory balances for obsolescence. Due to the slow moving nature or obsolescence of a portion of the Company's long-term inventory and inventory related to the retirement of certain rental equipment, management recorded an increase of $208,000 in the inventory allowance reserve for costs that may not be recoverable in the future. We ended 2021 with an inventory allowance balance of $64,000.
Company management routinely reviews its rental fleet to determine which units are no longer of the type, configuration, make or model that our customers are demanding or that are not cost efficient to refurbish, maintain and/or
operate. As a result of this review, we determined 263 units should be retired from our rental fleet. Accordingly, we recorded a $3.1 million loss on retirement of rental equipment during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Operating loss increased to $12.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to an operating loss of $3.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase in operating loss was mainly due to 1) an $8.1 million increase in costs of rentals primarily related to a significant increase in repair and maintenance work on our rental fleet as well as increased costs related to newly set units which experience higher upfront costs than typical run rates and 2) a $2.8 million increase in loss related to the retirement of 263 units. During the year ended December 31, 2021 we had 233 newly set units during the year, of which 51 units were 400 horsepower or larger. Upon initial installation, these units require oil volumes and other materials that exceed general run rate costs. In addition, we experienced higher than normal repair and maintenance needs for our rental fleet during the year. Consistent with our recent shift to a higher horsepower fleet concentration, these large horsepower units are more cost intensive to repair than our legacy fleet. While we have routine repair and maintenance requirements, we believe a large portion of these costs are one-time in nature. These increases were partially offset by higher rental and sales revenues.
Selling, general, and administrative expenses remained relatively unchanged at $10.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to $10.6 million for 2020. This 2.0% increase was primarily the result of increases in health insurance costs.
Depreciation and amortization expense increased to $25.4 million from $25.2 million, or 0.8%, for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to 2020. The increase is the result of higher capital expenditures for larger horsepower units being added to the fleet. We added 65 units (approximately 18,035 horsepower) to our fleet during the twelve-month period ended December 31, 2021. Twenty-five of those units were 400 horsepower or larger, representing approximately 56% of the horsepower added.
Income tax benefit decreased to $2.6 million from $4.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Our effective tax rate for both years differs from the U.S. federal statutory rate of 21%. On March 27, 2020, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act ("CARES Act") was enacted in response to the economic impact caused the COVID-19 pandemic. The CARES Act allows federal net operating losses ("NOL") incurred in 2018, 2019, and 2020 to be carried back to each of the five preceding taxable years to generate a refund of previously paid federal income taxes. The Company generated significant NOLs during 2018 and 2019. The Company filed its NOL carryback claims for 2018 and 2019 during 2020. Accordingly, the Company recorded a federal income tax receivable of $15.0 million and an increase to its deferred income tax liability of $10.1 million on its condensed consolidated balance sheet. During the third quarter of 2020, the Company received refunds totaling $3.9 million related to its 2018 NOLs, which, along with year-end provision adjustments, reduced its federal income tax receivable to $11.5 million on its consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021. In addition, the Company recorded a current income tax benefit of $4.8 million on its consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2020. Our income tax benefit in 2021 was largely due to our net loss before income taxes of $11.8 million.
Adjusted Gross Margin Year Ended December 31, 2021 Compared to the Year Ended December 31, 2020
The table below shows our adjusted gross margin and related percentages for each of our product lines for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Adjusted gross margin is the difference between revenue and cost of revenues, exclusive of depreciation and amortization expense.
(1) For a reconciliation of adjusted gross margin to its most directly comparable financial measure calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP, please read "Non-GAAP Financial Measures" below.
Our overall adjusted gross margin percentage decreased to 37.4% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 47.9% for the year ended December 31, 2020, exclusive of depreciation and amortization. Our decrease in gross margins is
mainly due to an increase in costs of rentals. While rental revenues increased 4.6% over 2020, our costs of rentals increased 28.5% primarily driven by a significant increase in repair and maintenance work on our rental fleet as well as increased costs related to newly set units which experience higher upfront costs than typical run rates. Rental revenues comprised 88% of our total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 89% of total revenues for the year ended December 31, 2020. While rental activity inherently realizes higher adjusted gross margins, the significant increase in costs of rentals beyond the increase in rental revenues resulted in a large reduction in total gross margins. Sales margin decreased to (13.8)% in 2021 from (9.8)% in 2020. While sales revenues increased 21.7%, this increase was attributable to increased parts sales, which realizes a lower gross margin than compressor sales. While many sales costs are variable, certain costs such as labor are less variable as a certain staff level is retained to meet demand when market forces shift. Third party service and maintenance margins decreased to 53.1% from 54.6% for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 2020. Service and maintenance only represents 2.6% of our revenue in 2021, providing minimal impact on our overall adjusted gross margin.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Our definition and use of Adjusted EBITDA
“Adjusted EBITDA” is a non-GAAP financial measure that we define as earnings (net (loss) income) before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, as well as an increase in inventory allowance and inventory write-offs, retirement of rental equipment and non-cash equity compensation expenses. This term, as used and defined by us, may not be comparable to similarly titled measures employed by other companies and is not a measure of performance calculated in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for operating income, net income or loss, cash flows provided by operating, investing and financing activities, or other income or cash flow statement data prepared in accordance with GAAP. However, management believes Adjusted EBITDA is useful to an investor in evaluating our operating performance because:
•it is widely used by investors in the energy industry to measure a company’s operating performance without regard to items excluded from the calculation of Adjusted EBITDA, which can vary substantially from company to company depending upon accounting methods and book value of assets, capital structure and the method by which assets were acquired, among other factors;
•it helps investors to more meaningfully evaluate and compare the results of our operations from period to period by removing the impact of our capital structure and asset base from our operating structure; and
•it is used by our management for various purposes, including as a measure of operating performance, in presentations to our Board of Directors, as a basis for strategic planning and forecasting, and as a component for setting incentive compensation.
Adjusted EBITDA has limitations as an analytical tool, and you should not consider it in isolation, or as a substitute for analysis of our results as reported under generally accepted accounting principles. Some of these limitations are:
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect our cash expenditures, future requirements for capital expenditures, or contractual commitments;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect changes in, or cash requirements for, our working capital needs;
•Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect the cash requirements necessary to service interest or principal payments on our debts; and
•although depreciation and amortization are non-cash charges, the assets being depreciated and amortized will often have to be replaced in the future, and Adjusted EBITDA does not reflect any capital expenditures for such replacements.
There are other material limitations to using Adjusted EBITDA as a measure of performance, including the inability to analyze the impact of certain recurring items that materially affect our net income or loss, and the lack of comparability of results of operations of different companies. Please read the table below under “Reconciliation” to see how Adjusted EBITDA reconciles to our net income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure.
Reconciliation
The following table reconciles our net (loss) income, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, to Adjusted EBITDA:
Our definition and use of Adjusted Gross Margin
We define “Adjusted Gross Margin” as total revenue less costs of revenues (excluding depreciation and amortization expense). Adjusted gross margin is included as a supplemental disclosure because it is a primary measure used by our management as it represents the results of revenue and costs (excluding depreciation and amortization expense), which are key components of our operations. Adjusted gross margin differs from gross margin, in that gross margin includes depreciation expense. We believe adjusted gross margin is important because it focuses on the current operating performance of our operations and excludes the impact of the prior historical costs of the assets acquired or constructed that are utilized in those operations. Depreciation expense does not accurately reflect the costs required to maintain and replenish the operational usage of our assets and therefore may not portray the costs from current operating activity. Rather, depreciation expense reflects the systematic allocation of historical property and equipment values over the estimated useful lives.
Adjusted gross margin has certain material limitations associated with its use as compared to gross margin. These limitations are primarily due to the exclusion of depreciation expense, which is material to our results of operations. Because we use capital assets, depreciation expense is a necessary element of our costs and our ability to generate revenue. In order to compensate for these limitations, management uses this non-GAAP measure as a supplemental measure to other GAAP results to provide a more complete understanding of our performance.
As an indicator of our operating performance, adjusted gross margin should not be considered an alternative to, or more meaningful than, gross margin as determined in accordance with GAAP. Our adjusted gross margin may not be comparable to a similarly titled measure of another company because other entities may not calculate adjusted gross margin in the same manner.
Reconciliation
The following table calculates gross margin, the most directly comparable GAAP financial measure, and reconciles it to adjusted gross margin:
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Our working capital positions as of December 31, 2021 and 2020 are set forth below.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, we invested approximately $25.7 million in rental equipment, property and other equipment. During the year, the Company added $24.3 million in new equipment to our rental fleet and $1.4 million in other property and equipment. Our investment in rental equipment includes any changes to work-in-progress related to our rental fleet jobs at the beginning of the year compared to the end of the year. Our rental work-in-progress increased by $1.4 million during 2021. We financed our investment in rental equipment, property and other equipment with cash flows from operations during 2021. We anticipate that our cash flows from operations as well as our borrowing capacity under our New Credit Agreement will provide ample liquidity for our planned capital expenditures during 2022 and beyond.
Cash flows
At December 31, 2021, we had cash and cash equivalents of $22.9 million compared to $28.9 million at year end 2020. Our cash flow from operations of $28.5 million was partially offset by capital expenditures of $25.7 million during 2021. In addition, we expended $7.9 million in connection with our share repurchase program. We also had working capital of $44.8
million at December 31, 2021 compared to $61.9 million at December 31, 2020. We had net cash flow from operating activities of $28.5 million during 2021 compared $32.6 million during 2020. Our cash flow from operating activities of $28.5 million was primarily the result of our rental and sales gross margins.
At December 31, 2020, we had cash and cash equivalents of $28.9 million, working capital of $61.9 million and total debt of $417,000, under our credit agreement which was due on March 31, 2021. We had positive net cash flow from operating activities of approximately $32.6 million during 2020.
Senior Bank Borrowings
Previous Credit Agreement
We had a senior secured revolving credit agreement (the "Previous Credit Agreement") with JP Morgan Chase Bank, N.A (the "Lender") that matured on March 31, 2021. Prior to maturation, the outstanding balance of $417,000 was repaid. The Previous Credit Agreement had an aggregate commitment of $30 million, subject to collateral availability.
New Credit Agreement
On May 11, 2021, we entered into a five-year senior secured revolving credit agreement ("New Credit Agreement") with Texas Capital Bank, National Association (the "Lender") with an initial commitment of $20 million and an accordion feature that would increase the maximum commitment to $30 million, subject to collateral availability. We also have a right to request from the Lender, on an uncommitted basis, an increase of up to $30 million on the aggregate commitment; provided, however, the aggregate commitment amount is not permitted to exceed $50 million. The maturity date of the New Credit Agreement is May 11, 2026. The obligations under the New Credit Agreement are secured by a first priority lien on a variety of our assets, including inventory and accounts receivable as well as a variable number of our leased compressor equipment.
Borrowing Base. At any time before the maturity of the New Credit Agreement, we may draw, repay and re-borrow amounts available under the borrowing base up to the maximum aggregate availability discussed above. Generally, the borrowing base equals the sum of (a) 90% of eligible accounts receivable owed to the Company by investment grade debtors, plus (b) 85% of the eligible accounts receivable owing by non-investment grade debtors, plus (c) 50% of the eligible inventory, valued at the lower of cost or market value at such time, subject to a cap of this component not to exceed $2 million, plus (d) the lesser of (i) 95% of the net book value of the compressors that the Lender has determined are eligible for the extension of credit, valued at the lower of cost or market value with depreciation not to exceed 25 years, at such time and (ii) 80% of the net liquidation value percentage of the net book value of the eligible compressors that the Lender has determined are eligible for the extension of credit, valued at the lower of cost or market value with depreciation not to exceed 25 years, at such time, plus (e) 80% of the value at cost (excluding any costs for capitalized interest or other non-cash capitalized costs) of the eligible new compressor fleet, minus (f) any required availability reserves determined by the Lender in its sole discretion. The Lender may adjust the borrowing base components if material deviations in the collateral are discovered in future audits of the collateral. As of December 31, 2021, our allowable borrowing base was $20.0 million.
Interest and Fees. Under the terms of the New Credit Agreement, we have the option of selecting the applicable variable rate for each revolving loan, or portion thereof, of either (a) the Base Rate (as defined below) plus the Applicable Margin, or (b) in the case of a Eurodollar Rate Loan, the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate plus the Applicable Margin. "Base Rate" means, for any day, a rate of interest per annum equal to the highest of (a) the prime rate for such day; (b) the sum of the federal funds rate for such day plus 0.50%; and (c) the Adjusted Eurodollar Rate for such day plus 1.00%. The Applicable Margin is determined based upon the leverage ratio as set forth in the most recent compliance certificate received by the Lender for each fiscal quarter from time to time pursuant to the New Credit Agreement. Depending on the leverage ratio, the Applicable Margin can be 0.25% to 0.75% for Base Rate Loans (as defined in the New Credit Agreement) and 1.25% to 1.75% for Eurodollar Rate Loans and for requested letters of credit. In addition, we are required to pay a monthly commitment fee on the daily average unused amount of the commitment while the New Credit Agreement is in effect at an annual rate equal to 0.25% of the unused commitment amount. Accrued interest is payable monthly on outstanding principal amounts and unused commitment fee, provided that accrued interest on Eurodollar Rate Loans is payable at the end of each interest period, but in no event less frequently than quarterly.
Covenants. The New Credit Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, as well as covenants which, among other things, condition or limit our ability to incur additional indebtedness and liens; enter into transactions with affiliates; make acquisitions in excess of certain amounts; pay dividends; redeem or repurchase capital stock or senior notes; make investments or loans; make negative pledges; consolidate, merge or effect asset sales; or change the nature of our business. In addition, we also have certain financial covenants that are applicable during certain trigger periods specified in the Credit Agreement and require us during such trigger periods to maintain a leverage ratio less than or equal to 3.00 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter and a fixed charge coverage ratio greater than or equal to 1.00 to 1.00 as of the last day of each fiscal quarter.
Events of Default and Acceleration. The New Credit Agreement contains customary events of default for credit facilities of this size and type, and includes, without limitation, payment defaults; defaults in performance of covenants or other
agreements contained in the Credit Agreement and the other transaction documents; inaccuracies in representations and warranties; certain defaults, termination events or similar events; certain defaults with respect to any other Company indebtedness in excess of $1.0 million; certain bankruptcy or insolvency events; the rendering of certain judgments in excess of $1.0 million; certain ERISA events; certain change in control events and the defectiveness of any liens under the secured revolving credit agreement. Obligations outstanding under the Credit Agreement may be accelerated upon the occurrence of an event of default.
As of December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with all financial covenants in our New Credit Agreement. At December 31, 2021, we had no amounts outstanding under the New Credit Agreement.
Components of Our Principal Capital Expenditures
Capital expenditures for the years ended December 31:
The level of our expenditures will vary in future periods depending on energy market conditions and other related economic factors. Based upon existing economic and market conditions, we believe that our cash on hand, operating cash flow and available line of credit are adequate to fully fund our net capital expenditures requirements for 2022. We also believe we have flexibility with respect to our financing alternatives and adjustments to our capital expenditure plans if circumstances warrant. We do not have any material continuing commitments related to our current operations that cannot be met with our cash on hand and our line of credit. However, our financing capacity could be negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. Please see Item 1A, Risk Factors, of this report.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time-to-time, we enter into off-balance sheet arrangements and transactions that can give rise to off-balance sheet obligations. As of December 31, 2021, we did not have any material off-balance sheet arrangements.
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
In March 2020, the FASB issued ASU 2020-04, Reference Rate Reform, which provides temporary optional guidance to companies impacted by the transition away from the London Interbank Offered Rate ("LIBOR"). The guidance provides certain expedients and exceptions to applying GAAP in order to lessen the potential accounting burden when contracts, hedging relationships and other transactions that reference LIBOR as a benchmark rate are modified. This guidance is effective upon issuance and expires on December 31, 2022. We are currently evaluating the impact of the LIBOR transition and this ASU 2020-04 on our consolidated financial statements.
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments-Credit Losses (ASC Topic 326): Measurement of Credit Losses on Financial Instruments. The amendments to ASC Topic 326 require immediate recognition of estimated credit losses expected to occur over the remaining life of many financial assets, including trade receivables. For companies that qualify as smaller reporting companies, the amendments in this update are effective for interim and annual periods beginning after January 1, 2023. We are currently evaluating the impact of ASU 2016-13 on our consolidated financial statements and note disclosures.
Environmental Regulations
Various federal, state and local laws and regulations covering the discharge of materials into the environment, or otherwise relating to protection of human safety and health and the environment, affect our operations and costs. Compliance with these laws and regulations could cause us to incur remediation or other corrective action costs or result in the assessment of administrative, civil and criminal penalties and the issuance of injunctions delaying or prohibiting operations. In addition, we have acquired certain properties and plant facilities from third parties whose actions with respect to the management and disposal or release of hydrocarbons or other wastes were not under our control. Under environmental laws and regulations, we could be required to remove or remediate wastes disposed of or released by prior owners. In addition, we could be responsible under environmental laws and regulations for properties and plant facilities we lease, but do not own. Compliance with such laws and regulations increases our overall cost of business, but has not had a material adverse effect on our operations or financial condition. It is not anticipated, based on current laws and regulations, that we will be required in the near future to expend amounts that are material in relation to our total expenditure budget in order to comply with environmental laws and regulations but such laws and regulations are frequently changed and we are unable to predict the ultimate cost of
compliance. We also could incur costs related to the cleanup of sites to which we send equipment and for damages to natural resources or other claims related to releases of regulated substances at such sites.