ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
The following discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based upon, and should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and related notes thereto included elsewhere in this report.
Forward Looking Statements
Certain information contained in this MD&A includes “forward-looking statements.” Statements which are not historical reflect our current expectations and projections about our future results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities and are based upon information currently available to us and our management and their interpretation of what is believed to be significant factors affecting our existing and proposed business, including many assumptions regarding future events. In some cases, you can identify forward-looking statements by terminology such as “may,” “will” “should,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “predict,” “potential,” “continue,” or similar terms, variations of such terms or the negative of such terms. These statements are only predictions and involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other factors. Although forward- looking statements, and any assumptions upon which they are based, are made in good faith, and reflect our current judgment, actual results could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements. Actual results, performance, liquidity, financial condition and results of operations, prospects and opportunities could differ materially and perhaps substantially from those expressed in, or implied by, these forward- looking statements as a result of various risks, uncertainties and other factors, including those risks described in detail in the section of this Annual Report on Form 10-K entitled “Risk Factors” as well as elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
In light of these risks and uncertainties, and especially given the nature of our existing and proposed business, there can be no assurance that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K will in fact occur. Potential investors should not place undue reliance on any forward- looking statements. Except as expressly required by the federal securities laws, there is no undertaking to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances or any other reason.
OVERVIEW
What you eat before bed matters.
In solving consumers’ nighttime snacking problem, Nightfood is pioneering the category of sleep-friendly nighttime snacking.
Over 80% of Americans snack regularly at night, resulting in an estimated 700 million nighttime snack occasions weekly, and an annual spend on night snacks of over $50 billion. The most popular choices are ice cream, cookies, chips, and candy. Recent research confirms such snacks, in addition to being generally unhealthy, can impair sleep, partly due to excess fat and sugar consumed before bed.
Nightfood’s sleep-friendly snacks are formulated by sleep and nutrition experts to contain less of those sleep-disruptive ingredients, along with a focus on ingredients and nutrients that research suggests can support nighttime relaxation and better sleep quality.
Through partnerships with national distributors and global hospitality companies, Nightfood is focused on establishing widespread national distribution of its sleep-friendly snacks in the high-margin hotel vertical. Management believes hotels have an obligation to help guests achieve better sleep, and one important way to do that is through the snacks hotels curate for sale in their grab-and-go lobby shops.
Management’s vision is for Nightfood snacks to be sold by every hotel that sells snacks for their guests. National hotel distribution is expected to lead to profitability, consumer adoption of the nighttime snack category, and a strategically defensible position from which category leadership can be maintained.
Our snack products are manufactured under contract at third-party manufacturing facilities. We then wholesale those snacks to retailers and distributors.
DEVELOPMENT PLANS
In April, 2022, we received the initial purchase orders for the introduction of Nightfood ice cream into national hotel distribution.
There are an estimated 56,000 hotels across the United States. The five largest hotel companies account for approximately half of those locations, distributed among dozens of hotel chains. Those are (in alphabetical order) Choice Hotels, Hilton Worldwide, Intercontinental Hotels Group, Marriott International, and Wyndham Hotels & Resorts.
Management has developed corporate-level relationships at three of those five companies. Two of those companies have executed corporate-level tests of Nightfood ice cream sales in some of their hotel locations, and both have declared those tests successful.
In May, 2022, one of those companies launched Nightfood ice cream into one of their national hotel chains, an extended-stay hotel chain with approximately 500 properties in the United States. To date, our pints are currently in approximately 300 - 350 of those properties, with more of the properties adding our ice cream over time. In September, 2022, because of our successful sales results across that first hotel chain, that company indicated that Nightfood will be added two of their additional chains, comprising over 3,000 additional properties, with the introduction planned to begin in October, 2022.
Our ice cream pints are available for purchase in hundreds of hotel locations across the United States, including select locations of many of the largest hotel chains in the world. This includes chains such as Holiday Inn, Holiday Inn Express, Fairfield Inn, Courtyard by Marriott, Hyatt Place, Hyatt House, Ramada by Wyndham, Best Western, Clarion, La Quinta, Staybridge Suites, Candlewood Suites, and many more.
While Nightfood may currently only be available in just one or a few locations of certain of these chains, we feel the breadth of our distribution reflects the appeal of our snack products across many segments of the hospitality industry. From select-service to full-service, from short-term to extended stay, we believe every hotel that sells snacks is a potential distribution point for Nightfood.
In September, 2022, we announced that independent industry sales data from Impulsify reflected our ice cream pints were selling well relative to more popular brands such as Haagen Dazs and Ben & Jerry’s. We believe this sales data, collected in only the 3rd and 4th months of our introduction into national hotel distribution, is a positive sign that our products can compete effectively in the hotel environment.
We believe the concept of sleep-friendly snacking for their guests is important to hotel decision-makers. We also believe that ongoing strong relative sales will be a contributing factor to establishing distribution in a significant percentage of the 56,000 hotels across the United States.
Our plans call for the introduction of Nightfood sleep-friendly versions of many of the most popular nighttime snack formats. In addition to ice cream pints, this includes single-serve ice cream novelties, cookies, chips, candy, and nutrition bars.
Hotel executives have indicated to us that they believe their guests can benefit from such a wide brand offering. We also believe having snacks in multiple formats will benefit the Company through increased trial, revenue, brand awareness, and category development.
In August, 2022, the first commercial production run of Nightfood Prime-Time Chocolate Chip cookies was completed. We have two additional flavors (cherry oat and snickerdoodle) nearing completion of R&D at the time of this filing.
We have begun development on both Nightfood single-serve ice cream novelties, and Nightfood chips. Our goal is to introduce both snack formats in calendar 2023.
Management believes widespread distribution in the world’s largest and most trusted hotel chains could result in significant increases in gross sales and net revenue and lead to profitability. Doing business in the hotel vertical effectively eliminates three of the major line items that reduce and delay profitability for new food and beverage products in the supermarket vertical. These are slotting fees, advertising, and pricing promotions.
In addition to the revenue and contribution margin from the sales of the product in the hotel environment, Management believes hotel distribution would result in important secondary benefits. Consumers encountering and purchasing Nightfood in a trusted and respected hotel outlet could be more likely to seek out the product in local supermarkets than consumers that have not had prior exposure to the brand.
In addition, it is believed that securing widespread hotel distribution would serve as a validation of the importance of sleep-friendly nutrition and the entire night snack category. We believe consumers will rightfully interpret the diligence of these leading hotel brands in providing sleep-friendly nutrition for their guests to be a validation of the core point of view of the Nightfood brand which is “What you eat before bed matters.”
As the brand pioneering and leading the sleep-friendly snack category, we believe that anything which advances the overall adoption of the category by consumers is, by extension, beneficial to the Nightfood brand.
INFLATION
Inflation can be expected to have an impact on our operating costs. Similar to many other industries, we have recently seen increases in the cost of certain ingredients and packaging materials. Such increases will either result in lower gross margins or necessitate an increase in our wholesale pricing. A prolonged period of inflation could cause a general economic downturn and negatively impact our results.
SEASONALITY
With a focus on distribution of our snacks in hotels over the next 1-2 years before we envision revisiting a focus on supermarkets, a certain amount of seasonality is expected. As U.S. hotel occupancy has a history of peaking in June and July, with occupancy rates approximately 10% above the average, it is possible that we will experience an increase in sales related to that occupancy peak.
As an early-stage and growing brand, with a product mix that is expected to include a variety of snacks such as ice cream, cookies, chips, candy, and more, the full impact of seasonality on our business might not be fully understood for several additional annual cycles.
CORONAVIRUS (COVID-19)
The outbreak of the novel coronavirus (COVID-19), including the measures to reduce its spread, and the impact on the economy, has still not been fully predicted.
We have experienced minimal issues with supply chain and logistics, except that there have been recent and significant increases in costs relating to freight and packaging. Order processing function has been normal to date, and our manufacturers have assured us that their operations are “business as usual” as of the time of this filing.
It is possible that the impact of the pandemic could make it more difficult in the future for the Company to access required growth capital, possibly rendering us unable to meet certain debts and expenses.
It is impossible to know what the future holds with regard to the virus, both for our company and in the broader sense. There are many uncertainties regarding the current coronavirus pandemic, and the Company is closely monitoring the impact of the pandemic on all aspects of its business, including how it will impact its customers, vendors, and business partners. It is difficult to know if the pandemic has materially impacted the results of operations, and we are unable to predict the impact that COVID-19 will have on our financial position and operating results due to numerous uncertainties. The Company expects to continue to assess the evolving impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and intends to make adjustments accordingly, if necessary.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States. The preparation of these financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates, including those related to uncollectible receivables, inventory valuation, deferred compensation, fair valve of derivative liabilities and contingencies. We base our estimates on historical performance and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. These estimates allow us to make judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources.
We believe the following accounting policies are our critical accounting policies because they are important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations, and they require critical management judgments and estimates about matters that may be uncertain. If actual results or events differ materially from those contemplated by us in making these estimates, our reported financial condition and results of operations for future periods could be materially affected.
Revenue Recognition ● The Company generates its revenue by selling its nighttime snack products wholesale and direct to consumer.
● All sources of revenue are recorded pursuant to FASB Topic 606 Revenue Recognition, to depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. This includes a five-step framework that requires an entity to: (i) identify the contract(s) with a customer, (ii) identify the performance obligations in the contract, (iii) determine the transaction price, (iv) allocate the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract, and (v) recognize revenue when the entity satisfies a performance obligation. In addition, this revenue generation requires disclosure of the nature, amount, timing, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
● For accounts within the supermarket space, the Company frequently offers sales discounts and promotions to customers through various programs such as rebates, temporary price reductions, product coupons, and other trade activities. This is standard practice for consumer products in the competitive and price-sensitive supermarket space. The Company records these activities as a reduction of gross sales as part of the calculation to arrive at reported net revenue.
● The Company incurs costs associated with product distribution, such as freight and handling costs. The Company has elected to treat these costs as fulfillment activities and recognizes these costs at the same time that it recognizes the underlying product revenue. As this policy election is in line with the Company’s previous accounting practices, the treatment of shipping and handling activities under FASB Topic 606 did not have any impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial condition and/or financial statement disclosures.
The adoption of ASC 606 did not result in a change to the accounting for any of the Company’s revenue streams that are within the scope of the amendments. The Company’s services that fall within the scope of ASC 606 are recognized as revenue as the Company satisfies its obligation to the customer.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year ended June 30, 2021
Revenue
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we had Net Revenues of $443,538 on Gross Sales of $614,125 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021, when we had Net Revenues of $701,246 on Gross Sales of $1,117,847. Gross Sales decreased by 45.1% and Net Revenue decreased by 36.8% year over year, as a result of our ice cream being rotated out of distribution in Walmart locations and other supermarkets, as we simultaneously pivoted to the higher-margin hospitality vertical where we believe our brand and unique sleep-friendly positioning deliver a competitive advantage.
Net Revenues are reported as Gross Sales less Slotting Fees (described below) and other contra-revenue accounts such as those related to manufacturers coupons, in-store specials (such as 2 pints for $8), consumer rebate programs, and more.
Slotting fees are typically one-time fees customarily charged to brands by supermarkets and distributors to add a new product line into their product assortment. For the year ended June 30, 2022, $22,500 of Gross Sales were cancelled out due to slotting arrangements with retailers and distributors compared to $223,691 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The 90% decrease in 2022 compared to 2021 was the result of our decreased supermarket distribution.
In situations where the Company agrees to pay slotting and promotional fees to accounts (such as to supermarkets and distributors), the Gross Sales to those customers are reduced on the income statement by these amounts (along with other items, such as early payment discounts), dollar for dollar, to arrive at a Net Revenue number. So, when these customers order product to put on their shelves and sell to consumers, that revenue does not get booked even though the product is moving through the supply chain.
These dollar for dollar reductions continue, on a customer-by-customer basis, for any and all sales to each slotting account until the Gross Sales to these accounts exceed the total of these commitments, at which time the remaining Gross Sales amounts are reported as Net Revenue.
These slotting fees and other promotional expenses do not appear on the income statement as an expense. Rather, they are applied against Gross Sales, resulting in Net Revenue, as shown below. The netting of Gross Sales against slotting and sales discounts, as described and shown below, results in the Net Revenue number at the top of the income statement. This is not a reflection of the amount of product sold by the Company and shipped to customers, but rather a function of the way certain sales are accounted for when those sales are made to customers who are charging slotting fees. With a focus on the hospitality vertical, we expect slotting expenses and other revenue reductions to decrease significantly as a percentage of Gross Sales.
The following tables summarize Gross Sales and Net Revenue for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021.
Operating Expenses
Our operating expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022, were $2,372,873, compared to $3,210,875 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in operating expenses is due largely to decreases in Cost of product sold to $486,163, for the year ended June 30, 2022, compared to $721,777 for the year ended June 30, 2021. This decrease in cost of product sold is due to a decrease in pints sold which is offset to some extent by an increase in per-unit freight costs as a proportion of gross sales due to increases in fuel prices and due to more orders being shipped outside of the consolidated Walmart shipping lanes.
Our income statement shows an increase in Advertising and Promotional expenses to $596,331 for the year ending June 30, 2022, from $588,172 for the year ending June 30, 2021. This includes items such as social media advertising, consumer promotions, marketing partnerships, paid advertising, samples expense and public relations. The two most significant components of Advertising and Promotional were paid advertising and promotion related expenses. For each of those line items, more than two-thirds of the expense during Fiscal 2022 occurred in the first quarter of the fiscal year. Our Advertising and Promotional expenses since September 30, 2021 decreased significantly compared to previous quarters. We expect that trend to continue with our focus on distribution through the higher-margin hotel vertical as compared to conventional supermarkets.
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased to $492,713 for the year ending June 30, 2022, compared to $479,881 for the year ending June 30, 2021. This includes items such as web hosting, web marketing services, freight, warehousing, shipping, product liability insurance, research & development of new products. The selling, general, and administrative expenses for the year ended June 30, 2021 included a one-time gain on extinguishment of debt of $715,075. There was no such one-time gain in the year ended June 30, 2022, which is the reason that a significant decrease in selling, general, and administrative is not reported for the current reporting period. Professional fees decreased from $1,421,045 for the year ending June 30, 2021, to $797,666 for the year ending June 30, 2022. This includes legal fees, marketing consulting, accounting and auditor fees, and other paid consultants. The decrease is largely due to the absence of significant capital raising activities during the year ending June 30, 2022 and the fees that tend to accompany such transactions, a significant portion of which do not involve cash expenditures, but are tied to the valuation of shares and warrants.
For the year ended June 30, 2022, total interest expense was $318,519 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021, when we reported total interest expense of $281,505. Part of the reason for the increased interest expense was our incurrence of additional indebtedness in December 2021. For the year ended June 30, 2022, we recorded a loss on debt extinguishment upon note conversion of $0 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021, when we recorded a loss on debt extinguishment upon note conversion of $1,442,325.
For the year ended June 30, 2022, we recorded a change in fair value of derivative liability of $0 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021, when we recorded a change in fair value of derivative liability of ($853,329). For the year ended June 30, 2022, we recorded an amortization of beneficial conversion feature of $275,423 compared to the year ended June 30, 2021, when we recorded an amortization of beneficial conversion feature of $814,769. A significant portion of these amounts recorded in both years stems from the accounting treatment applied to financing activities.
Net Loss
For the year ended June 30, 2022, we had a net loss of $2,523,277, compared to the year ended June 30, 2021 when we had a net loss of $3,479,824. A significant portion of the losses recorded in both years stems from the accounting treatment applied to financing activities. Operating losses for the year ended June 30, 2022, were $1,929,335 and $2,509,629 for the year ended June 30, 2021.
Deemed Dividend
The Company has never declared dividends, however as set out below, during the fiscal year ended June 30, 2022, upon issuance of the final 335 shares of the total 5,000 designated shares of Series B Preferred stock the Company recorded a deemed dividend as a result of the beneficial conversion feature associated with the transaction.
In connection with certain conversion terms provided for in the designation of the Series B Preferred Stock, pursuant to which each share of Series B Preferred Stock is convertible into 5,000 shares of common stock and 5,000 warrants, the Company recognized a beneficial conversion feature upon the conclusion of the transaction in the amount of $4,467,235. The beneficial conversion feature (BCF) was treated as a deemed dividend, and fully amortized on transaction date due to the fact that the issuance of the Series B preferred stock was classified as equity. In connection with certain clauses under sale of Series B Stock, the Company recognized a discount created by separating a BCF from this.
Customers
Our customers consist primarily of distributors that sell snack product to hotels and supermarkets. In FY 2022, we had one customer that accounted for over 20% of our Gross Sales. Two other customers each accounted for 16% and four others each accounted for between 8.5% and 9.9%. In FY 2021, we had one customer that accounted for over 30% of our Gross Sales. Three other customers each accounted for between 7.8% and 23%. As a result of our efforts to shift our primary focus away from traditional supermarket distribution to focus on hotel distribution, we expect the mix of distributors, at least in the short term, to trend towards more hotel distribution and less supermarket distribution.
Vendors
During the year ended June 30, 2022, no vendors accounted for more than 10% of our operating expenses. During the year ended June 30, 2021, one vendor accounted for more than 10% of our operating expenses.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
As of June 30, 2022, we had cash on hand of $280,877, accounts receivable of $93,674, and inventory value of $331,531. As of June 30, 2021, we had cash on hand of $1,041,899, accounts receivable of $109,589, and inventory value of $387,736. The decrease in cash is the result of us funding ongoing operations while executing a strategic pivot towards the hospitality vertical, including investing in sales, business development, and research and development expenses related to bringing new products to market in a new channel. The decrease in accounts receivable is due to a decrease in overall sales activity relating to sales and distribution of Nightfood ice cream.
Since June 30, 2022, we raised $576,800 in net proceeds from the sale of a promissory note and warrants to an institutional investor
As of June 30, 2022, we had accounts payable of $234,152 compared to $459,703 on June 30, 2021. This decrease is due primarily to paying down certain payables combined with lower operating expenses.
Since our inception, we have sustained operating losses. During the year ended June 30, 2022, we incurred a net loss of $2,523,277 and had total stockholders’ equity of $265,576.
The Company has limited available cash resources and we do not believe our cash on hand will be sufficient to fund our operations and growth throughout Fiscal 2023 or adequate to satisfy our ongoing working capital needs as we continue to expand distribution. The Company is continuing to raise capital through the sale of its securities, including common stock, preferred stock, and debt (including convertible debt) to finance the Company’s operations, of which it can give no assurance of success. In addition, we will receive the proceeds from our outstanding warrants as, if and when such warrants are exercised for cash.
On July 17, 2022, the Company made an initial filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission for a Tier 2 offering pursuant to Regulation A (also known as “Regulation A+) with the intent to raise capital through an equity crowdfunding campaign We believe this offering, if and upon its successful qualification and launch, will enable us to raise the capital needed to eliminate all corporate debt and operate the company until profitability is achieved.
Based on the results from the 2021 test, we projected that distribution of our ice cream pints in approximately 4,000 hotel locations would bring the company to profitability. However, due to recent and significant inflation-related increases in costs related to freight, packaging, and ingredients, combined with significantly higher retail prices charged by certain hotels and out-of-stock situations at a meaningful percentage of hotels, Management believes distribution of our ice cream in a larger number of hotels might be required to attain profitability. Similar to many other food and beverage companies in the current economic climate, Management is assessing the possibility of an increase in wholesale pricing to offset lower gross margins resulting from recent cost increases.
If we are unable to raise cash through the sale of our securities, we may be required to severely restrict our operations. However, we believe that our current capitalization structure, combined with the continued expansion of operations, will enable us to achieve successful financings to continue our growth.
Even if the Company is successful in raising additional funds, the Company cannot give any assurance that it will, in the future, be able to achieve a level of profitability from the sale of its products to sustain its operations. These conditions raise substantial doubt about the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments to reflect the possible future effects on recoverability and reclassification of assets or the amounts and classification of liabilities that may result from the outcome of this uncertainty.
From our inception in January 2010 through June 30, 2022, we have generated an accumulated deficit of approximately $28,101,458. This accumulated deficit is not debt, and there is no obligation or liability associated with it. An accumulated deficit reflects a negative balance of retained earnings and an accumulation of historical losses over time, related to both operations and financing activities. It is not unusual for growing companies to have significant accumulated deficit, even after turning profitable. Many large, fast growing, and successful companies have reported accumulated deficits in recent years, such as Warby Parker, The Honest Company, Beyond Meat, Roblox, Robinhood, Sweetgreen, Oatly, Rivian, Celsius Holdings, Chobani, and Tesla. In our case, like many of these others, an accumulated deficit is a function of losses sustained over time, along with the costs associated with raising operating capital.
Assuming we raise additional funds and continue operations, it is expected we may incur additional operating losses during the course of Fiscal 2023 and possibly thereafter. We plan to continue to pay or satisfy existing obligation and commitments and finance our operations, as we have in the past, primarily through the sale of our securities and other forms of external financing until such time that we are able to generate sufficient funds from the sale of our products to finance our operations, of which we can give no assurance.
We anticipate deriving additional revenue from product sales and new distribution arrangements in Fiscal 2023, but we cannot at this time quantify the amount.
CASH FLOWS
During the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash used in operating activities totaled $2,070,030, compared to $1,439,828 for the year ended June 30, 2021. This increase is due largely to the way certain financing activities completed in the year ended June 30, 2021 significantly decreased reported net cash used in operating activities. There were no similar financing activities completed in the year ended June 30, 2022.
During each of the fiscal years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, there was net cash provided by investing activities of $0.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, net cash aggregating $1,309,008 was provided by financing activities, which represents net proceeds of $984,808 from the issuance of convertible debt, $308,200 from the sale of Series B Preferred Shares, and $16,000 from the proceeds of warrants exercised. During the year ended June 30, 2021, net cash aggregating $2,284,105 was provided by financing activities, which represents net proceeds of $720,000 from the issuance of common stock for convertible debt, $2,868,000 from the sale of newly designated Series B Preferred Shares, ($1,300,000) related to the repayment of convertible debt, and ($3,895) from repayment of short-term debt.