ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Introduction
Management’s discussion and analysis of Ingevity’s financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) should be read in conjunction with Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data. Investors are cautioned that the forward-looking statements contained in this section and other parts of this Annual Report on Form 10-K involve both risk and uncertainty. Several important factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those anticipated by these statements. Many of these statements are macroeconomic in nature and are, therefore, beyond the control of management. See "Cautionary Statements about Forward-Looking Statements" at the beginning of this Annual Report on Form 10-K for further discussion.
Overview
Ingevity Corporation is a leading global manufacturer of specialty chemicals and high performance activated carbon materials. We provide innovative solutions to meet our customers’ unique and demanding requirements through proprietary formulated products. We report in two business segments, Performance Materials and Performance Chemicals.
Our Performance Materials segment manufactures products in the form of powder, granular, extruded pellets, extruded honeycombs, and activated carbon sheets. Automotive technologies products are sold into gasoline vapor emission control applications within the automotive industry, while process purification products are sold into the food, water, beverage, and chemical purification industries.
Our Performance Chemicals segment consists of our pavement technologies, industrial specialties, and engineered polymers product lines. Performance Chemicals manufactures products derived from crude tall oil ("CTO") and lignin extracted from the kraft pulping process as well as caprolactone monomers and derivatives derived from cyclohexanone and hydrogen peroxide. Performance Chemicals products serve as critical inputs used in a variety of high performance applications, including warm mix paving, pavement preservation, and pavement reconstruction and recycling (pavement technologies product line), adhesives, agrochemicals, lubricants, printing inks, industrial intermediates and oilfield (industrial specialties product line), coatings, resins, elastomers, adhesives, bio-plastics, and medical devices (engineered polymers product line).
Recent Developments
On July 19, 2018, Ingevity filed suit against BASF Corporation (“BASF”) in the United States District Court for the District of Delaware (the “Delaware Proceeding”) alleging BASF infringed Ingevity’s patent covering canister systems used in the control of automotive gasoline vapor emissions (U.S. Patent No. RE38,844) (the “844 Patent”). On February 14, 2019, BASF asserted counterclaims against Ingevity in the Delaware Proceeding, alleging two claims for violations of U.S. antitrust law (one for exclusive dealing and the other for tying) as well as a claim for tortious interference with an alleged prospective business relationship between BASF and a BASF customer (the “BASF Counterclaims”). The BASF Counterclaims relate to Ingevity’s enforcement of the 844 Patent and Ingevity’s entry into several supply agreements with customers of its fuel vapor canister honeycombs. The U.S. District Court dismissed Ingevity’s patent infringement claims on November 18, 2020, and the case proceeded to trial on the BASF Counterclaims in September 2021.
On September. 15, 2021, a jury in the Delaware Proceeding issued a verdict in favor of BASF on the BASF Counterclaims and awarded BASF damages of approximately $28.3 million, which will be trebled under U.S. antitrust law to approximately $85 million when the court enters judgment. In addition, BASF may seek pre- and post-judgment interest and attorneys’ fees and costs in amounts that they will have to support at a future date.
We disagree with the verdict, including the court’s application of the law, and we intend to seek judgment as a matter of law in the Delaware Proceeding post-trial briefing stage and on appeal, if necessary. In addition, we intend to challenge the U.S. District Court’s November 2020 dismissal of our patent infringement claims against BASF. Ingevity believes in the strength of its intellectual property and the merits of its position and intends to pursue all legal relief available to challenge these outcomes in the Delaware Proceeding. Final resolution of these matters could take up to eighteen months.
As a result of the jury's $85.0 million verdict, we have accrued the full amount as of December 31, 2021. The amount accrued for this matter is included in Other liabilities on the consolidated balance sheet as of December 31, 2021, and the charge is included in Other (income) expense, net on the consolidated statement of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021. The amount of any liability we may ultimately incur related to the Delaware Proceeding could be more or less than the amount accrued.
Results of Operations
Net sales
The table below shows 2021 and 2020 Net sales and variances from 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. 2020
The sales increase in 2021 was driven by a volume increase of $97.0 million (eight percent), primarily related to a volume increase in Performance Chemicals of $110.0 million, favorable pricing of $74.7 million (six percent) and favorable foreign exchange impacts of $3.7 million (less than one percent), offset slightly by a volume decrease in Performance Materials of $13.0 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. 2019
The sales decrease in 2020 was driven by a volume decline of $85.2 million (seven percent) primarily related to a volume decline in Performance Chemicals of $89.1 million, offset slightly by a volume increase in Performance Materials of $3.9 million, favorable pricing of $7.6 million (one percent) and favorable foreign exchange impacts of $0.8 million (less than one percent).
Gross Profit
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. 2020
Gross profit increase of $47.3 million was driven by favorable pricing improvement of $73.0 million, favorable sales volume of $30.6 million, and favorable foreign currency exchange of $1.3 million, partially offset by increased manufacturing costs of $57.6 million due to raw material and energy cost inflationary pressures. Refer to the Segment Operating Results section included within this MD&A for more information on the drivers to the changes in gross profit period over period for both segments.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. 2019
Gross profit decline of $16.5 million was driven by unfavorable sales volume impacting gross profits by $35.8 million, increased manufacturing costs of $2.3 million due to reduced plant throughput, and unfavorable foreign currency exchange of $0.8 million, which were partially offset by favorable pricing improvement of $14.0 million. Additionally, the prior year was negatively impacted by inventory step-up amortization of $8.4 million related to the Caprolactone Acquisition (see Note 16 within the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of the Form 10-K for more information). Refer to the Segment Operating Results section included within this MD&A for more information on the drivers to the changes in gross profit period over period for both segments.
Selling, general and administrative expenses
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. 2020
Selling, general and administrative ("SG&A") expenses were $179.3 million (13 percent of Net sales) and $149.4 million (12 percent of Net sales) for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The increase in SG&A expenses is primarily due to higher employee-related costs of $27.7 million and increased travel and other miscellaneous costs of $3.2 million. This was partially offset by a decrease in litigation defense costs of $1.0 million.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. 2019
SG&A expenses were $149.4 million (12 percent of Net sales) and $163.1 million (13 percent of Net sales) for the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively. The decrease in SG&A is primarily due to reduced travel and other miscellaneous costs of $12.8 million, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, decreased intellectual property litigation defense costs of $5.0 million, and lower employee-related incentive costs of $3.0 million. The positive impact was partially offset by an increase in amortization costs associated with intangible assets acquired in the Caprolactone Business ("Caprolactone Acquisition") (see Note 16 within the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of the Form 10-K for more information) and an increase in our credit allowance reserve of a combined $7.1 million, which included impacts from the COVID-19 pandemic.
Research and technical expenses
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Research and technical expenses as a percentage of Net sales remained relatively consistent period over period, totaling 1.9 percent of sales in the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to 1.9 percent and 1.5 percent in the years ended December 31, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Restructuring and other (income) charges, net
Restructuring and other (income) charges, net, were $16.2 million, $18.5 million, and $1.8 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, with the decrease in 2021 primarily attributable to certain cost reduction initiatives. See Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
Acquisition-related costs
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Acquisition costs of $0.6 million, $1.8 million, and $26.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively, were comprised of charges incurred in connection with the Caprolactone Acquisition. See Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
Other (income) expense, net
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
_______________
(1) See Note 18 within the Consolidated Financial Statements for more information.
Interest expense
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Interest income
Years Ended December 31 2021, 2020, and 2019
_______________
(1) See Note 5 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
(2) See Note 9 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included in Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information.
Provision (benefit) for income taxes
Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019, our effective tax rate was 27.5 percent, 22.8 percent, and 19.4 percent respectively. An explanation of the change in the effective tax rate is presented in Note 17 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Segment Operating Results
In addition to the information discussed above, the following sections discuss the results of operations for each of Ingevity's segments. Our segments are (i) Performance Materials and (ii) Performance Chemicals. Segment Earnings before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation and Amortization ("EBITDA") is the primary measure used by the Company's chief operating decision maker to evaluate the performance of and allocate resources among our operating segments. Segment EBITDA is defined as segment revenue less segment operating expenses (segment operating expenses consist of costs of sales, selling, general and administrative expenses, other (income) expense, net, excluding depreciation and amortization). We have excluded the following items from segment EBITDA: interest expense, net, associated with corporate debt facilities, income taxes, depreciation, amortization, restructuring and other (income) charges, net, acquisition and other-related costs, litigation verdict charges, pension and postretirement settlement and curtailment (income) charge, net. In general, the accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in the Summary of Significant Accounting Policies in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Performance Materials
_______________
(1) Beginning in Q1 2021, we updated disaggregated revenue disclosures, combining certain product groups to reflect categories that depict how the nature, amount, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors. As a result, Automotive Technologies and Process Purification product lines have been combined within the Performance Materials segment.
Net Sales Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. 2020
Segment net sales. The increase in 2021 was driven by favorable pricing of $12.6 million (three percent) and favorable foreign currency exchange impacts of $7.2 million (less than one percent). The increase was offset by $13.0 million (three percent) in volume decline in automotive evaporative emission canister products due to semiconductor shortages in automotive markets.
Segment EBITDA. Segment EBITDA increased $0.2 million due to favorable pricing, contributing $11.3 million, and lower manufacturing costs of $2.4 million. The increase was partially offset by unfavorable volume of $11.2 million, primarily in the automotive evaporative emission canister products, and increased SG&A expenses and research and technical costs of $7.4 million, due to increased travel, outside services, and consulting expenses. Favorable foreign currency exchange impacts also contributed $5.1 million to the increase.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. 2019
Segment net sales. The increase in 2020 was driven primarily by favorable pricing and product mix of $13.6 million (three percent). Additionally, we benefited from $3.9 million (one percent) in volume improvements in automotive evaporative emission canister products due to stricter environmental regulation in the Chinese, North American, and European automotive markets, and favorable foreign currency exchange impacts of $1.9 million (less than one percent).
Segment EBITDA. Segment EBITDA increased $35.8 million due to favorable pricing and product mix, which contributed $18.7 million, favorable volume, primarily in the automotive evaporative emission canister products, which contributed $2.8 million, lower manufacturing costs of $5.0 million, and decreased SG&A expenses and research and technical
costs of $8.0 million, primarily due to reduced travel and decreased intellectual property litigation defense costs. Favorable foreign currency exchange impacts, offset slightly by other miscellaneous charges, also contributed $1.3 million to the increase.
Performance Chemicals
____________
(1) In 2021, we updated disaggregated revenue disclosures, combining certain product groups to reflect categories that depict how the nature, amount, and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows are affected by economic factors. As a result, the Oilfield Technologies product line has been combined with the Industrial Specialties product line within the Performance Chemicals segment.
Net Sales Comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Year Ended December 31, 2021 vs. 2020
Segment net sales. The sales increase was driven by favorable volume of $110.0 million (15 percent), which consisted of volume growth in all business lines: industrial specialties ($64.9 million), engineered polymers ($43.5 million) and pavement technologies product lines ($1.6 million). Also driving the net sales increase was favorable pricing and product mix of $62.1 million (nine percent) in industrial specialties ($35.3 million), engineered polymers ($20.7 million), and pavement technologies product lines ($6.1 million). In addition, unfavorable foreign currency exchange impacted Net sales by $3.5 million (less than one percent).
Segment EBITDA. Segment EBITDA increased $24.1 million, mainly due to favorable pricing and product mix of $61.7 million, and an increase in volume of $41.8 million. These increases were partially offset by higher manufacturing costs of $51.6 million due to inflationary raw material and energy inflationary costs, and increased SG&A expenses of $23.6 million due to increased spending on growth initiatives, compensation, and modest travel. Unfavorable foreign currency exchange impacts and other miscellaneous charges of $4.2 million also contributed to increased costs.
Year Ended December 31, 2020 vs. 2019
Segment net sales. The sales decrease was driven by unfavorable volume of $89.1 million (11 percent), which consisted of volume declines in industrial specialties ($95.9 million), partially offset by volume growth in engineered polymers ($5.9 million) and pavement technologies product lines ($0.9 million). Also driving the net sales decline was unfavorable pricing and product mix of $6.0 million (one percent) in industrial specialties ($8.9 million), which was partially offset by favorable pricing and product mix in pavement technologies product lines ($2.9 million). Unfavorable foreign currency exchange of $1.1 million (less than one percent) contributed to the overall decline.
Segment EBITDA. Segment EBITDA decreased $34.8 million mainly due to decline in volume of $38.6 million, unfavorable pricing and product mix of $4.7 million, and unfavorable foreign currency exchange impacts and other miscellaneous charges of $2.0 million. Favorable SG&A expenses due to reduced travel and lower employee-related costs of $10.3 million and favorable manufacturing productivity of $0.2 million offset part of the overall decline.
Use of Non-GAAP Financial Measures
Ingevity has presented the financial measure, Adjusted EBITDA, defined below, which has not been prepared in accordance with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (“GAAP”) and has provided a reconciliation to net income, the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is not meant to be considered in isolation nor as a substitute for the most directly comparable financial measure calculated in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted EBITDA is utilized by management as a measure of profitability.
We believe this non-GAAP financial measure provides management as well as investors, potential investors, securities analysts and others with useful information to evaluate the performance of the business, because such measure, when viewed together with our financial results computed in accordance with GAAP, provides a more complete understanding of the factors and trends affecting our historical financial performance and projected future results. We believe Adjusted EBITDA is a useful measure because it excludes the effects of financing and investment activities as well as non-operating activities.
Adjusted EBITDA is defined as net income (loss) plus provision (benefit) for income taxes, interest expense, net, depreciation, amortization, restructuring and other (income) charges, net, acquisition and other-related costs, litigation verdict charges, and pension and postretirement settlement and curtailment (income) charges, net.
This non-GAAP measure is not intended to replace the presentation of financial results in accordance with GAAP and investors should consider the limitations associated with these non-GAAP measures, including the potential lack of comparability of these measures from one company to another. A reconciliation of Adjusted EBITDA to net income is set forth within this section.
Adjusted EBITDA
Year Ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
The factors that impacted Adjusted EBITDA period to period are the same factors that affected earnings discussed in the sections entitled "Results of Operations" and "Segment Operating Results" within MD&A.
Total Company Outlook and 2022 Guidance
For revenue, we expect to capture volume growth in our Performance Chemical segment specifically within our Engineered Polymers’ thermoplastics products. We also anticipate continued growth in our adhesives, lubricants, and oilfield products within Industrial Specialties. Pavement technologies will benefit from the U.S. infrastructure bill and continued Evotherm® warm mix technology adoption. This expected demand will result in favorable pricing conditions. Performance Materials will see moderate growth as process purification volumes and price increases will partially offset muted improvement in automotive due to the continued constrained semiconductor shortage and the absence of any novel gasoline vapor emission control regulations.
Adjusted EBITDA is expected to grow versus 2021 mainly driven by our Performance Chemicals segment, where continued profitable growth in all businesses is expected to be partially offset by inflationary costs for freight and primary raw materials. The Performance Materials segment anticipates results similar to 2021 as U.S., Chinese, Canadian, and European vehicle production continues to be negatively impacted by global chip supply and general cost inflation. We expect to deliver fiscal year 2022 Adjusted EBITDA of $430 million to $460 million. These estimates assume that 2022 will continue to be impacted by global logistical headwinds, significant cost inflation, and by the microchip shortage, which is disrupting the global automotive supply chain.
A reconciliation of net income to adjusted EBITDA as projected for 2022 is not provided. Ingevity does not forecast net income as it cannot, without unreasonable effort, estimate or predict with certainty various components of net income. These components, net of tax, include further restructuring and other income (charges), net; additional acquisition and other-related costs; litigation verdict charges; additional pension and postretirement settlement and curtailment (income) charges; and revisions due to legislative tax rate changes. Additionally, discrete tax items could drive variability in our projected effective tax rate. All of these components could significantly impact such financial measures. Further, in the future, other items with similar characteristics to those currently included in adjusted EBITDA, that have a similar impact on comparability of periods, and which are not known at this time, may exist and impact adjusted EBITDA.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The primary source of liquidity for our business is the cash flow provided by operating activities. We expect our cash flow provided by operations combined with cash on hand and available capacity under our revolving credit facility to be sufficient to fund our planned operations and meet our interest and other contractual obligations for at least the next twelve months. As of December 31, 2021, our undrawn capacity under our revolving credit facility was $497.5 million. Over the next twelve months, we expect to fund the following: interest payments, capital expenditures, expenditures related to our business transformation initiative, debt principal repayments, purchases pursuant to our stock repurchase program, income tax payments, and to incur additional spending associated with our Performance Materials' intellectual property litigation. In addition, we may also evaluate and consider strategic acquisitions, joint ventures, or other transactions to create stockholder value and enhance financial performance. In connection with such transactions, or to fund other anticipated uses of cash, we may modify our existing revolving credit and term loan facility, redeem all or part of our outstanding senior notes, seek additional debt financing, issue equity securities, or some combination thereof.
Cash and cash equivalents totaled $275.4 million at December 31, 2021. We continuously monitor deposit concentrations and the credit quality of the financial institutions that hold our cash and cash equivalents, as well as the credit quality of our insurance providers, customers, and key suppliers.
Due to the global nature of our operations, a portion of our cash is held outside the U.S. The cash and cash equivalents balance at December 31, 2021 included $89.6 million held by our foreign subsidiaries. Cash and earnings of our foreign subsidiaries are generally used to finance our foreign operations and their capital expenditures. We believe that our foreign holdings of cash will not have a material adverse impact on our U.S. liquidity. If these earnings were distributed, such amounts would be subject to U.S. federal income tax at the statutory rate less the available foreign tax credits, if any, and would potentially be subject to withholding taxes in the various jurisdictions. The potential tax implications of the repatriation of unremitted earnings are driven by facts at the time of distribution, therefore, it is not practicable to estimate the income tax liabilities that might be incurred if such cash and earnings were repatriated to the U.S. Management does not currently expect to repatriate cash earnings from our foreign operations in order to fund U.S. operations.
Debt and Finance Lease Obligations
Refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a summary of our outstanding debt obligations and revolving credit facility.
Other Potential Liquidity Needs
Share Repurchases
On February 28, 2020, our Board of Directors authorized the repurchase of up to $500.0 million of our common stock, and rescinded the prior two outstanding authorizations. Shares may be purchased through open market or privately negotiated transactions at the discretion of management based on its evaluation of market prevailing conditions and other factors, including through the use of trading plans intended to qualify under Rule 10b5-1 under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
In the year ended December 31, 2021, we repurchased $109.4 million in common shares, representing 1,421,379 shares of our common stock at a weighted average cost per share of $76.98. At December 31, 2021, $302.6 million remained unused under our Board-authorized repurchase program.
Capital Expenditures
Projected 2022 capital expenditures are expected to be $155 million to $175 million. We have no material commitments associated with these projected capital expenditures as of December 31, 2021.
Cash flow comparison of Years Ended December 31, 2021, 2020, and 2019
Cash flows provided by (used in) operating activities
During the year ended December 31, 2021, cash flow provided by operations decreased primarily due to working capital increases compared to 2020, which are further explained below.
Current Assets and Liabilities
Current assets as of December 31, 2021, increased $96.2 million compared to December 31, 2020, primarily due to an increase in Inventories, net of $52.2 million to support forecasted sales. Additionally, cash and cash equivalents increased by $17.7 million, Accounts receivable, net increased by $13.7 million, and Prepaid and other current assets increased by $12.6 million in 2021.
Current liabilities as of December 31, 2021 increased by $45.5 million compared to December 31, 2020, driven primarily by the increase in sales and business activity with Accrued payroll and employee benefits up $23.1 million, Accounts payable of $21.6 million, Accrued expenses of $5.1 million, Current operating lease liabilities of $1.2 million and Income taxes payable of $0.9 million. These increases were partially offset by a decrease in Notes payable and current portion of long-term debt of $6.4 million.
Cash flows provided by (used in) investing activities
For the year ended December 31, 2021, investing activities was driven by capital spending and strategic investments. Capital spending included the base maintenance capital supporting ongoing operations and growth and cost improvement spending primarily related to our business transformation initiative (refer to Note 15 within the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information). Also, during twelve months ended December 31, 2021, we entered into multiple strategic investments (refer to Note 5 within the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information).
For the year ended December 31, 2020, investing activities were driven by capital spending. Our Performance Materials' facilities, including Covington, Virginia, Wickliffe, Kentucky, and Waynesboro, Georgia, incurred expenditures for growth and expansion projects, as well as base maintenance and safety spending. Our Performance Chemicals' facility in Warrington, United Kingdom, completed a large, multi-year growth and cost improvement project, and there was additional spending at all of our Performance Chemicals' facilities for base maintenance and safety spending. Additionally, we had capital expenditures related to our business transformation initiative (see Note 15 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information) and our new corporate headquarters.
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the cash used in investing activities was primarily driven by the $537.9 million Caprolactone Acquisition (see Note 16 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this form 10-K for more information). The remaining cash used by investing activities was primarily driven by capital expenditures, driven primarily by maintenance and growth spending. Our Covington, Virginia facility incurred expenditures for its expansion project, along with base maintenance and other various equipment purchases. Also, we incurred cost improvement spending at our DeRidder, Louisiana location related to installation of new CTO tanks as well as base maintenance spending, and our Waynesboro, Georgia location expended funds primarily for growth and cost improvement. We also invested capital spending in our newest location in Warrington, United Kingdom to enable further growth and cost improvement as well as base maintenance.
Cash flows provided by (used in) financing activities
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $133.1 million, and was driven by the repurchase of common stock of $109.4 million, payments on long-term borrowings of $23.4 million, and tax payments related to withholding tax on vested equity awards of $2.4 million.
Cash used in financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 was $50.2 million, and was driven by proceeds from long-term borrowings from the senior notes that were issued in the fourth quarter of $550.0 million, net of debt issuance costs of $8.8 million. We used these proceeds to repay the outstanding balance on the revolving credit facility of $131.2 million and the 2019 term loan of $375.0 million. We also paid $2.2 million in debt issuance costs for the amendment to our revolving credit facility (refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information). Additionally, we repaid $14.1 million of other long-term borrowings, repurchased $88.0 million of our common stock, and made payments of $3.2 million related to withholding tax on vested equity awards
Cash provided by financing activities for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $369.2 million, and was driven by proceeds from long-term borrowings from a new term loan in the first quarter of 2019 of $375.0 million and $131.3 million in net borrowings related to our revolving credit facility (refer to Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for more information). This was offset by repayments of $122.5 million on our long-term borrowings. Additionally, we made payments of $14.3 million related to withholding tax on vested equity awards.
New Accounting Guidance
Refer to the Note 3 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K for a full description of recent accounting pronouncements including the respective expected dates of adoption and expected effects on our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
Our principal accounting policies are described in Note 2 to the Consolidated Financial Statements included within Part II. Item 8 of this Form 10-K. Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in conformity with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires management to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses. We have reviewed these accounting policies, identifying those that we believe to be critical to the preparation and understanding of our financial statements. Critical accounting policies are central to our presentation of results of operations and financial condition and require management to make estimates and judgments on certain matters. We base our estimates and judgments on historical experience, current conditions and other reasonable factors.
The following is a list of those accounting policies that we have deemed most critical to the presentation and understanding of our results of operations and financial condition:
Revenue recognition
Our revenue is derived from contracts with customers, and substantially all our revenue is recognized when products are either shipped from our manufacturing and warehousing facilities or delivered to the customer. Revenue, net of returns and customer incentives, are based on the sale of manufactured products. Revenues are recognized when performance obligations under the terms of a contract with our customer are satisfied; generally, this occurs with the transfer of control of our products. For certain limited contracts, where we are producing goods with no alternative use and for which we have an enforceable right to payment for performance completed to date, we are recognizing revenue as goods are manufactured, rather than when they are shipped. Revenues are presented as Net sales on the consolidated statements of operations to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Since Net sales are derived from product sales only, we have disaggregated our Net sales by our product lines within each reportable segment. Net sales are measured as the amount of consideration we expect to receive in exchange for transferring goods. Sales, value add, and other taxes we collect concurrent with revenue-producing activities are excluded from revenue. Sales returns and allowances are not a normal practice in the industry and are not significant. Certain customers may receive cash-based incentives, including discounts and volume rebates, which are accounted for as variable consideration and included in Net sales. Shipping and handling fees billed to customers are included with Net sales. If we pay for the freight and shipping, we recognize the cost when control of the product has transferred to the customer as an expense in Cost of sales on the consolidated statements of operations. Payment terms with our customers are typically in the range of zero to sixty days. Because the period between when we transfer a promised good to a customer and when the customer pays for that good will be one year or less, we elect not to adjust the promised amount of consideration for the effects of any financing component, as it is not significant.
Valuation of tangible and intangible long-lived assets and goodwill
Our long-lived assets primarily include property, plant and equipment and other intangible assets. We periodically evaluate whether current events or circumstances indicate that the carrying value of long-lived assets to be held and used may not be recoverable. If such circumstances are determined to exist, an estimate of undiscounted future cash flows produced by the long-lived asset, or the appropriate grouping of assets, is compared to carrying value to determine whether an impairment exists.
If an asset is determined to be impaired, the loss is measured based on quoted market prices in active markets, if available. If quoted market prices are not available, the estimate of fair value is based on various valuation techniques, including a discounted value of estimated future cash flows. We report an asset to be disposed of at the lower of its carrying value or its estimated net realizable value.
Goodwill represents the excess of cost of an acquired business over the fair value of the identifiable tangible and intangible assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination. We conduct a required annual review of goodwill for potential impairment at October 1, or sooner if events or changes in circumstances indicate that the fair value of a reporting unit is below its carrying value. Our reporting units are our operating segments, i.e., Performance Chemicals and Performance
Materials. If the carrying value of a reporting unit that includes goodwill exceeds its fair value, which is determined using both the income approach and market approach, goodwill is considered impaired. The income approach determines fair value based on discounted cash flow model derived from a reporting unit’s long-term forecasted cash flows. The market approach determines fair value based on the application of earnings multiples of comparable companies to projected earnings of the reporting unit. The amount of impairment loss is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the fair value of a reporting unit but is limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to the reporting unit. In performing the fair value analysis, management makes various judgments, estimates and assumptions, the most significant of which is the assumption related to revenue growth rates.
The factors we considered in developing our estimates and projections for cash flows include, but are not limited to, the following: (i) macroeconomic conditions; (ii) industry and market considerations; (iii) costs, such as increases in raw materials, labor, or other costs; (iv) our overall financial performance; and (v) other relevant entity-specific events that impact our reporting units.
The determination of whether goodwill is impaired involves a significant level of judgment in the assumptions underlying the approach used to determine the estimated fair values of our reporting units. We believe that the estimates and assumptions used in our impairment assessment are reasonable; however, these assumptions are judgmental and variations in any assumptions could result in materially different calculations of fair value. We will continue to evaluate goodwill on an annual basis as of October 1, and whenever events or changes in circumstances, such as significant adverse changes in operating results, market conditions, or changes in management’s business strategy indicate that there may be a probable indicator of impairment. It is possible that the assumptions used by management related to the evaluation may change or that actual results may vary significantly from management’s estimates.
Business Combinations
We account for business combinations in accordance with ASC 805 “Business Combinations” which requires, among other things, the acquiring entity in a business combination to recognize the fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed; the recognition of acquisition-related costs in the consolidated results of operations; the recognition of restructuring costs in the consolidated results of operations for which the acquirer becomes obligated after the acquisition date; and contingent purchase consideration to be recognized at fair value on the acquisition date with subsequent adjustments recognized in the consolidated results of operations. We generally use third-party qualified consultants to assist management in determining the fair value of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. This includes, when necessary, assistance with the determination of lives and valuation of property and identifiable intangibles, assisting management in determining the fair value of obligations associated with employee related liabilities and assisting management in assessing obligations associated with legal and environmental claims.
The fair value assigned to identifiable intangible assets acquired are determined primarily by using an income approach, which is based on assumptions and estimates made by management. Significant assumptions utilized in the income approach are the attrition rate, growth rate, and discount rate. These assumptions are based on company-specific information and projections, which are not observable in the market and are therefore considered Level 2 and Level 3 measurements. The excess of the purchase price over the fair value of the identified assets and liabilities is recorded as goodwill. Based on the acquired business’ end markets and products as well as how the chief operating decision maker will review the business results determines the most appropriate operating segment for which to integrate the acquired business. Goodwill acquired, if any, is allocated to the reporting unit within or at the operating segment for which the acquired business will be integrated. Operating results of the acquired entity are reflected in the Consolidated Financial Statements from date of acquisition.
Income taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions, including China and the United Kingdom. The provision for income taxes includes income taxes paid, currently payable or receivable, and deferred taxes. We follow the liability method of accounting for income taxes in accordance with current accounting standards regarding the accounting for income taxes. Under this method, deferred income taxes are recorded based upon the differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities and are measured using the enacted tax rates and laws in effect at the time the underlying assets or liabilities are recovered or settled. The ability to realize deferred tax assets is evaluated through the forecasting of taxable income, historical and projected future operating results, the reversal of existing temporary differences, and the availability of tax planning strategies. Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets when it is more
likely than not that a tax benefit will not be realized. We do not provide income taxes on undistributed earnings of consolidated foreign subsidiaries as it is our intention that such earnings will remain invested in those companies.
We recognize income tax positions that are more likely than not to be realized and accrue interest related to unrecognized income tax positions, which is included as a component of the income tax provision, on the consolidated statements of operations.