ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion and analysis of the Company’s financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the condensed financial statements and the notes thereto contained elsewhere in this report. Certain information contained in the discussion and analysis set forth below includes forward-looking statements. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of many factors, including those set forth under “Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements,” and elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Overview
We are a blank check company incorporated on February 25, 2021 as a Delaware corporation and formed for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar business combination with one or more businesses (the “Initial Business Combination”). We intend to effectuate our Initial Business Combination using cash from the proceeds of our initial public offering that was completed in October 2021 (the “Public Offering”) and the sale of warrants in a private placement (the “Private Placement”) that occurred simultaneously with the completion of the Public Offering (the “Private Placement Warrants”), shares issued to the owners of the target, debt issued to bank or other lenders or the owners of the target, or a combination of the foregoing.
We have not selected any specific business combination target. However, our management team had been actively in discussions with potential business combination partners in their capacity as officers of NewHold Investment Corp. (“NHIC I”), which completed its business combination with Evolv Technologies, Inc., a company specializing in artificial intelligence enabled touchless security screening, on July 19, 2021. Our management team may pursue business combination partners that had previously been in discussions with NHIC I’s management team.
The issuance of additional shares in connection with an initial business combination to the owners of the target or other investors:
● may significantly dilute the equity interest of investors in our Class A common stock, which dilution would increase if the anti-dilution provisions in the Class B common stock resulted in the issuance of Class A common stock on a greater than one-to-one basis upon conversion of the Class B common stock;
● may subordinate the rights of holders of our common stock if preferred stock is issued with rights senior to those afforded our common stock;
● could cause a change in control if a substantial number of shares of our common stock is issued, which may affect, among other things, our ability to use our net operating loss carry forwards, if any, and could result in the resignation or removal of our present officers and directors;
● may have the effect of delaying or preventing a change of control of us by diluting the stock ownership or voting rights of a person seeking to obtain control of us; and
● may adversely affect prevailing market prices for our Class A common stock and/or warrants.
Similarly, if we issue debt securities or otherwise incur significant debt to bank or other lenders or the owners of a target, it could result in:
● default and foreclosure on our assets if our operating revenues after an initial business combination are insufficient to repay our debt obligations;
● acceleration of our obligations to repay the indebtedness even if we make all principal and interest payments when due if we breach certain covenants that require the maintenance of certain financial ratios or reserves without a waiver or renegotiation of that covenant;
● our immediate payment of all principal and accrued interest, if any, if the debt security is payable on demand;
● our inability to obtain necessary additional financing if the debt security contains covenants restricting our ability to obtain such financing while the debt security is outstanding;
● our inability to pay dividends on our common stock;
● using a substantial portion of our cash flow to pay principal and interest on our debt, which will reduce the funds available for dividends on our common stock if declared, our ability to pay expenses, make capital expenditures and acquisitions, and fund other general corporate purposes;
● limitations on our flexibility in planning for and reacting to changes in our business and in the industry in which we operate;
● increased vulnerability to adverse changes in general economic, industry and competitive conditions and adverse changes in government regulation;
● limitations on our ability to borrow additional amounts for expenses, capital expenditures, acquisitions, debt service requirements, and execution of our strategy; and
● other purposes and other disadvantages compared to our competitors who have less debt.
As indicated in the accompanying financial statements, at December 31, 2021, we had approximately $1,972,000 in cash and working capital of approximately $2,474,000. We expect to incur significant costs in the pursuit of an Initial Business Combination and we cannot assure you that our plans to complete an Initial Business Combination will be successful.
Results of Operations and Known Trends or Future Events
We have neither engaged in any operations nor generated any operating revenues to date. Our only activities for the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021 were organizational activities, those necessary to prepare for the Public Offering and, after the Public Offering, identifying a target company for a business combination. We do not expect to generate any operating revenues until after the completion of our Initial Business Combination. We expect to generate non-operating income in the form of interest income on cash and cash equivalents held after the Public Offering. We incur expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for due diligence expenses.
Prior to the closing of the Public Offering, we had no activity in relation to the Company’s operations.
For the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we had a net loss of approximately $413,000, which resulted largely (approximately $152,000) from those legal, audit, reporting, insurance, listing and other costs associated with our being a public company subsequent to October 25, 2021, consultant and travel expenses associated with our search for a target company for a business combination of approximately $77,000 administrative fees of the Sponsor of approximately $56,000 and franchise taxes of approximately $144,000 net of interest income of approximately $16,000.
We expect to incur increased expenses as a result of being a public company (for legal, financial reporting, accounting and auditing compliance), as well as for search and due diligence expenses and we expect those expenses to increase substantially.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
In October 2021, we consummated the Public Offering of an aggregate of 19,490,000 Units (including the partial exercise of the underwriters’ overallotment option) at a price of $10.00 per unit generating gross proceeds of approximately $194,900,000 before underwriting discounts and expenses. Simultaneously with the consummation of the Public Offering, we consummated the Private Placement of 9,254,705 Private Placement Warrants, each exercisable to purchase one share of our Class A common stock at $11.50 per share, to the Sponsor and certain funds and accounts managed by Magnetar Financial LLC, UBS O’Connor LLC, and Kepos Capital, L.P., at a price of $1.00 per Private Placement Warrant, generating gross proceeds, before expenses, of approximately $9,254,705.
The net proceeds from the Public Offering and Private Placement were approximately $199,622,000, net of the non-deferred portion of the underwriting commissions of $3,898,000 and offering costs and other expenses of approximately $635,000. $196,849,000 of the proceeds of the Public Offering and the Private Placement have been deposited into a trust account, with Continental Stock Transfer & Trust Company acting as trustee (the “Trust Account”), and are not available to us for operations (except amounts to pay taxes).
For the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) through December 31, 2021, we used approximately $907,000 in cash operating activities including approximately $708,000 of deposit premiums, primarily for insurance, for periods up to 2 years as well as other services. Of the $199,728,000 net cash provided from financing activities, approximately $196,849,000 was used to fund the Trust Account including the gross proceeds of the Public Offering plus approximately $1,949,000 to fund an additional $0.10 per share for redemption.
We intend to use substantially all of the funds held in the Trust account, including any amounts representing interest earned on the Trust Account (less taxes payable and deferred underwriting commissions), to complete our Initial Business Combination. We may withdraw interest income (if any) to pay income taxes, if any. Our annual income tax obligations will depend on the amount of interest and other income earned on the amounts held in the Trust Account. We do not expect the interest income earned on the amount in the Trust Account (if any) will be sufficient to pay our income and franchise taxes. To the extent that our equity or debt is used, in whole or in part, as consideration to complete our Initial Business Combination, the remaining proceeds held in the Trust Account will be used as working capital to finance the operations of the target business or businesses, make other acquisitions and pursue our growth strategies.
We account for all of the Class A common stock issued in our Public Offering as redeemable stock and not permanent equity and so we report negative stockholders’ equity.
Subsequent to our Public Offering and prior to the completion of our Initial Business Combination, we have available to us proceeds held outside the Trust Account (initially, approximately $2,914,000) for working capital. We are using these funds primarily to identify and evaluate target businesses, perform business due diligence on prospective target businesses, travel to and from the offices, plants or similar locations of prospective target businesses or their representatives or owners, review corporate documents and material agreements of prospective target businesses, structure, negotiate and complete a business combination, pay our public reporting and other costs of being a public company and to pay taxes to the extent the interest earned on the Trust Account is not sufficient to pay our taxes.
We do not believe we will need to raise additional funds following our Public Offering in order to meet the expenditures required for operating our business. However, if our estimates of the costs of identifying a target business, undertaking in-depth due diligence and negotiating an initial business combination are less than the actual amount necessary to do so, we may have insufficient funds available to operate our business prior to our initial business combination. Moreover, we may need to obtain additional financing either to complete our Initial Business Combination or because we become obligated to redeem a significant number of our public shares upon completion of our Initial Business Combination, in which case we may issue additional securities or incur debt in connection with such business combination.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements; Commitments and Contractual Obligations; Quarterly Results
We have no obligations, assets or liabilities which would be considered off-balance sheet arrangements. We do not participate in transactions that create relationships with unconsolidated entities or financial partnerships, often referred to as variable interest entities, which would have been established for the purpose of facilitating off-balance sheet arrangements.
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet financing arrangements, established any special purpose entities, guaranteed any debt or commitments of other entities, or entered into any agreements for non-financial assets.
Contractual Obligations
In connection with the Public Offering, the Company agreed to pay $25,000 a month for office space, utilities and secretarial and administrative support to the Sponsor. Services commenced on the date the securities are first listed on The Nasdaq Global Market and will terminate upon the earlier of the consummation by the Company of an initial Business Combination or the liquidation of the Company.
Critical Accounting Policies
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements, and income and expenses during the periods reported. Actual results could materially differ from those estimates. The Company has identified the following as its critical accounting policies:
Emerging Growth Company
Section 102(b)(1) of the JOBS Act exempts emerging growth companies from being required to comply with new or revised financial accounting standards until private companies (that is, those that have not had a Securities Act registration statement declared effective or do not have a class of securities registered under the Exchange Act) are required to comply with the new or revised financial accounting standards. The JOBS Act provides that a company can elect to opt out of the extended transition period and comply with the requirements that apply to non-emerging growth companies but any such an election to opt out is irrevocable. The Company has elected not to opt out of such extended transition period which means that when an accounting standard is issued or revised and it has different application dates for public or private companies, the Company, as an emerging growth company, can adopt the new or revised standard at the time private companies adopt the new or revised standard. This may make comparison of the Company’s financial statements with another public company which is neither an emerging growth company nor an emerging growth company which has opted out of using the extended transition period difficult or impossible because of the potential differences in accounting standards used.
Net Income or Loss per Common Share:
The Company complies with accounting and disclosure requirements of FASB ASC Topic 260, “Earnings Per Share.” Net income or loss per common share is computed by dividing net income or loss applicable to common shareholders by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the period plus, to the extent dilutive, the incremental number of common shares to settle warrants, as calculated using the treasury stock method.
The Company has not considered the effect of the warrants sold in the Public Offering and Private Placement to purchase an aggregate of 18,999,705 Class A common shares in the calculation of diluted income (loss) per share, since their inclusion would be anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method. As a result, diluted income (loss) per common share is the same as basic income (loss) per common share for the period presented.
The Company has two classes of shares, which are referred to as Class A common shares and Class B common shares. Income and losses are shared pro rata among the two classes of shares. Net income (loss) per common share is calculated by dividing the net income (loss) by the weighted average number of common shares outstanding during the respective period.
The following table reflects the net loss per share for the period from February 25, 2021 (inception) to December 31, 2021 after allocating income between the shares based on outstanding shares.
Accounting for Warrants:
The Company accounts for warrants as either equity-classified or liability-classified instruments based on an assessment of the instruments’ specific terms and applicable authoritative guidance in Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 480, Distinguishing Liabilities from Equity (“ASC 480”) and ASC 815, Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”). The assessment considers whether the instruments are freestanding financial instruments pursuant to ASC 480, meet the definition of a liability pursuant to ASC 480, and whether the instruments meet all of the requirements for equity classification under ASC 815, including whether the instruments are indexed to the Company’s own common shares and whether the instrument holders could potentially require “net cash settlement” in a circumstance outside of the Company’s control, among other conditions for equity classification. This assessment, which requires the use of professional judgment, is conducted at the time of warrant issuance and as of each subsequent quarterly period end date while the instruments are outstanding.
Management has concluded that the Public Warrants and Private Placement Warrants issued in connection with the Company’s Public Offering, pursuant to the warrant agreements, qualify for equity accounting treatment.
Offering Costs:
The Company complies with the requirements of the FASB ASC 340-10-S99-1 and SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin (SAB) Topic 5A - “Expenses of Offering.” Costs incurred in connection with preparation for the Public Offering totaled approximately $19,374,000 including Company costs of approximately $635,000 together with $10,720,000 of underwriters’ discount and approximately $8,019,000 in fair value over cost of Sponsor shares forfeited and purchased by Anchor investors in connection with their investment in the Company. Such costs have been allocated to the redeemable Class A common stock subject to redemption issued upon completion of the Public Offering. None of the Public Warrants or Private Placement Warrants are classified as liabilities so there is no charge to operations for costs related to their issuance.
Class A Common Stock Subject to Possible Redemption:
All of the 19,490,000 shares of Class A common stock sold as part of a Unit in the Public Offering discussed in Note 3 contain a redemption feature which allows for the redemption of common shares under the Company’s liquidation or tender offer/stockholder approval provisions. In accordance with FASB ASC 480, redemption provisions not solely within the control of the Company require the security to be classified outside of permanent equity. Ordinary liquidation events, which involve the redemption and liquidation of all of the entity’s equity instruments, are excluded from the provisions of FASB ASC 480. Although the Company did not specify a maximum redemption threshold, its articles of association provide that in no event will it redeem its Public Shares in an amount that would cause its net tangible assets (tangible assets less intangible assets and liabilities) to be less than $5,000,001. However, because all of the shares of Class A common stock are redeemable, all of the shares will be recorded as Class A common stock subject to redemption on the Company’s balance sheet.
The Company recognizes changes immediately as they occur and adjusts the carrying value of the securities at the end of each reporting period. Increases or decreases in the carrying amount of redeemable Class A common stock are affected by adjustments to additional paid-in capital. Accordingly, at December 31, 2021, all of the 19,490,000 Public Shares were classified outside of permanent equity. Class A common stock subject to redemption consist of:
Recent Accounting Standards
Management does not believe that any other recently issued, but not yet effective, accounting standards, if currently adopted, would have a material effect on our financial statements.