Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our audited financial statements and the related notes that appear elsewhere in this annual report. The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed in the forward- looking statements. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to those discussed below and elsewhere in this annual report.
Our audited financial statements are stated in United States Dollars and are prepared in accordance with United States Generally Accepted Accounting Principles.
Plan of Operations and Liquidity Requirements
We have suffered recurring losses from operations. The continuation of our Company is dependent upon our Company attaining and maintaining profitable operations and raising additional capital as needed. The issuance of additional equity securities by us could result in a significant dilution in the equity interests of our current stockholders.
There are no assurances that we will be able to obtain further funds required for our continued operations. As noted herein, we are pursuing various financing alternatives to meet our immediate and long-term financial requirements. There can be no assurance that additional financing will be available to us when needed or, if available, that it can be obtained on commercially reasonable terms. If we are not able to obtain the additional financing on a timely basis, we will be unable to conduct our operations as planned, and we will not be able to meet our other obligations as they become due. In such event, we will be forced to scale down or perhaps even cease our operations.
Results of Operations
The following summary of our results of operations should be read in conjunction with our financial statements for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, which are included herein.
Our operating results for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, and the changes between those periods for the respective items are summarized as follows:
Revenue
Our Company generated $70,395 revenue from digital currency mining for the year ended May 31, 2022 and $1,758 of product revenue for year ended May 31, 2021. The Company commenced the mining of Bitcoin in September 2021. Our Company generated $70,395 in Bitcoin Mining revenue with a gross loss of $126,794 for the year ended May 31, 2022.
Cost of Revenue
The cost of digital currency mining revenue was $197,189 and $0 for the years ended May 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Cost of digital currency mining revenue consists of electricity and other co-location hosting fees, which are remitted in Bitcoin and cash payments for equipment leases and hosting. Cost of revenues for May 31, 2022, was comprised of $26,651 for electricity, $169,965 for equipment leases, $397 in equipment amortization and $176 for mining fees.
Operating Expenses
During the year ended May 31, 2022, we incurred general and administrative expenses of $71,480 compared to $22,434 incurred during the year ended May 31, 2021. The increase in operating expenses were predominantly from professional and other fees related to our reporting requirements and general administrative expenses.
Other Income (Expense)
During the year ended May 31, 2022, we had a gain on change in fair market value of derivatives of $373,925, interest expense of $116,131, loss on disposal of digital currency of $9,793, gain on settlement of debts of $76,027, and impairment loss on digital currency of $5,478. During the year ended May 31, 2021, the Company recognized $1,184,178 gain on change in fair value of derivative liabilities and interest expenses of $20,152.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Working Capital
Cash Flows
As of May 31, 2022, our Company had $13,788 in cash. In management’s opinion, our Company’s cash position is insufficient to maintain our operations at the current level for the next 12 months. Any expansion may cause our Company to require additional capital until such expansion begins generating revenue. It is anticipated that the raising of additional funds will principally be through the sales of our securities.
As of May 31, 2022, our total current liabilities were $970,348 which consisted of $388,687 in notes payable - related parties, $89,164 in accrued interest-related party, $163,615 in derivative liability, $64,198 in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $264,684 in convertible notes as compared to May 31, 2021, with total current liabilities of $1,344,749 which primarily consisted of $537,540 in derivative liability, $361,075 in notes payable-related parties, $76,281 accrued interest-related party, $333,035 in accounts payable and accrued liabilities and $36,818 in convertible notes.
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $216,990 for the year ended May 31, 2022, compared with net cash used in operating activities of $4,112 for the year ended May 31, 2021. For the year ended May 31, 2022, net cash flows used in operating activities was $216,990, consisting of a net income of $120,276, reduced by a gain in change fair value of derivative liability of $373,925, gain on settlement of debts of $76,027, changed in digital currency of $36,736 and prepaid of $9,900, and increased by an increase in amortization of discount on convertible note of $79,366, impairment loss on digital currency of $5,478, realized loss on disposal of digital currency of $9,793, increase in accrued interest-related party of $12,883 and changed in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $51,802. For the year ended May 31, 2021, net cash flows used in operating activities was $4,112, consisting of a net income of $1,142,894, reduced by a gain in change fair value of derivative liability of $1,184,178, and increased by an increase in accrued interest -related party of $12,894 and changes in accounts payable and accrued liabilities of $24,278.
Investing Activities
Our Company purchased $12,337 in digital mining equipment during the year ended May 31, 2022. We did not have any investing activities during the year ended May 31, 2021.
Financing Activities
Net Cash provided by financing activities was $242,500 for the year ended May 31, 2022, compared with net cash provided by financing activities of $4,000 for the year ended May 31, 2021.
During the year ended May 31, 2022, net cash provided by financing activities were $240,500 from issuance of notes payable and $2,000 from related party loan compared with $4,000 from related party loans for the year ended May 31, 2021.
Contractual Obligations
As a “smaller reporting company”, we are not required to provide tabular disclosure obligations.
Going Concern
Our financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business. However, our Company has negative working capital, recurring losses, and does not have an established source of revenues sufficient to cover its operating costs. These factors raise substantial doubt about our Company’s ability to continue as a going concern.
The ability of our Company to continue as a going concern is dependent upon its ability to successfully accomplish the plan described in the preceding paragraph and eventually attain profitable operations. The accompanying financial statements do not include any adjustments that may be necessary if our Company is unable to continue as a going concern.
In the coming year, our Company’s foreseeable cash requirements will relate to continual development of the operations of our business, maintaining our good standing and making the requisite filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the payment of expenses associated with operations and business developments. Our Company may experience a cash shortfall and be required to raise additional capital.
Historically, we have mostly relied upon internally generated funds such as shareholder loans and advances to finance our operations and growth. Management may raise additional capital by retaining net earnings or through future public or private offerings of our Company’s stock or through loans from private investors, although there can be no assurance that we will be able to obtain such financing. Our Company’s failure to do so could have a material and adverse effect upon us and our shareholders.
Our Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations section discusses our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. On an on-going basis, management evaluates its estimates and judgments, including those related to revenue recognition, accrued expenses, financing operations, and contingencies and litigation. Management bases its estimates and judgments on historical experience and on various other factors that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The most significant accounting estimates inherent in the preparation of our financial statements include estimates as to the appropriate carrying value of certain assets and liabilities which are not readily apparent from other sources.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources that is material to stockholders.
Critical Accounting Policies
We have identified the policies below as critical to our business operations and the understanding of our results of operations. The impact on our business operations and any associated risks related to these policies are discussed throughout Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations when such policies affect our reported or expected financial results.
In the ordinary course of business, we have made a number of estimates and assumptions relating to the reporting of results of operations and financial condition in the preparation of our financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (“GAAP”). We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances. The results form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ significantly from those estimates under different assumptions and conditions. We believe that the following discussion addresses our most critical accounting policies, which are those that are most important to the portrayal of our financial condition and results of operations and require our most difficult, subjective, and complex judgments, often as a result of the need to make estimates about the effect of matters that are inherently uncertain.
The material estimates for our Company are that of derivative liabilities and income tax valuation allowance recorded for deferred tax assets. The estimated sensitivity to change is related to the various variables of the Black-Scholes option pricing model stated below. The specific quantitative variables are included in the notes to the consolidated financial statements. The estimated fair value of options is recognized as expense on the straight-line basis over the options’ vesting periods. The fair value of each option granted is estimated on the date of grant using the Black-Scholes option pricing model with the expected life, dividend yield, expected volatility, and risk-free interest rate weighted-average assumptions used for options and warrants granted. Expected volatility for 2022 and 2021 was estimated using our common stock for convertible notes and warrants. The risk-free rate for periods within the contractual life of the option is based on the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the grant date. The expected life of options is based on the life of the instrument on grant date.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amount of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could differ from those estimates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
Our Company has implemented all new accounting pronouncements that are in effect and that may impact its financial statements and does not believe that there are any other new accounting pronouncements that have been issued that might have a material impact on its financial position or results of operations.