Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with the audited financial statements and notes thereto for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020 found in this Annual Report. In addition to historical information, the following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Where possible, we have tried to identify these forward-looking statements by using words such as “may,” “should,” “potential,” “continue,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions. Our actual results could differ materially from those anticipated by the forward-looking statements due to important factors and risks including, but not limited to, those set forth under “Risk Factors” in Part I, Item 1A of this Annual Report.
Company Overview
We are a biopharmaceutical company primarily engaged in the development of immune therapies and vaccines. Our gp96 platform is designed to activate the immune system. This platform has broad applications in cancer and infectious disease. Our platform leverages gp96’s role as a natural molecular warning system that presents antigens to the immune system. HS-110 (viagenpumatucel-L) is our first allogeneic (“off-the-shelf”) cell line biologic product candidate in a series of proprietary immunotherapies designed to stimulate a patient’s T-cells to destroy cancer. HS-130 is an allogeneic cell line engineered to express the extracellular domain of OX40 ligand fusion protein (OX40L-Fc), a key costimulator of T-cells, with the potential to augment antigen-specific CD4+ T-cell and CD8+ T-cell responses. We have initiated development of a new COVID-19 vaccine program under our Zolovax, Inc. subsidiary that utilizes our gp96 platform to secrete SARS-CoV-2 antigens. Our subsidiary Pelican Therapeutics, Inc. (“Pelican”), is developing PTX-35, a novel T-cell co-stimulator agonist antibody targeting DR3/TNFRSF25 for systemic administration.
These programs are designed to harness the body's natural antigen specific immune activation and tolerance mechanisms to reprogram immunity and provide a long-term, durable clinical effect. We have completed the following clinical milestones: patient enrollment completed for our HS-110 Phase 2 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) clinical trial, enrollment and dosing of fifteen patients in our HS-130 Phase 1 clinical trial, and dosing of fifteen patients in our PTX-35 Phase 1a clinical trial.
We are also providing pre-clinical, CMC development, and administrative support for these programs, while constantly focusing on protecting and expanding our intellectual property in areas of strategic interest. As we advance our clinical programs, we are in close contact with our CROs and clinical sites to monitor the impact of COVID-19 on our studies, current timelines, and costs.
In an effort to decrease our dependence upon third party manufacturers and enhance efficiency, we are designing and building a cGMP facility in San Antonio, Texas for bioanalytics, process development and manufacturing activities. We will also offer external customers fee-for-service contracting after completion of the build out.
Our gp96 Platform includes ImPACT® and ComPACT™ which are designed to activate and expand tumor antigen specific “killer” T-cells to destroy a patient’s cancer. By turning immunologically “COLD tumors HOT,” we believe our platform will become an essential component of the immuno-oncology regimen to enhance the effectiveness and durability of checkpoint inhibitors and other cancer therapies, thereby improving outcomes for those patients less likely to benefit from checkpoint inhibitors alone.
We believe this is a highly differentiated approach as our platform delivers a broad range of tumor antigens that are previously unrecognized by the patient’s immune system. Our platform combines these tumor antigens with a powerful, naturally occurring immune adjuvant, gp96, to actively chaperone these antigens. Our gp96 product candidates are non-replicating, “off-the-shelf”, allogenic cell-based therapies that are locally administered into the skin. The treatment is designed to prime local natural immune recognition to activate T-cells to seek and destroy the cancer cells throughout the body. These agents can be administered with a variety of immuno-modulators to enhance a patient’s immune response through T-cell activation.
Unlike many other “patient specific” or autologous immunotherapy approaches, our drugs are fully allogenic, “off-the-shelf” products which means that we can administer drug immediately without the extraction of blood or tumor tissue from each patient or the creation of an individualized treatment based on patient materials. Our gp96 product candidates are produced from allogeneic cell lines expressing tumor-specific proteins common among cancers. Because each patient is dosed with the same medication, we believe that our immunotherapy approach offers superior speed to initiation, logistical, manufacturing and importantly, cost benefits, compared to “personalized” precision medicine approaches.
Our ImPACT® platform is an allogenic cell-based, T-cell-stimulating platform that functions as an immune activator to stimulate and expand T-cells. The key component of this innovative immunotherapy platform is the dual functionality of the heat shock protein, gp96.
As a molecular chaperone, gp96 is typically found within the cell’s endoplasmic reticulum and facilitates the folding of newly synthesized proteins for functionalized tasks. When a cell abnormally dies through necrosis or infection, gp96 is naturally released into the surrounding microenvironment. At this moment, gp96 becomes a Danger Associated Molecular Protein, or “DAMP”, a molecular warning signal for localized innate activation of the immune system. In this context, gp96 serves as a potent adjuvant, or immune stimulator, via Toll-Like Receptor 4/2 (TLR4 and TLR2) signaling which serves to activate antigen presenting cells (APCs), such as dendritic cells that upregulate T-cell costimulatory ligands, major histocompatibility (MHC) molecules and immune activating cytokines. It is among the most powerful adjuvants found in the body and uniquely shows exclusive specificity to CD8+ “killer” T-cells through cross-presentation of the gp96-chaperoned tumor associated peptide antigens directly to MHC class I molecules for direct activation and expansion of CD8+ T-cells. Thus, gp96 plays a critical role in the mechanism of action for our T-cell activating platform immuno-therapies; mimicking necrotic cell death and activating a powerful, tumor antigen-specific T-cell immune response to attack the patient’s cancer cells.
ComPACT™, our second gp96-based program, delivers antigen-driven T-cell activation and specific co-stimulation in a single product by providing specific co-stimulation to enhance T-cell activation and expansion. This approach has the potential to simplify combination immunotherapy development for oncology patients, as it is designed to deliver the gp96 heat shock protein and a T-cell co-stimulatory fusion protein (OX40L) as a single therapeutic, without the need for multiple, independent biologic products. This dual approach has several potential advantages including: (a) enhanced activation of antigen-specific CD8+ T-cells; (b) boosting the number of antigen-specific CD8+ and CD4+ T-cells compared to OX40L alone; (c) stimulation of T-cell memory function to remain effective after treatment, even if the cancer comes back; (d) demonstration of less toxicity, as the source of cancer associated antigens and co-stimulator are supplied at the same time locally in the draining lymph nodes, which drives targeted, cancer specific immunity towards the tumor rather than throughout the body; and (e) simplification of combination cancer immunotherapy versus systemic co-stimulation with conventional monoclonal antibodies (mAbs).
Pelican, our subsidiary, is a biotechnology company focused on developing an agonist mAb, PTX-35, against a T-cell costimulatory receptor, DR3/TNFRSF25. PTX-35 has completed IND-enabling activities in preparation for a first-in-human (FIH) trial for oncology. Pelican has initiated its first clinical trial site for PTX-35 and began dosing patients in the Phase 1 clinical trial. PTX-35 is designed to harness the body's natural antigen specific immune activation and tolerance mechanisms to reprogram immunity and provide a long-term, durable clinical effect. DR3/TNFRSF25 agonism has been shown to provide highly selective and potent stimulation of antigen experienced ‘memory’ CD8+ cytotoxic T-cells, which are the class of long-lived T-cells capable of eliminating tumor cells in patients. Due to the preferential specificity of PTX-35 to antigen experienced CD8+ T-cells, this agent represents a promising candidate as a T-cell co-stimulator in cancer patients.
When combined in preclinical studies with Heat’s gp96 platform immunotherapies and an anti-PD-1 checkpoint inhibitor, PTX-35 has been shown to enhance antigen specific T-cell activation to eliminate tumor cells. Pelican is also developing other biologics that target DR3/TNFRSF25 for various immunotherapy approaches.
We continue to enroll patients in our HS-110 combination immunotherapy trial, preparing for IND submission of HS-130 (ComPACT™), advancing pre-clinical development of Pelican assets in anticipation of an IND submission, providing general and administrative support for these operations and protecting our intellectual property. We currently do not have any products approved for sale and we have not generated any significant revenue since our inception and no revenue from product sales. We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and to incur increasing operating losses for at least the next several years. We anticipate that our expenses will increase substantially as we:
● complete the ongoing clinical trials of our product candidates;
● maintain, expand and protect our intellectual property portfolio;
● seek to obtain regulatory approvals for our product candidates;
● continue our research and development efforts;
● add operational, financial and management information systems and personnel, including personnel to support our product development and commercialization efforts; and
● operate as a public company.
Recent Developments
On December 20, 2021, we entered into the Merger Agreement with Merger Sub, Elusys and Fortis Advisors LLC, pursuant to which, subject to certain conditions, we will acquire Elusys through the Merger of Merger Sub with Elusys. The acquisition of Elusys has not been completed and is subject to several conditions. See “Potential Elusys Acquisition” below for additional information regarding the Merger Agreement.
Funding/Liquidity
We commenced active operations in June 2008. Our operations to date have been primarily limited to organizing and staffing our company, business planning, raising capital, acquiring and developing our technology, identifying potential product candidates and undertaking preclinical and clinical studies of our most advanced product candidates. To date, we have primarily financed our operations with net proceeds from the sale of our securities including, our July 2013 initial public offering in which we received net proceeds of $24.3 million, our March 2015 public offering in which we received net proceeds of $11.1 million, our March 2016 public offering in which we received net proceeds of $6.1 million, an additional $3.9 million from the exercise of warrants, our March 2017 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $4.1 million, our November 2017 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $2.4 million, our May 2018 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $18.8 million and an additional $4.8 million from the exercise of warrants, our November 2018 public offering in which we received net proceeds of approximately $12.7 million and our January 21, 2020 public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in which we received net proceeds of approximately $6.4 million. As of December 31, 2021, we have received $13.7 million in grant funding from the CPRIT Grant through Pelican. We have also raised an aggregate of $140.1 million through at-the-market offerings, including $25.6 million during the year ended December 31, 2021. Cash and cash equivalents at March 9, 2022 were approximately $86.8 million. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of $165.7 million. We had net losses of $35.4 million and $26.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
We expect to continue to incur significant expenses and continued losses from operations for the foreseeable future and we do not anticipate to generate revenue from any product sales for several years, including Anthim upon consummation of the pending acquisition of Elusys, which will take several years to conduct full scale manufacturing for commercial sale and obtain required regulatory approvals and anticipate only generating minimal revenue from our manufacturing facility in the next few years until the facility is fully operational and we develop a customer base. We expect our expenses to increase in connection with our ongoing activities, particularly as we continue the research and development and advance our clinical trials of, and seek marketing approval for, our product candidates and as we add to our product candidate pipeline and continue construction of the cGMP manufacturing facility in San Antonio, Texas and related equipment expenses. Furthermore, we anticipate increased costs associated with the manufacture of Anthim, upon completion of the pending Elusys acquisition, and the increase in headcount upon completion of the pending acquisition of Elusys. In addition, if we expand our operations we will incur additional expenses which could be significant. Furthermore, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution. As currently planned, we expect to have sufficient funds to fund our operations into 2024. We will need to obtain substantial additional future funding in connection with our future planned clinical trials, the manufacturing facility that we are building out in San Antonio, Texas, full scale manufacturing of Anthim upon completion of the pending Elusys acquisition, and any new opportunities we may pursue. We also expect our general and administrative expenses to increase upon the consummation of our planned acquisition of Elusys due to increased headcount and cash consideration and other expenses set forth in the Merger Agreement that we have agreed to pay. Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. To meet our capital needs, we are considering multiple alternatives, including, but not limited to, additional equity financings, which include sales of our common stock under at-the-market offerings, if available, debt financings, partnerships, collaborations and other funding transactions. This is based on our current estimates, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND SIGNIFICANT JUDGMENTS AND ESTIMATES
We believe that several accounting policies are important to understanding our historical and future performance. We refer to these policies as "critical" because these specific areas generally require us to make judgments and estimates about matters that are uncertain at the time we make the estimate, and different estimates-which also would have been reasonable-could have been used, which would have resulted in different financial results.
Our management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations is based on our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP. The preparation of our consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue and expenses and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. On an ongoing basis, we evaluate our estimates based on historical experience and make various assumptions, which management believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, which form the basis for judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions.
The notes to our audited consolidated financial statements contain a summary of our significant accounting policies. We consider the following accounting policies critical to the understanding of the results of our operations:
● Revenue;
● Deferred revenue;
● In-process R&D;
● Goodwill impairment;
● Income tax;
● Contingent consideration;
● Stock-based compensation;
● Derivative financial instruments;
● Research and development costs, including clinical and regulatory cost; and
● Recent accounting pronouncements.
Grants Receivable and Revenue
Our 2021 and 2020 revenue primarily consisted of research funding from our CPRIT Grant. Grant revenue is recognized when qualifying costs are incurred and there is reasonable assurance that the conditions of the award have been met for collection. Proceeds received prior to the costs being incurred or the conditions of the award being met are recognized as deferred revenue until the services are performed and the conditions of the award are met. When grant funds are received after costs have been incurred, the Company records revenue and a corresponding grants receivable until grant funds are received.
In-process R&D
In-process research and development (“IPR&D”) assets represent the fair value assigned to technologies that were acquired, which at the time of acquisition have not reached technological feasibility and have no alternative future use. IPR&D assets are considered to be indefinite-lived until the completion or abandonment of the associated research and development projects. During the period that the IPR&D assets are considered indefinite-lived, they are tested for impairment on an annual basis, or more frequently if the Company becomes aware of any events occurring or changes in circumstances that indicate that the fair value of the IPR&D assets are less than their carrying amounts. If and when development is complete, which generally occurs upon regulatory approval, and the Company is able to commercialize products associated with the IPR&D assets, these assets are then deemed definite-lived and are amortized based on their estimated useful lives at that point in time. If development is terminated or abandoned, the Company may have a full or partial impairment charge related to the IPR&D assets, calculated as the excess of carrying value of the IPR&D assets over fair value. See Note 7 regarding impairment at December 31, 2021. The IPR&D assets were acquired on April 28, 2017 when we acquired Pelican.
Goodwill and In-Process R&D Impairment
Goodwill and in process R&D may result from our business acquisitions. In-process research and development is considered an indefinite-lived intangible asset and is not subject to amortization until the associated projects are completed or terminated. Indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested for impairment annually, when events or changes in circumstances indicate the asset may be impaired, or when their useful lives are determined to be no longer indefinite.
We test goodwill and in-process R&D for impairment each year as of April 1, or more frequently should a significant impairment indicator occur. As part of the impairment test, we may elect to perform an assessment of qualitative factors. If this qualitative assessment indicates that it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit, including goodwill, is less than its carrying amount, or if we elect to bypass the qualitative assessment, we would then proceed with the impairment test. The impairment test involves comparing the fair values of the reporting units to their carrying amounts. If the carrying amount of a reporting unit exceeds its fair value, we recognize a goodwill loss in an amount equal to any excess.
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. We forecast discounted future cash flows at the reporting unit level using risk-adjusted discount rates and estimated future revenues, launch costs and operating costs, which take into consideration expectations of competitive, business, and economic environments. We also identify similar publicly traded companies and develop a correlation, referred to as a multiple, to apply to the operating results of the reporting units. These combined fair values are then reconciled to the aggregate market value of our common stock on the date of valuation, while considering a reasonable control premium.
Determining the fair value of IPR&D is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. We forecast discounted future cash flows risk-adjusted discount rates and estimated future revenues, launch costs and operating costs, which take into consideration expectations of competitive, business, and economic environments. The fair value is then compared to the carrying value and if the carrying value exceeds fair value an impairment charge is recognized.
Changes in market demand, fluctuations in the markets in which we operate, the volatility and decline in the worldwide equity markets, and a decline in our market capitalization could unfavorably impact the remaining carrying value of our goodwill and in process R&D, which could have a significant effect on our current and future results of operations and financial position.
Income Tax
Income taxes are accounted for using the asset and liability method. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the future tax consequences attributable to temporary differences between the carrying amounts of assets and liabilities and their respective tax bases, operating loss carryforwards, and tax credit carryforwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using enacted tax rates expected to apply to taxable income in the years in which those temporary differences are expected to be recovered or settled. The effect on deferred tax assets and liabilities of a change in tax rates is recognized in income in the period that includes the enactment date.
In accordance with FASB ASC 740, Accounting for Income Taxes, we reflect in the financial statements the benefit of positions taken in a previously filed tax return or expected to be taken in a future tax return only when it is considered ‘more-likely-than-not’ that the position taken will be sustained by a taxing authority. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no unrecognized income tax benefits and correspondingly there is no impact on our effective income tax rate associated with these items. Our policy for recording interest and penalties relating to uncertain income tax positions is to record them as a component of income tax expense in the accompanying consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had no such accruals.
Contingent Consideration
Contingent consideration is recorded as a liability and is the estimate of the fair value of potential milestone payments related to business acquisitions. Contingent consideration is measured at fair value using a probability-weighted income approach utilizing significant unobservable inputs including the probability of achieving each of the potential milestones and an estimated discount rate associated with the risks of the expected cash flows attributable to the various milestones. Significant increases or decreases in any of the probabilities of success or changes in expected timelines for achievement of any of these milestones would result in a significantly higher or lower fair value of these milestones, respectively, and commensurate changes to the associated liability. The contingent consideration is revalued at each reporting period and changes in fair value are recognized in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss.
Stock-Based Compensation
Calculating stock-based compensation expense requires the input of highly subjective assumptions. The fair value of restricted stock units is estimated based on the closing price of our stock on the date of grant, and for the purposes of expense recognition, the total new number of shares expected to vest is adjusted for as they occur. We apply the Black-Scholes-Merton option pricing model to determine the fair value of our stock options awards. Inherent in this model are assumptions related to expected stock-price volatility, expected option life, risk-free interest rate and dividend yield. We use an average historical stock price volatility of our own data plus an analysis of reported data for a peer group of comparable companies that have issued stock options with substantially similar terms. We estimate the expected life of our options using the simplified method. The risk-free interest rate is based on the U.S. Treasury zero-coupon yield curve on the grant date for a maturity similar to the expected life of the options. The dividend rate is based on our historical rate, which we anticipate remaining at zero. We account for forfeitures as they occur. The assumptions used in calculating the fair value of stock options represent our best estimates, however these estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management judgment. As a result, if factors change and different assumptions are used, the stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future.
Derivative Financial Instruments
We issued common stock warrants in connection with the execution of certain equity financings. The fair value of the warrants, which were deemed to be derivative instruments, was recorded as a derivative liability under the provisions of ASC Topic 815 Derivatives and Hedging (“ASC 815”) because they are not considered indexed to the Company’s own stock. Subsequently, the liability is adjusted to fair value as of the end of each reporting period and the changes in fair value of derivative liabilities are recorded in the consolidated statements of operations and comprehensive loss under the caption “Change in fair value of warrant liability.” See Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements for additional information.
Research and Development Costs
We expense research and development costs associated with developmental products not yet approved by the FDA as well as costs associated with bringing our developmental products into advanced phase clinical trials as incurred. These costs consist primarily of pre-manufacturing and manufacturing drug costs, clinical trial execution, investigator payments, license fees, salaries, stock-based compensation, in-process R&D impairment, and related personnel costs. Other costs include fees paid to consultants and outside service providers related to the development of our product candidates, and other expenses relating to the design, development, and testing and enhancement of our product candidates.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
In June 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-13, Financial Instruments - Credit Losses which requires financial assets measured at amortized cost basis to be presented at the net amount expected to be collected. This standard is effective for fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2022 and we are currently evaluating the expected impact of this standard but do not expect it to have a material impact on its consolidated financial statements upon adoption.
In August 2020, the FASB issued ASU No. 2020-06, Debt-Debt with Conversion and Other Options (Subtopic 470-20) and Derivatives and Hedging-Contracts in Entity’s Own Equity (Subtopic 815-40): Accounting for Convertible Instruments and Contracts in an Entity’s Own Equity. This ASU simplifies the accounting for convertible instruments. This ASU also requires entities to use the if-converted method for all convertible instruments in calculating diluted earnings-per-share. The ASU is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2021 with early adoption permitted. We are currently evaluating the impact this standard will have on our consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Year Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
Revenues
The CPRIT Grant is subject to customary CPRIT funding conditions including a matching funds requirement where Pelican will match $0.50 for every $1.00 from CPRIT. Consequently, Pelican was required to raise $7.6 million in matching funds over the life of the project.
As of December 31, 2021, CPRIT has provided $13.7 million of the total $15.2 million grant. The remaining $1.5 million will become available on a reimbursement basis, rather than in advance of expending the funds as in prior grant years. As of December 31, 2021, we have provided Pelican with approximately $7.6 million which was used to satisfy Pelican’s matching fund obligation under the first four years of the CPRIT Grant.
Upon commercialization of the product, the terms of the Grant Contract require Pelican to pay tiered royalties in the low to mid-single digit percentages. Such royalties reduce to less than one percent after a mid-single-digit multiple of the grant funds have been paid to CPRIT in royalties.
We recognized grant revenue of $2.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 for qualified expenditures under the grant. We recognized $2.8 million grant revenue related to CPRIT during the year ended December 31, 2020. As of December 31, 2021, we have a remaining $1.5 million to be awarded, on a reimbursement basis, after the Company has fulfilled every requirement of the grant and the grant has been approved to be finalized. Funds received are reflected in deferred revenue as a liability until revenue is earned. When grant funds are received after costs have been incurred, the Company records revenue and a corresponding grants receivable. Grant revenue is recognized when qualifying costs are incurred.
Operating Expenses
Total operating expenses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, were $37.5 million and $29.1 million, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2021 operating expenses are primarily comprised of research and development, general and administrative expenses, goodwill impairment loss, and a change in the fair value of contingent consideration related to Pelican. Research and development expenses were $18.8 million, general and administrative expenses were $16.8 million, goodwill impairment loss was $1.5 million, and the change in fair value of contingent consideration was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 as compared to research and development expenses of $12.9 million, general and administrative expenses of $14.9 million, and the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. For the year ended December 31, 2021, research and development expenses represented approximately 50% of operating expenses, general and administrative expenses represented approximately 45%, goodwill impairment loss represented approximately 4%, and change in fair value of contingent consideration 1% of operating expenses. For the year ended December 31, 2020, research and development expenses represented approximately 45% of operating expenses, general and administrative expenses represented approximately 51%, and change in fair value of contingent consideration 4% of operating expenses.
Research and development expense
Research and development expenses increased to $18.8 million from $12.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. The components of R&D expense are as follows, in millions:
● HS-110 increased by $0.4 million, reflecting the current period mix of development activities, primarily due to increased costs associated with the transition of patients from active treatment into long-term follow-up, and increased manufacturing costs.
● HS-130 expense increased by $0.1 million due to the completion of enrollment of patients, third-party regulatory consulting, and investigator site payments for the ongoing Phase 1 clinical trial.
● PTX-35 expense increased by $0.9 million, primarily consisting of manufacturing development and patient dosing.
● COVID-19 program increased by $1.3 million, which primarily represents an increase in sponsored research agreement costs and manufacturing costs.
● RapidVax was initiated in Q4 2021 and primarily consists of consulting costs.
● Other programs expenses decreased by $0.4 million and include preclinical costs associated with our Zika program, T-cell costimulatory programs, and laboratory supplies.
● In-process R&D had a $2.4 million impairment loss recorded in 2021.
● Unallocated research expenses increased by $1.1 million primarily from increased clinical and CMC consulting expenses and Skunkworx lab and personnel costs.
General and administrative expense
General and administrative expense increased approximately 13% to $16.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $14.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase of $1.9 million is primarily due to the increase in salaries, D&O insurance expense, and legal fees.
Change in fair value of contingent consideration
We reassess the actual consideration earned and the probability-weighted future earn-out payments at each balance sheet date. The change in the fair value of contingent consideration was $0.4 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $1.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease in fair value for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the payment of the first milestone to the Pelican stockholders in 2020 and fewer adjustments to the probability of achieving milestones and holding timelines constant.
Goodwill impairment loss
During the year ended December 31, 2021, we experienced a sustained decline in the quoted market price of our common stock and as a result we determined that it was more likely than not that the carrying value of goodwill exceeded its estimated fair value. Accordingly, we performed an impairment analysis using the income approach. This analysis required significant judgments, including primarily the estimation of future development costs, the probability of success in various phases of its development programs, potential post-launch cash flows and a risk-adjusted weighted average cost of capital. As a result, we recorded a goodwill impairment loss of $1.5 million on the goodwill during the year ended December 31, 2021. No impairment was recorded during the year ended December 31, 2020.
Change in fair value of warrant liability
During the year ended December 31, 2020, we issued common stock warrants in connection with the execution of certain equity financings. The fair value of the warrants, which were deemed to be derivative instruments, were recorded as a derivative liability and was adjusted to fair value at the end of the reporting period resulting in $1.0 million of warrant expense. The adjustment to the fair value of the derivative liability for the year ended December 31, 2021 was de minimis.
Interest Income
Interest income was $0.8 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $0.6 million for the year ended December 31, 2020. The increase is due to the investment in various short-term financial instruments that generated interest income during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other (expense) income, net
Other income (expense), net was $1.0 million expense for the year ended December 31, 2021, compared to $0.3 million income for the year ended December 31, 2020. This change was primarily due to unrealized losses associated with our short-term investments.
Income tax benefit (expense)
Income tax benefit of $0.1 million for the year ended December 31, 2021 related to the ASC 350 impairment charge against our IPR&D asset. Since that is an indefinite-lived intangible asset, we recognized a net deferred tax liability of $0.2 million due to the asset value decreasing.
Net loss attributable to Heat Biologics, Inc.
We had a net loss attributable to Heat Biologics, Inc. of $35.1 million, or ($1.41) per basic and diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to a net loss attributable to Heat Biologics, Inc. of $26.0 million, or ($1.63) per basic and diluted share for the year ended December 31, 2020.
BALANCE SHEET AS OF DECEMBER 31, 2021 AND 2020
Short-term Investments. Short-term investments were $88.3 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to $100.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The decrease is primarily due the sale of investments and transferring the cash to fund clinical trials and other operations.
Prepaid Expenses and Other Current Assets. Prepaid expenses and other current assets was approximately $2.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and $1.8 million as of December 31, 2020. The $1.1 million increase was primarily attributable to our upfront payments to certain vendors for our clinical trials related to PTX-35.
Property, Plant & Equipment. PP&E was approximately $2.2 million as of December 31, 2021, and $0.7 million as of December 31, 2020. The increase is attributed to a $1.5 million increase in lab equipment purchased for Heat and Skunkworx.
Grants Receivable. We had grants receivable of $1.3 million as of December 31, 2021 compared to no grants receivable as of December 31, 2020. The CPRIT grant will award the remaining grant funds, on a reimbursement basis, after Heat has fulfilled every requirement of the grant and the grant has been approved to be finalized. The receivable relates to reimbursable costs incurred related to PTX-35.
Other assets. Other assets was approximately $12.2 million and $0 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The $12.2 million increase is directly attributable to equipment purchases in 2021 for Scorpion’s new facility in San Antonio, Texas, which is expected to commence operations in the second quarter of 2022.
In-Process R&D. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had in-process R&D of $3.5 million and $5.9 million from our acquisition of Pelican, respectively. The carrying value of this asset decreased by $2.4 million due to an in-process R&D impairment charge for the year ended December 31, 2021.
Goodwill. As of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, we had goodwill of $0.0 million and $1.5 million, respectively, from our acquisition of Pelican. The carrying value of this asset decreased by $1.5 million due to a full impairment charge for the excess of the reporting unit’s carrying value over its fair value in 2021.
Accounts Payable. Accounts payable was approximately $0.9 million and $1.1 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Accounts payable remaining steady with only a $0.2 million decrease is due to payables for investigator site payments for our clinical trials remained steady.
Deferred Revenue. We had short term deferred revenue of $0 and $0.6 million as of December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. This short term deferred revenue represents proceeds received for the CPRIT grant but for which the costs had not been incurred or the conditions of the award had not been met. We had long term deferred revenue of $35,000 and $0.2 million as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The decrease of $0.2 million was due to recognition of grant revenue from termination of a City of San Antonio economic development grant agreement for Pelican.
Accrued Expenses and Other Liabilities. Accrued expenses were approximately $2.4 million at December 31, 2021 compared to $1.6 million at December 31, 2020. The increase is primarily due to higher clinical expense accruals.
Operating and financing lease liabilities. Current and long term liabilities related to operating and finance leases was $1.9 million as of December 31, 2021 and $1.8 million as of December 31, 2020. These balances are related to our office lease and equipment leases.
Deferred Tax Liability. Deferred tax liability was approximately $0.2 million and $0.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, respectively. The decrease is a result of the ASC 350 impairment charge against our IPR&D asset.
Contingent Consideration. As of December 31, 2021, we had contingent consideration of $3.3 million compared to $2.9 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 related to our acquisition of Pelican which is recorded on our consolidated balance sheets. This amount represents the fair value of future milestone payments to Pelican shareholders which were discounted in accordance with ASC 805. We perform an analysis on a quarterly basis and for the year ended December 31, 2021, we determined the change in the estimated fair value of the contingent consideration to be approximately $0.4 million due to the effect of the change in discount rate, probability of achieving milestones, and passage of time on the fair value measurement.
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES
Current and Future Financing Needs
Since our inception in June 2008, we have incurred significant losses and we have financed our operations with net proceeds from the private placement of our preferred stock, common stock and debt. Since our initial public offering, we have primarily financed our operations with net proceeds from the public offering of our securities and to a lesser extent,
the proceeds from the exercise of warrants. During May 2018, we closed a public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in which we received net proceeds of approximately $18.8 million and after the closing of the offering, an additional $4.8 million from the exercise of 436,381 warrants issued in this offering. During November 2018, we closed a public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock in which we received net proceeds of approximately $12.7 million. For the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2019, we received net proceeds of approximately $3.8 million from sales of our common stock in at-the-market offerings. On January 21, 2020, we closed an underwritten public offering of shares of our common stock and warrants to purchase shares of our common stock pursuant to which we received net proceeds of approximately $6.4 million. For the year ended December 31, 2021, we received net proceeds of $25.6 million from the sale of 2,106,027 shares of our common stock in at-the-market offerings. As of December 31, 2021, we had an accumulated deficit of approximately $165.7 million. We had net losses of $35.4 million and $26.4 million for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
In order to promote efficiency and reduce our reliance on third-party vendors, we plan to enhance our in-house development of bioanalytic, process development and manufacturing capabilities and offer such services to third parties for fees. We have entered into a lease for a 20,144 square foot facility in San Antonio, TX to conduct such services and
are currently building the facility. Our proposed expansion in Texas is part of a company-wide-growth strategy to enhance efficiency and decrease our dependence on third-party vendors as we advance our clinical trials and general research and development. The future forecasted investment to build out the facility with labs, equipment, and staff will be approximately $23.5 million, without taking into account federal new market tax credits based on the location in San Antonio, federal and state historical tax credits based on the historical designation of the facility, as well as city and county tax abatement incentives with the City of San Antonio and Bexar County. Scorpion reimbursements to Merchants Ice, who is purchasing the equipment for the CDMO facility, has paid $12.2 million for equipment through the fourth quarter of 2021 and approximately $7.5 million is expected to be spent in the first quarter of 2022 is included in the $23.5 million. We intend to fund this initiative with current working capital. The potential value of tax credits and tax incentives to Scorpion are estimated to be up to approximately $4.5 million based on the total cost of the build out, employees hired, real property, and other factors. Operations at the facility are projected to commence by second quarter of 2022, and we expect to fill production capacity by transitioning our outsourced manufacturing and development to in-house immediately and followed by contracting with external customers. However, there can be no assurance that we will be successful in these new operations. As of February 28, 2022 we have spent $15.8 million on laboratory related manufacturing equipment for the San Antonio facility. We intend to meet our financing needs through multiple alternatives, including, but not limited to, cash on hand, additional equity financings, debt financings and/or funding from partnerships or collaborations and potential revenue, if any, from our planned development and manufacturing facility.
Furthermore, upon consummation of our pending acquisition of Elusys, we anticipate increased costs associated with the manufacture of Anthim and the increase in headcount due to the acquisition of Elusys. Pursuant to the terms of the Merger Agreement we agreed to cash consideration at Closing of $3 million plus additional expenses of $1.6 million that we were obligated to pay and are obligated to pay an additional $2 million, subject to adjustment upon attainment of certain milestones.
In addition, if we obtain marketing approval for any of our product candidates, we expect to incur significant commercialization expenses related to product sales, marketing, manufacturing, and distribution. Although we currently have sufficient funds to complete our Phase 2 clinical trials, as currently planned, and expect that we will have sufficient funds to fund our operations into 2024, we will need to obtain substantial additional future funding in connection with our future planned clinical trials, manufacture of Anthim, upon consummation of our pending acquisition of Elusys, and our manufacturing facility construction and set up.
However, the actual amount of funds we will need to operate is subject to many factors, some of which are beyond our control. These factors include the following:
● the progress of our research activities;
● the number and scope of our research programs;
● the progress of our preclinical and clinical development activities;
● the progress of the development efforts of parties with whom we have entered into research and development agreements;
● our expansion plans and cash needs of any new projects;
● our ability to maintain current research and development licensing arrangements and to establish new research and development and licensing arrangements;
● our ability to achieve our milestones under licensing arrangements;
● the costs involved in prosecuting and enforcing patent claims and other intellectual property rights;
● the costs and timing of regulatory approvals;
● the receipt of grant funding if any;
● clinical laboratory development and testing;
● manufacturing facility construction costs and equipment costs; and
● manufacturing costs of Anthim upon consummation of the pending acquisition of Elusys.
We have based our estimate on assumptions that may prove to be wrong. We may need to obtain additional funds sooner or in greater amounts than we currently anticipate. Potential sources of financing include strategic relationships, public or private sales of our equity or debt and other sources. We may seek to access the public or private equity markets when conditions are favorable due to our long-term capital requirements. We do not have any committed sources of financing at this time, and it is uncertain whether additional funding will be available when we need it on terms that will be acceptable to us, or at all. If we raise funds by selling additional shares of common stock, such as through the Amended and Restated Common Stock Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., or other securities convertible into common stock, the ownership interest of our existing stockholders will be diluted. If we are not able to obtain financing when needed, we may be unable to carry out our business plan. As a result, we may have to significantly limit our operations and our business, financial condition and results of operations would be materially harmed. While we are experiencing limited financial impacts at this time, given the global economic slowdown, the overall disruption of global healthcare systems and the other risks and uncertainties associated with the pandemic, our business, financial condition, results of operations and growth prospects could be materially adversely affected.
Adequate additional financing may not be available to us on acceptable terms, or at all. If we are unable to raise capital when needed or on attractive terms, we would be forced to delay, reduce or eliminate our research and development programs or any future commercialization efforts. To meet our capital needs, we are considering multiple alternatives, including, but not limited to, additional equity financings, which include sales of our common stock under at-the-market offerings, if available, debt financings, partnerships, collaborations and other funding transactions. This is based on our current estimates, and we could use our available capital resources sooner than we currently expect. We will need to generate significant revenues to achieve profitability, and we may never do so. As of December 31, 2021, we had approximately $96.4 million in cash and cash equivalents and short-term investments.
Cash Flows
Operating activities. The use of cash in both periods resulted primarily from our net losses adjusted for non-cash charges and changes in components of working capital. Net cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31 2021 was $38.1 million compared to $22.0 million during the same period in 2020. The increase was primarily due to an increased net loss of $9.0 million, a decrease in the change in fair value of common stock warrants of $1.0 million, a decrease in the change in fair value of contingent consideration of $0.8 million, an increase in other assets of 12.2 million.
Investing activities. Net cash provided by investing activities was $9.8 million during year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $95.4 million used during the same period in 2020. The increase is from the change in net purchases of short-term investment purchases and sales of $106.8 million from 2021 to 2020.
Financing activities. Net cash provided by financing activities was $25.5 million during the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to $119.3 million during the year ended December 31, 2020. The decrease of $93.8 million was primarily due to a $91.1 million net decrease of sales of our common stock through an at-the-market Common Stock Sales Agreement with B. Riley FBR, Inc. and Cantor Fitzgerald & Co., net of the decrease in related stock issuance costs of $2.4 million, partially offset by a public offering of shares that occurred in 2020 of $6.6 million.
On April 23, 2020, Heat and Pelican received loan proceeds of $0.7 million from Regions Bank, N.A, pursuant to the Paycheck Protection Program, or the PPP Loan, under the CARES Act, administered by the U.S. Small Business Administration. On April 28, 2020, we returned all $0.7 million in proceeds from the PPP Loan in order to make those funds available to other borrowers that may be in greater need.
OFF-BALANCE SHEET ARRANGEMENTS
We did not have during the periods presented, and we do not currently have, any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined under SEC rules.
Additional In-Licensed Programs
We may enter into additional license agreements relating to new product candidates.