ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATION
This report contains certain forward-looking statements and information relating to us that are based on the beliefs and assumptions made by our management as well as information currently available to the management. When used in this document, the words “anticipate,” “believe,” “estimate,” “expect,” and similar expressions are intended to identify forward-looking statements. Such statements reflect our current views with respect to future events and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties, and assumptions. If one or more of these risks or uncertainties materialize, or if underlying assumptions prove incorrect, actual results may vary materially from those described herein as anticipated, believed, estimated, or expected.
General
Video River Networks, Inc. (“NIHK,” “PubCo” or “Company”), previously known as Nighthawk Systems Inc., a Nevada corporation, used to be a provider of wireless and IP-based control solutions for the utility and hospitality industries. On October 29, 2019, Video River Networks, Inc. sold one (1) Special 2019 series A preferred share (one preferred share is convertible 150,000,000 share of common stocks) of the company for an agreed upon purchase price to Community Economic Development Capital LLC, (“CED Capital”) a California limited liability company CED. The Special preferred share controls 60% of the company’s total voting rights and thus, gave to CED Capital the controlling vote power to control and dominate the affairs of the company theretofor. Upon the closing of the transaction, the business of CED Capital was merged into the Company and CED Capital became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company.
Following the completion of above mentioned transactions, the Company added real estate operations to its business model and started devoting capital to real estate holding operations for specialized assets including, affordable housing, opportunity zones properties, medical real estate investments, industrial and commercial real estate, and other real estate related services.
On June 10, 2020, the Company filed Form 10-12g, General Form for Registration of Securities, which became effective on August 10, 2020, and as a result, the Company is required to file all required SEC forms since August 10, 2020.
Environmental, Social and Governance (“ESG”)
We endeavor to provide a richly diverse work environment that employs the highest performers, cultivates the best ideas and creates the widest possible platform for success. We are committed to elevating and supporting the core values of diversity and inclusion, “Total Well-Being” (which brings together physical, financial, career, social and community well-being into a cohesive whole), and environmental, social and governance (“ESG”), which includes sustainability and social responsibility, by actively engaging in these areas. Each member of the executive team maintains an annual goal related to these core values, which is evaluated by the Company’s Board of Trustees. Our goal is to create and sustain an inclusive environment where diversity will thrive, employees will want to work and tenants will want. We are committed to providing our employees with encouragement, guidance, time and resources to learn and apply the skills required to succeed in their jobs. We provide many classroom and on-line training courses to assist our employees in interacting with prospects and tenants as well as extensive training for our customer service specialists in maintaining our properties and improvements, equipment and appliances. We actively promote from within and many senior corporate and property leaders have risen from entry level or junior positions. We monitor our employees’ engagement by surveying them annually and find most employees say they are proud to work at the Company, value one another as colleagues, believe in our mission and values and feel their skills meet their job requirements.
We have a commitment to sustainability and consider the environmental impacts of our business activities. Sustainability and social responsibility are key drivers of our focus on creating the best properties for tenants operate, work and play. We have a dedicated in-house team that initiates and applies sustainable practices in all aspects of our business, including investment activities, development, property operations and property management activities. With its high density, multifamily housing is, by its nature, an environmentally friendly property type. Our recent acquisition and development activities have been primarily concentrated in pedestrian-friendly urban and close-in suburban locations near public transportation. When developing and renovating our properties, we strive to reduce energy and water consumption by investing in energy saving technology while positively impacting the experience of our tenants and the value of our assets. We continue to implement a combination of irrigation, lighting, HVAC and renewable energy improvements at our properties that will reduce energy and water consumption. For 2020, we continue to have an express company-wide goal for Total Well-Being, which includes enhanced ESG efforts. Employees, including our executives, will have their performance against our various Total Well - Being goals evaluated as part of our annual performance review process.
On September 15, 2020, the Company spun-off its specialty real estate holding business to an operating subsidiary and then pivot back to being a technology company.
Subsequent to the above spinoff, the Company has now returned back to its original technology-focused businesses of Power Controls, Battery Technology, Wireless Technology, and Residential utility meters and remote, mission-critical devices in addition to a primary focus of building a portfolio businesses and assets and operations that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute affordable, high-performance fully electric vehicles in North America.
On April 21, 2021, Cannabinoid Biosciences, Inc. (“CBDX”), a California corporation, was sold to Premier Information Management, Inc. for $1 in cash. As further consideration pursuant to the stated sales, CBDX returned Kid Castle Educational Inc., the parent Company of GMPW, the 100,000 shares of KDCE preferred stock and 900,000,000 shares of KDCE common stock that CBDX bought in October of 2019. Pursuant to the April 21, 2021 transaction, CBDX ceased from being a subsidiary of GMPW, effective April 1, 2021.
On December 30, 2021, in exchange for the 87% control block held by Kid Castle Educational Corporation, a subsidiary of Video River Networks, Inc. both of which are publicly traded companies with ticker symbols KDCE and NIHK respectively, GiveMePower sold Alpharidge Capital LLC to KDCE.
Going forward, the Company intends to focus its business model to operate and manage a portfolio of Electric Vehicles, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotics (“EV-AI-ML-R”) assets, businesses and operations in addition to its Power Controls, Battery Technology, Wireless Technology, and Residential utility meters and remote, mission-critical devices businesses in North America.
Basis of Presentation
The following discussion and analysis are based on Video River Networks’ financial statements contained in this Current Report, which we have prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles. Accompanying financial statements for Alpharidge Capital LLC fiscal year 2021 include a summary of our significant accounting policies and should be read in conjunction with the discussion below. In the opinion of management, all material adjustments necessary to present fairly the results of operations for such periods have been included in these audited financial statements. All such adjustments are of a normal recurring nature.
Principles of Consolidation
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of the Company and its subsidiaries, in which the Company has a controlling voting interest and entities consolidated under the variable interest entities (“VIE”) provisions of ASC 810, “Consolidation” (“ASC 810”). Inter-company balances and transactions have been eliminated upon consolidation.
ASC 810 requires that the investor with the controlling financial interest should consolidate the investee/affiliate. ASC 810-10 requires that an equity interest investor consolidates a VIE when it retains an investment in the entity, is considered a variable interest investor in the entity, and is the primary beneficiary of the entity. An investor in a VIE is a “variable interest beneficiary” when, per an arrangement’s governing documents, the investor will absorb a portion of the VIE’s expected losses or will receive a portion of the entity’s “residual returns.” The variable interest beneficiary retaining a controlling financial interest in the VIE is designated as its “primary beneficiary” and must consolidate the VIE. A variable interest beneficiary retains a “controlling financial interest” in a VIE when that beneficiary retains the power to direct the activities of the VIE that have the greatest influence over the VIE’s economic performance and retains an obligation to absorb the VIE’s significant losses or the right to receive benefits from the VIE that could potentially be significant to the VIE. Based on the ASC 810 test above, Video River Network, Inc. is the primary beneficiary of Kid Castle Educational Corporation (“VIE-2”), Kid Castle Educational Corporation is the primary beneficiary of GiveMePower Corporation (the “VIE-1”) because Video River retained a controlling financial interest in the VIE-2 and has the power to direct the activities of the VIE-2, having the greatest influence over the VIE-2’s economic performance and retains an obligation to absorb the VIE-2’s significant losses and the right to determine and receive benefits from the VIE-2. Similarly, Kid Castle Educational Corporation is the primary beneficiary of GiveMePower Corporation (the “VIE-1”). Kid Castle retained a controlling financial interest in the VIE-1 and has the power to direct the activities of the VIE-1, having the greatest influence over the VIE-1’s economic performance and retains an obligation to absorb the VIE-1’s significant losses and the right to determine and receive benefits from the VIE-1.
Because GiveMePower Corporation is 88% controlled by Kid Castle Educational Corporation, the consolidation rule requires that the Revenue, Assets and Liabilities recognized and disclosed on the financial statements of GiveMePower Corporation are also recognized and disclosed on the financial statements of Kid Castle Educational Corporation pursuant to ASC 810.
Overview
General - Electric Vehicles (EV) Business
The Company’s Electric Vehicles (EV) business model is a newly created business model created in the 3rd quarter of 2020, for the purpose of effecting a merger, capital stock exchange, asset acquisition, stock purchase, reorganization or similar Business acquisition with one or more EV manufacturers and related businesses, which we refer to throughout this prospectus as our EV Business acquisition plan. We have not selected any specific EV Business acquisition target and we have not, nor has anyone on our behalf, initiated any substantive discussions, directly or indirectly, with any EV Business acquisition target. We have generated no revenues to date and we do not expect that we will generate operating revenues at the earliest until we consummate our initial EV Business acquisition. While we may pursue an acquisition opportunity in the Electric Vehicles, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotics (“EV-AI-ML-R”) industry or sector, we intend to focus on: (1) businesses that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles; and (2) businesses that design, manufacture, install and sell Power Controls, Battery Technology, Wireless Technology, and Residential utility meters and remote, mission-critical devices mostly engineered using Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotic technologies.
Our management team is comprised of two business professionals that have a broad range of experience in executive leadership, strategy development and implementation, operations management, financial policy and corporate transactions. Our management team members have worked together in the past, at Goldstein Franklin, Inc. and other firms as executive leaders and senior managers spearheading turnarounds, rollups and industry-focused consolidation while generating shareholder value for many for investors and stakeholders.
We believe that our management team is well positioned to identify acquisition opportunities in the marketplace. Our management team’s industry expertise, principal investing transaction experience and business acumen will make us an attractive partner and enhance our ability to complete a successful Business acquisition. Our management believes that its ability to identify and implement value creation initiatives has been an essential driver of past performance and will remain central to its differentiated acquisition strategy.
Although our management team is well positioned and have experience to identify acquisition opportunities in the marketplace, past performance of our management team is not a guarantee either (i) of success with respect to any EV Business acquisition we may consummate or (ii) that we will be able to identify a suitable candidate for our initial EV Business acquisition. You should not rely on the historical performance record of our management team as indicative of our future performance. Additionally, in the course of their respective careers, members of our management team have been involved in businesses and deals that were unsuccessful. Our officers and directors have not had management experience with EV companies in the past.
General - Real Estate Business
Our real estate operations has two lines of business: (1) promote and preserve affordable housing and economic development across urban neighborhoods in the United States; and (2) acquire, hold and manage specialized assets. To achieve our objectives, we plan to acquire, own, renovate, develop, redevelop, operate, dispose of, and manage specialized assets including industrial and commercial real estate, affordable housing and rental property and multi-family properties both on our own and through our investment management platform. We focus primarily on commercial and multifamily properties located in urban and high-density suburban markets throughout the United States. Our real estate platform is internally managed with primarily focused on: (1) the acquisition, ownership and management of specialized industrial properties; and (2) ownership, operation and development of multi-family affordable housing properties.
Our Business Plan
Returning back to its foremost business model of technology focused operations, Video River Networks, Inc. (the “Company”), a technology firm intends to operate and manage a portfolio of Electric Vehicles, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotics (“EV-AI-ML-R”) assets, businesses and operations in North America. The Company’s current targeted portfolio businesses include those that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles; and design, manufacture, install and sell Power Controls, Battery Technology, Wireless Technology, and Residential utility meters and remote, mission-critical devices mostly engineered using Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotic technologies.
Our current technology-focused business model was a result of our board resolution on September 15, 2020 to spin-in our specialty real estate holding business to an operating subsidiary and then pivot back to being a technology company. The Company has now returned back to its original technology-focused businesses of Power Controls, Battery Technology, Wireless Technology, and Residential utility meters and remote, mission-critical devices. In addition to above list, the Company intends to spread its wings into the Electric Vehicles, Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotics (“EV-AI-ML-R”) businesses/markets, targeting acquisition, ownership and operation of acquired EV-AI-ML-R businesses or portfolio of EV-AI-ML-R businesses.
Video River Networks, Inc., prior to September 15, 2020, used to be a specialty real estate holding company, focuses on the acquisition, ownership, and management of specialized industrial properties. The Company’s real estate business objective is to maximize stockholder returns through a combination of (1) distributions to our stockholders, (2) sustainable long-term growth in cash flows from increased rents, which we hope to pass on to stockholders in the form of increased distributions, and (3) potential long-term appreciation in the value of our properties from capital gains upon future sale. As a real estate holding company, the Company is engaged primarily in the ownership, operation, management, acquisition, development and redevelopment of predominantly multifamily housing and specialized industrial properties in the United States.
Having partially freed itself from the day-to-day operation of the real estate operations, the Company now returns to its technology root with a primary purpose of acquiring Electric Vehicles manufacturer or doing a joint venture (JV) with Electric Vehicles businesses that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles; and design, manufacture, install and sell Power Controls, Battery Technology, Wireless Technology, and Residential utility meters and remote, mission-critical devices mostly engineered using Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning and Robotic technologies.
Business Strategy and Deal Origination
We have not finalized an acquisition target yet, but making progress in identifying several potential candidates from which we intend to pick those that meet our criteria for acquisition. Our acquisition and value creation strategy will be to identify, acquire and, after our initial EV Business acquisition, build an EV company that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles that suit the experience of our management team and can benefit from their operational expertise. Our Business acquisition strategy will leverage our management team’s network of potential transaction sources, where we believe a combination of our relationships, knowledge and experience could effect a positive transformation or augmentation of existing businesses to improve their overall value proposition.
Our management team’s objective is to generate attractive returns and create value for our shareholders by applying our disciplined strategy of underwriting intrinsic worth and implementing changes after making an acquisition to unlock value. While our approach is focused on the EV-AI-ML-R industries where we have differentiated insights, we also have successfully driven change through a comprehensive value creation plan framework. We favor opportunities where we can accelerate the target’s growth initiatives. As a management team we have successfully applied this approach over approximately 16 years and have deployed capital successfully in a range of market cycles.
We plan to utilize the network and Finance industry experience of our Chief Executive Officer and our management team in seeking an initial EV Business acquisition and employing our Business acquisition strategy described below. Our CEO is a top financial professional with designations that include, CPA, CMA, and CFM. He’s very knowledgeable in the fields of corporate law, real estate, lending, turnarounds and restructuring. Over the course of their careers, the members of our management team have developed a broad network of contacts and corporate relationships that we believe will serve as a useful source of EV acquisition opportunities. This network has been developed through our management team’s extensive experience:
● investing in and operating a wide range of businesses;
● growing brands through repositioning, increasing household penetration and geographic expansion; expanding into new distribution channels, such as e-Commerce, in an increasingly omni-channel world;
● identifying lessons learned and applying solutions across product portfolios and channels;
● sourcing, structuring, acquiring, operating, developing, growing, financing and selling businesses;
● developing relationships with sellers, financing providers, advisors and target management teams; and
● executing transformational transactions in a wide range of businesses under varying economic and financial market conditions.
In addition, drawing on their extensive investing and operating experience, our management team anticipates tapping four major sources of deal flow:
● directly identifying potentially attractive undervalued situations through primary research into EV industries and companies;
● receiving information from our management team’s global contacts about a potentially attractive situation;
● leads from investment bankers and advisors regarding businesses seeking a combination or added value that matches our strengths; and
● inbound opportunities from a company or existing stakeholders seeking a combination, including corporate divestitures.
We expect this network will provide our management team with a robust flow of EV acquisition opportunities. In addition, we anticipate that target EV Business candidates will be brought to our attention by various unaffiliated sources, which may include investment market participants, private equity groups, investment banking firms, consultants, accounting firms and large business enterprises. Upon completion of this offering, members of our management team will communicate with their network of relationships to articulate the parameters for our search for a target company and a potential Business acquisition and begin the process of pursuing and reviewing potential leads.
Acquisition/Business acquisition Criteria
Consistent with this strategy, we have identified the following general criteria and guidelines that we believe are important in evaluating prospective target EV businesses. We will use these criteria and guidelines in evaluating acquisition opportunities. While we intend to acquire EV companies that we believe exhibit one or more of the following characteristics, we may decide to enter into our initial EV Business acquisition with a target EV business that does not meet these criteria and guidelines. We intend to acquire EV companies that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles:
● have potential for significant growth, or can act as an attractive EV acquisition platform, following our initial EV Business acquisition;
● have demonstrated market segment, category and/or cost leadership and would benefit from our extensive network and insights;
● provide operational platform and/or infrastructure for variety of EV models and/or services, with the potential for revenue, market share, footprint and/or distribution improvements;
● are at the forefront of EV evolution around changing consumer trends;
● offer marketing, pricing and product mix optimization opportunities across distribution channels;
● are fundamentally sound companies that could be underperforming their potential and/or offer compelling value;
● offer the opportunity for our management team to partner with established target management teams or business owners to achieve long-term strategic and operational excellence, or, in some cases, where our access to accomplished executives and the skills of the management of identified targets warrants replacing or supplementing existing management;
● exhibit unrecognized value or other characteristics, desirable returns on capital and a need for capital to achieve the company’s growth strategy, that we believe have been misevaluated by the marketplace based on our analysis and due diligence review; and
● will offer an attractive risk-adjusted return for our shareholders.
These criteria are not intended to be exhaustive. Any evaluation relating to the merits of a particular initial EV Business acquisition may be based, to the extent relevant, on these general guidelines as well as other considerations, factors and criteria that our management may deem relevant. In the event that we decide to enter into our initial EV Business acquisition with a target EV Business that does not meet the above criteria and guidelines, we will disclose that the target EV Business does not meet the above criteria in our shareholder communications related to our initial EV Business acquisition.
Acquisition/Business acquisition Process
In evaluating a prospective target EV business, we expect to conduct a thorough due diligence review that will encompass, among other things, meetings with incumbent management and employees, document reviews, inspection of EV manufacturing facilities, as well as a review of financial and other information. We will also utilize our operational and capital allocation experience.
In order to execute our business strategy, we intend to:
Assemble a team of EV industry and financial experts: For each potential transaction, we intend to assemble a team of EV industry and financial experts to supplement our management’s efforts to identify and resolve key issues facing a target EV Business. We intend to construct an operating and financial plan that optimizes the potential to grow shareholder value. With extensive experience investing in both healthy and underperforming businesses, we expect that our management will be able to demonstrate to the target EV business and its stakeholders that we have the resources and expertise to lead the combined company through complex and potentially turbulent market conditions and provide the strategic and operational direction necessary to grow the business in order to maximize cash flows and improve the overall strategic prospects for the company.
Conduct rigorous research and analysis: Performing disciplined, fundamental research and analysis is core to our strategy, and we intend to conduct extensive due diligence to evaluate the impact that a transaction may have on a target EV Business.
Business acquisition driven by trend analysis: We intend to understand the underlying purchase and industry behaviors that would enhance a potential transaction’s attractiveness. We have extensive experience in identifying and analyzing evolving industry and consumer trends, and we expect to perform macro as well as bottoms-up analysis on consumer and industry trends.
Acquire the target company at an attractive price relative to our view of intrinsic value: Combining rigorous analysis as well as input from industry and financial experts, our management team intends to develop its view of the intrinsic value of a potential Business acquisition. In doing so, our management team will evaluate future cash flow potential, relative industry valuation metrics and precedent transactions to inform its view of intrinsic value, with the intention of creating a Business acquisition at an attractive price relative to its view of intrinsic value.
Implement operational and financial structuring opportunities: Our management team has the ability to structure and execute a Business acquisition that will establish a capital structure that will support the growth in shareholder value and give it the flexibility to grow organically and/or through strategic acquisitions. We intend to also develop and implement strategies and initiatives to improve the business’ operational and financial performance and create a platform for growth.
Seek strategic acquisitions and divestitures to further grow shareholder value: Our management team intends to analyze the strategic direction of the company, including evaluating potential non-core asset sales to create financial and/or operational flexibility for the company to engage in organic and/or inorganic growth. Our management team intends to evaluate strategic opportunities and chart a clear path to take the EV business to the next level after the Business acquisition.
After the initial EV Business acquisition, our management team intends to apply a rigorous approach to enhancing shareholder value, including evaluating the experience and expertise of incumbent management and making changes where appropriate, examining opportunities for revenue enhancement, cost savings, operating efficiencies and strategic acquisitions and divestitures and developing and implementing corporate strategies and initiatives to improve profitability and long-term value. In doing so, our management team anticipates evaluating corporate governance, opportunistically accessing capital markets and other opportunities to enhance liquidity, identifying acquisition and divestiture opportunities and properly aligning management and board incentives with growing shareholder value. Our management team intends to pursue post-merger initiatives through participation on the board of directors, through direct involvement with company operations and/or calling upon a stable of former managers and advisors when necessary.
Strategic Approach to Management. We intend to approach the management of a company as strategy consultants would. This means that we approach business with performance-based metrics based on strategic and operational goals, both at the overall company level and for specific divisions and functions.
Corporate Governance and Oversight. Active participation as board members can include many activities ranging from conducting monthly or quarterly board meetings to chairing standing (compensation, audit or investment committees) or special committees, replacing or supplementing company management teams when necessary, adding outside directors with industry expertise which may or may not include members of our own board of directors, providing guidance on strategic and operational issues including revenue enhancement opportunities, cost savings, brand repositioning, operating efficiencies, reviewing and testing annual budgets, reviewing acquisitions and divestitures and assisting in the accessing of capital markets to further optimize financing costs and fund expansion.
Direct Operational Involvement. Our management team members, through ongoing board service, intend to actively engage with company management. These activities may include: (i) establishing an agenda for management and instilling a sense of accountability and urgency; (ii) aligning the interest of management with growing shareholder value; (iii) providing strategic planning and management consulting assistance, particularly in regards to re-invested capital and growth capital in order to grow revenues, achieve more optimal operating scale or eliminate costs; (iv) establishing measurable key performance metrics; and (v) complementing product lines and brands while growing market share in attractive market categories. These skill sets will be integral to shareholder value creation.
M&A Expertise and Add-On Acquisitions. Our management team has expertise in identifying, acquiring and integrating synergistic, margin-enhancing and transformational businesses. We intend to, wherever possible, utilize M&A as a strategic tool to strengthen the financial profile of an EV business we acquire, as well as its competitive positioning. We would seek to enter into accretive Business acquisitions where our management team or an acquired company’s management team can seamlessly transition to working together as one organization and team.
Access to Portfolio Company Managers and Advisors. Through their combined 32+ year history of investing in and controlling businesses, our management team members have developed strong professional relationships with former company managers and advisors. When appropriate, we intend to bring in outside directors, managers or consultants to assist in corporate governance and operational turnaround activities. The use of supplemental advisors should provide additional resources to management to address time intensive issues that may be delaying an organization from realizing its full potential shareholder returns.
Our acquisition criteria, due diligence processes and value creation methods are not intended to be exhaustive. Any evaluation relating to the merits of a particular initial EV Business acquisition may be based, to the extent relevant, on these general guidelines as well as other considerations, factors and criteria that our management may deem relevant. In the event that we decide to enter into our initial EV Business acquisition with a target EV Business that does not meet the above criteria and guidelines, we will disclose that the target EV Business does not meet the above criteria in our shareholder communications related to our initial EV Business acquisition, which, as discussed in this prospectus, would be in the form of tender offer documents or proxy solicitation materials that we would file with the SEC.
Sourcing of Potential Business acquisition Targets
We believe that the operational and transactional experience of our management team and their respective affiliates, and the relationships they have developed as a result of such experience, will provide us with a substantial number of potential Business acquisition targets. These individuals and entities have developed a broad network of contacts and corporate relationships around the world. This network has grown through sourcing, acquiring and financing businesses and maintaining relationships with sellers, financing sources and target management teams. Our management team members have significant experience in executing transactions under varying economic and financial market conditions. We believe that these networks of contacts and relationships and this experience will provide us with important sources of investment opportunities. In addition, we anticipate that target EV Business candidates may be brought to our attention from various unaffiliated sources, including investment market participants, private equity funds and large business enterprises seeking to divest noncore assets or divisions.
Other Acquisition Considerations
We are not prohibited from pursuing an initial EV Business acquisition with a company that is affiliated with our sponsor, officers or directors. In the event we seek to complete our initial EV Business acquisition with a company that is affiliated with our officers or directors, we, or a committee of independent directors, will obtain an opinion from an independent investment banking firm or another independent firm that commonly renders valuation opinions for the type of company we are seeking to acquire or an independent accounting firm that our initial EV Business acquisition is fair to our company from a financial point of view.
Unless we complete our initial EV Business acquisition with an affiliated entity, or our Board of Directors cannot independently determine the fair market value of the target EV Business or businesses, we are not required to obtain an opinion from an independent investment banking firm, another independent firm that commonly renders valuation opinions for the type of company we are seeking to acquire or from an independent accounting firm that the price we are paying for a target is fair to our company from a financial point of view. If no opinion is obtained, our shareholders will be relying on the business judgment of our Board of Directors, which will have significant discretion in choosing the standard used to establish the fair market value of the target or targets, and different methods of valuation may vary greatly in outcome from one another. Such standards used will be disclosed in our tender offer documents or proxy solicitation materials, as applicable, related to our initial EV Business acquisition.
Members of our management team may directly or indirectly own our ordinary shares and/or private placement warrants following this offering, and, accordingly, may have a conflict of interest in determining whether a particular target EV Business is an appropriate business with which to effectuate our initial EV Business acquisition. Further, each of our officers and directors may have a conflict of interest with respect to evaluating a particular Business acquisition if the retention or resignation of any such officers and directors was included by a target EV Business as a condition to any agreement with respect to our initial EV Business acquisition.
In the future any of our directors and our officers may have additional, fiduciary or contractual obligations to other entities pursuant to which such officer or director is or will be required to present acquisition opportunities to such entity. Accordingly, subject to his or her fiduciary duties, if any of our officers or directors becomes aware of an acquisition opportunity which is suitable for an entity to which he or she has then current fiduciary or contractual obligations, he or she will need to honor his or her fiduciary or contractual obligations to present such acquisition opportunity to such entity, and only present it to us if such entity rejects the opportunity. We do not believe, however, that any fiduciary duties or contractual obligations of our directors or officers would materially undermine our ability to complete our Business acquisition.
Plan of Operations
While our major focus is to find, acquire and manage an EV business, our real estate portfolio is still alive and must figure in our plan of operation. In the next twelve months, we plan on buying rehabilitating and selling up to six properties and adding the net proceeds obtained from the sales to finance our acquisition business plan.
The Company will continue to evaluate its projected expenditures relative to its available cash and to seek additional means of financing in order to satisfy the Company’s working capital and other cash requirements.
Upon completion of the acquisition of an Electric Vehicles manufacturer or doing a joint venture (JV) with Electric Vehicles businesses that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles, our strategy will subsequently include distribution of the electric vehicles and related product lines to retailers and consumers across North America.
Critical Accounting Policies, Estimates and New Accounting Pronouncements
Management’s discussion and analysis of its financial condition and plan of operations is based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. The preparation of these financial statements requires that we make estimates and judgments that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. At each balance sheet date, management evaluates its estimates. We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. The estimates and critical accounting policies that are most important in fully understanding and evaluating our financial condition and results of operations include those stated in our financial statements and those listed below:
Going Concern
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared assuming that the Company will continue as a going concern. As shown in the accompanying financial statements, we had zero cash flows from operations for the twelve months ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 These conditions raise substantial doubt as to our ability to continue as a going concern. The financial statements do not include any adjustments that might be necessary if we are unable to continue as a going concern. Management intends to finance these deficits by making additional shareholder notes and seeking additional outside financing through either debt or sales of its Common Stock.
Recently Adopted Accounting Standards
Leases
In February 2016, the FASB issued ASU 2016-02, “Leases” that requires for leases longer than one year, a lessee to recognize in the statement of financial condition a right·of·use asset, representing the right to use the underlying asset for the lease term, and a lease liability, representing the liability to make lease payments. The accounting update also requires that for finance leases, a lessee recognize interest expense on the lease liability, separately from the amortization of the right-of-use asset in the statements of earnings, while for operating leases, such amounts should be recognized as a combined expense. In addition, this accounting update requires expanded disclosures about the nature and terms of lease agreements. The Company has reviewed the new standard and does not expect it to have a material impact to the statement of financial condition or its net capital. The adoption of this guidance resulted in no significant impact to our results of operations or cash flows.
Revenue Recognition
The Company recognizes revenue in accordance with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (“FASB”) Accounting Standards Codification (“ASC”) 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers, which requires that five basic steps be followed to recognize revenue: (1) a legally enforceable contract that meets criteria standards as to composition and substance is identified; (2) performance obligations relating to provision of goods or services to the customer are identified; (3) the transaction price, with consideration given to any variable, noncash, or other relevant consideration, is determined; (4) the transaction price is allocated to the performance obligations; and (5) revenue is recognized when control of goods or services is transferred to the customer with consideration given, whether that control happens over time or not. Determination of criteria (3) and (4) are based on our management’s judgments regarding the fixed nature of the selling prices of the products and services delivered and the collectability of those amounts. The adoption of ASC 606 did not result in a change to the accounting for any of the in-scope revenue streams; as such, no cumulative effect adjustment was recorded.
The Company generates revenue primarily from: (1) the sale of homes/properties, (2) commissions and fees charged on each real estate services transaction closed by our lead agents or partner agents, and (3) principal transactions from sales of trading securities, less original purchase cost. Principal transaction is net trading revenues consisting primarily of revenues from trading securities earned upon completion of trade, net of any trading fees. A trading is completed when earned and recognized at a point in time, on a trade-date basis, as the Company executes trades. The Company records trading revenue on a net basis, trading sales less original purchase cost. Net realized gains and losses from securities transactions are determined for federal income tax and financial reporting purposes on the first-in, first-out method and represent proceeds on disposition of investments less the cost basis of investments. Sale of real estate properties are recognized at the sales price/amount and the total cost (including cost of rehabilitations) associated with the property acquisition and rehabilitation are classified in Cost of Goods Sold (COGS).
During the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company did recognized revenue of $7,477,882 and $1,253,445 from operations, and $77 and $174 in dividend income respectively.
Income Taxes
The provision for income taxes is computed using the asset and liability method, under which deferred tax assets and liabilities are recognized for the expected future tax consequences of temporary differences between the financial reporting and tax bases of assets and liabilities, and for operating losses and tax credit carry-forwards. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are measured using the currently enacted tax rates that apply to taxable income in effect for the years in which those tax assets are expected to be realized or settled. We record a valuation allowance to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that is believed more likely than not to be realized.
Loss Contingencies
Consistent with ASC 450-20-50-1C, if the Company determines that there is a reasonable possibility that a material loss may have been incurred, or is reasonably estimable, regardless of whether the Company accrued for such a loss (or any portion of that loss), the Company will confer with its legal counsel, consistent with ASC 450. If the material loss is determinable or reasonably estimable, the Company will record it in its accounts and as a liability on the balance sheet. If the Company determines that such an estimate cannot be made, the Company’s policy is to disclose a demonstration of its attempt to estimate the loss or range of losses before concluding that an estimate cannot be made, and to disclose it in the notes to the financial statements under Contingent Liabilities.
Net Income (Loss) Per Common Share
Basic net loss per common share (“EPS”) is computed by dividing loss available to common stockholders by the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed by dividing net income by the weighted average shares outstanding, assuming all dilutive potential common shares were issued. Dilutive loss per share excludes all potential common shares if their effect is anti-dilutive.
Except for the October 29, 2019 transaction in which the company sold one (1) Special 2019 series A preferred share (one preferred share is convertible 150,000,000 share of common stocks) to Community Economic Development Capital LLC, no other potentially dilutive debt or equity instruments were issued or outstanding during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Related Party Transactions
We follow ASC subtopic 850-10, “Related Party Transactions,” for the identification of related parties and disclosure of related party transactions.
Pursuant to ASC 850-10-20, related parties include: a) affiliates of the Company; b) entities for which investments in their equity securities would be required, absent the election of the fair value option under the Fair Value Option Subsection of Section 825-10-15, to be accounted for by the equity method by the investing entity; c) trusts for the benefit of employees, such as pension and profit-sharing trusts that are managed by or under the trusteeship of management; d) principal owners of the Company; e) management of the Company; f) other parties with which the Company may deal if one party controls or can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the other to an extent that one of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests; and g) other parties that can significantly influence the management or operating policies of the transacting parties or that have an ownership interest in one of the transacting parties and can significantly influence the other to an extent that one or more of the transacting parties might be prevented from fully pursuing its own separate interests.
Material related party transactions are required to be disclosed in the financial statements, other than compensation arrangements, expense allowances, and other similar items in the ordinary course of business. However, disclosure of transactions that are eliminated in the preparation of or combined financial statements is not required in those statements. The disclosures shall include: a) the nature of the relationship(s) involved; b) a description of the transactions, including transactions to which no amounts or nominal amounts were ascribed, for each of the periods for which statements of operation are presented, and such other information deemed necessary to an understanding of the effects of the transactions on the financial statements; c) the dollar amounts of transactions for each of the periods for which statements of operations are presented and the effects of any change in the method of establishing the terms from that used in the preceding period; and d) amounts due from or to related parties as of the date of each balance sheet presented and, if not otherwise apparent, the terms and manner of settlement.
A related party is generally defined as (i) any person that holds 10% or more of our membership interests including such person’s immediate families, (ii) our management, (iii) someone that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by or is under common control with us, or (iv) anyone who can significantly influence our financial and operating decisions. A transaction is considered to be a related party transaction when there is a transfer of resources or obligations between related parties.
Results of Operations
Comparison of Fiscal Years 2021 and 2020
Our financial statements are prepared using accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America applicable to a going concern, which contemplates the realization of assets and the liquidation of liabilities in the normal course of business.
Revenues - We are generating substantially all our revenue from sales of real estate investment property, entrepreneurship development initiative, and principal transactions in proprietary trading operation. For the year ended December 31, 2021, revenue from entrepreneurship development initiative was $146,000 and revenue from principal transactions was $7,331,882 for total revenue of $$7,477,882. Compared to combined real estate sales and principal transaction revenue of $1,253,445 for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2020.
Operating Expenses - Operating expense was $309,963 and $159,463 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 respectively. Operating expense consists of costs related to the establishment of corporate governances; and costs associated with our plans and preparations for a future potential capital raise. These expenses also include the costs of conducting market research, attending and/or participating in industry conferences and seminars, business development activities, and professional fees, other general business outside consulting activities. Operating expense also includes travel costs, for third-party consultants, legal and accounting fees and other professional and administrative costs.
Net Income (Loss) - Net Income for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $2,206,953 compared to Net Loss of $82,980 for the year ended December 31, 2020.
Accumulated Deficit - As at December 31, 2021, we have accumulated deficit of $17,159,878 compared to accumulated deficit of $19,385,856 as at December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash and Cash Equivalent - As at December 31, 2021, we had $701,042 cash on hand compared to $1,630 as at December 31, 2020.
Other Current Assets - Inventory and Receivables - As at December 31, 2021, we had $446,050 in account receivable compared to $92,282 as at December 31, 2020.
Other Assets - Investments and Real Estate - As at December 31, 2021, we had $6,414,552 in mortgages receivable, notes receivable, loans, and long term investments to/in related investment in a private company compared to $671,855 as at December 31, 2020.
Related parties liabilities - As at December 31, 2021, we had $588,859 balance from advances from related compared to $540,524 as at December 31, 2020.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
As of December 31, 2021, we had $701,042 cash on hand compared to $1,630 as at December 31, 2020. We anticipate that our cash position is sufficient to fund current operations. We believe that our capital resources, including cash on hand, cash generated from operations, and available capacity on our credit facility, will provide us with sufficient liquidity to meet our strategic objectives, maintain current operations and execute the capital program for the next 12 months and beyond, given current oil price trends and production levels. In accordance with our investment policy, available cash balances are held in our primary cash management banks or tradable securities for short-term liquidity. We believe that our current financial position provides us the flexibility to respond to both internal growth opportunities and those available through acquisitions.
Since 2019, all of our operations have been financed through advances from a company controlled by our president and CEO. As of December 31, 2021, the company controlled by our president and CEO has loaned operating capital, pursuant to a Line of Credit Agreements to advance or loan any additional funds to us in the future. We have not yet achieved significant profitability. We expect that our general and administrative expenses will continue to increase and, as a result, we will need to generate significant revenues to achieve significant profitability. We may never achieve significant profitability. Future financing of our operation depends largely on our controlling shareholder, Mr. Igwealor, advancing most or all of our operating budget.
We will now be obligated to file annual, quarterly and current reports with the SEC pursuant to the Exchange Act. In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (“Sarbanes-Oxley”) and the rules subsequently implemented by the SEC and the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board have imposed various requirements on public companies, including requiring changes in corporate governance practices. We expect these rules and regulations to increase our legal and financial compliance costs and to make some activities of ours more time- consuming and costly. In order to meet the needs to comply with the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act, we will need investment of capital.
Management has determined that additional capital will be required in the form of equity or debt securities. There is no assurance that management will be able to raise capital on terms acceptable to the Company. If we are unable to obtain sufficient amounts of additional capital, we may have to cease filing the required reports and cease operations completely. If we obtain additional funds by selling any of our equity securities or by issuing common stock to pay current or future obligations, the percentage ownership of our shareholders will be reduced, shareholders may experience additional dilution, or the equity securities may have rights preferences or privileges senior to the common stock.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
As of December 31, 2021, we did not engage in any off-balance sheet arrangements as defined in Item 303(a)(4) of Regulation S-K promulgated by the SEC under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
Contractual Obligations
Not applicable.
Plan of Operation for the Next Twelve (12) Months
While our major focus is to find, acquire and manage an EV business, our real estate portfolio is still alive and must figure in our plan of operation. During the year ended December 31, 2021, we sold one real estate properties for a total amount of $700,385. In the next twelve months, we plan on buying rehabilitating and selling four to six properties and adding the net proceeds obtained from the sales to the to finance our electric vehicles business plan.
The Company will continue to evaluate its projected expenditures relative to its available cash and to seek additional means of financing in order to satisfy the Company’s working capital and other cash requirements.
Upon completion of the acquisition of an Electric Vehicles manufacturer or doing a joint venture (JV) with Electric Vehicles businesses that source, design, develop, manufacture and distribute high-performance, affordable and fully electric vehicles, our strategy will subsequently include distribution of the electric vehicles and related product lines to retailers and consumers across North America.
NIHK currently own zero real property in Los Angeles County.
Using the real properties as collateral, we believe that we could always obtain the capital needed to complete the rehabilitation of these three properties. Although there is no assurance that we would be able to put the three properties to good use such as renting them our to tenants. If we are unable to put them to productive use, we would be forced to sell them and use the money generated from the sales to pay off the loans used to acquire them.
To effectively fund our business plan, we must raise additional capital. But there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital necessary to acquire, own or hold these specialized real properties. Moreover, there can be no assurance that we will be able to raise the capital necessary to execute our business plan and also to acquire, own or hold specialized real properties.
Our operations will be conducted on five platforms comprising of: (1) specialized real properties; and (2) affordable housing real estate operation. Within the next twelve months, we intend to use income generated from our three properties to hire employees that would help us to raise capital to build our company.
We intend to implement the following tasks within the next twelve months:
1. Month 1-3: Phase 1 (1-3 months in duration; purchase and rehabilitation of three properties and put them to good use)
a. Identify 3 properties to acquire
b. Sign purchase agreement with the sellers of the 3 properties identified above;
c. Acquire and consolidate the revenue from those 3 properties.
2. Month 3-6 Phase 2 (1-3 months in duration; cost control, process improvements, admin & mngt.).
a. Integrate acquired properties into NIHK’s model - consolidate the management of the properties including integration of their accounting and finance systems, synchronization of their operating systems, and harmonization of their human resources functions.
b. Complete and file quarterly reports and other required filings for the quarter
3. Month 6-9: Phase 3 (1-3 months in duration; $5 million in estimated fund receipt)
a. Identify and acquire 4 specialized properties that are complementary/similar properties or assets in the target market
4. Month 9-12: Phase 4 (1-3 months duration; use acquired businesses’ free cash flow for more acquisitions)
a. Run the businesses efficiently, giving employees a conducive and friendly workplace and add value to investors and shareholders by identifying and reducing excesses and also identifying and executing growth strategies
b. Acquire 4 more properties especially in regions where RE is at or below their book-value.
5. Operating expenses during the twelve months would be as follows:
a. For the six months through June 30, 2020, we anticipate to incur general and other operating expenses of $238,000.
b. For the six months through December 31, 2020 we anticipate to incur additional general and other operating expenses of $328,000.
As noted above, the execution of our current plan of operations requires us to raise significant additional capital immediately. If we are successful in raising capital through the sale of shares offered for sale in this Filing we believe that the Company will have sufficient cash resources to fund its plan of operations for the next twelve months. If we are unable to do so, our ability to continue as a going concern will be in jeopardy, likely causing us to curtail and possibly cease operations.
We continually evaluate our plan of operations discussed above to determine the manner in which we can most effectively utilize our limited cash resources. The timing of completion of any aspect of our plan of operations is highly dependent upon the availability of cash to implement that aspect of the plan and other factors beyond our control. There is no assurance that we will successfully obtain the required capital or revenues, or, if obtained, that the amounts will be sufficient to fund our ongoing operations. The inability to secure additional capital would have a material adverse effect on us, including the possibility that we would have to sell or forego a portion or all of our assets or cease operations. If we discontinue our operations, we will not have sufficient funds to pay any amounts to our stockholders.
Even if we raise additional capital in the near future, if our current business plan is not successfully executed, our ability to fund our biopharmaceutical research and development, or our financial product deployment and services efforts would likely be seriously impaired.
Because our working capital requirements depend upon numerous factors there can be no assurance that our current cash resources will be sufficient to fund our operations. At present, we have no committed external sources of capital, and do not expect any significant product revenues for the foreseeable future. Thus, we will require immediate additional financing to fund future operations. There can be no assurance, however, that we will be able to obtain funds on acceptable terms, if at all.