Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations should be read in conjunction with “Financial Statements and Supplementary Data” in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
This discussion contains forward-looking statements based on our current expectations, estimates, and projections about our operations and the industry in which we operate. Our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements as a result of a variety of risks and uncertainties, including those described under “Risk Factors” in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report. We assume no obligation to update any of these forward-looking statements.
Overview
Company Description
We are a leading North American onshore completion services provider that targets unconventional oil and gas resource development. We partner with our E&P customers across all major onshore basins in both the U.S. and Canada as well as abroad to design and deploy downhole solutions and technology to prepare horizontal, multistage wells for production. We focus on providing our customers with cost-effective and comprehensive completion solutions designed to maximize their production levels and operating efficiencies.
Generally, operators have continued to improve operational efficiencies in completions design, increasing the complexity and difficulty, making oilfield service selection more important. This increase in high-intensity, high-efficiency completions of oil and gas wells further enhances the demand for our services. We compete for the most complex and technically demanding wells in which we specialize, which are characterized by extended laterals, increased stage spacing, multi-well pads, cluster spacing, and high proppant loads. These well characteristics lead to increased operating leverage and returns for us, as we are able to complete more jobs and stages with the same number of units and crews. Service providers for these projects are selected based on their technical expertise and ability to execute safely and efficiently.
We provide (i) cementing services, which consist of blending high-grade cement and water with various solid and liquid additives to create a cement slurry that is pumped between the casing and the wellbore of the well, (ii) an innovative portfolio of completion tools, including those that provide pinpoint frac sleeve system technologies as well as a portfolio of completion technologies used for completing the toe stage of a horizontal well and fully-composite, dissolvable, and extended range frac plugs to isolate stages during plug-and-perf operations, (iii) wireline services, the majority of which consist of plug-and-perf completions, which is a multistage well completion technique for cased-hole wells that consists of deploying perforating guns and isolation tools to a specified depth, and (iv) coiled tubing services, which perform wellbore intervention operations utilizing a continuous steel pipe that is transported to the wellsite wound on a large spool in lengths of up to 30,000 feet and which provides a cost-effective solution for well work due to the ability to deploy efficiently and safely into a live well.
We believe our success is a product of our culture, which is driven by our intense focus on performance and wellsite execution as well as our commitment to forward-leaning technologies that aid us in the development of smarter, customized applications that drive efficiencies.
How We Generate Revenue and the Costs of Conducting Our Business
We generate our revenues by providing completion services to E&P customers across all major onshore basins in both the U.S. and Canada as well as abroad. We primarily earn our revenues pursuant to work orders entered into with our customers on a job-by-job basis. We typically will enter into an MSA with each customer that provides a framework of general terms and conditions of our services that will govern any future transactions or jobs awarded to us. Each specific job is obtained through competitive bidding or as a result of negotiations with customers. The rate we charge is determined by location, complexity of the job, operating conditions, duration of the contract, and market conditions. In addition to MSAs, we have entered into a select number of longer-term contracts with certain customers relating to our wireline and cementing services, and we may enter into similar contracts from time to time to the extent beneficial to the operation of our business. These longer-term contracts address pricing and other details concerning our services, but each job is performed on a standalone basis.
The principal expenses involved in conducting our business include labor costs, materials and freight, the costs of maintaining our equipment, and fuel costs. Our direct labor costs vary with the amount of equipment deployed and the utilization of that equipment. Another key component of labor costs relates to the ongoing training of our field service employees, which improves safety rates and reduces employee attrition.
How We Evaluate Our Operations
We evaluate our performance based on a number of financial and non-financial measures, including the following:
•Revenue: We compare actual revenue achieved each month to the most recent projection for that month and to the annual plan for the month established at the beginning of the year. We monitor our revenue to analyze trends in the performance of our operations compared to historical revenue drivers or market metrics. We are particularly interested in identifying positive or negative trends and investigating to understand the root causes.
•Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss): Adjusted gross profit (loss) is a key metric that we use to evaluate operating performance. We define adjusted gross profit (loss) as revenues less direct and indirect costs of revenues (excluding depreciation and amortization). Costs of revenues include direct and indirect labor costs, costs of materials, maintenance of equipment, fuel and transportation freight costs, contract services, crew cost, and other miscellaneous expenses. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
•Adjusted EBITDA: We define Adjusted EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, and depreciation and amortization, further adjusted for (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) loss or gain on revaluation of contingent liabilities, (iv) loss or gain on the extinguishment of debt, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) restructuring charges, (vii) stock-based compensation expense, (viii) loss or gain on sale of property and equipment, and (ix) other expenses or charges to exclude certain items which we believe are not reflective of ongoing performance of our business, such as legal expenses and settlement costs related to litigation outside the ordinary course of business. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
•Return on Invested Capital (“ROIC”): We define ROIC as after-tax net operating profit (loss), divided by average total capital. We define after-tax net operating profit (loss) as net income (loss) plus (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) interest expense (income), (iv) restructuring charges, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) loss or gain on the extinguishment of debt, and (vii) the provision or benefit for deferred income taxes. We define total capital as book value of equity plus the book value of debt less balance sheet cash and cash equivalents. We compute the average of the current and prior period-end total capital for use in this analysis. For additional information, see “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below.
•Safety: We measure safety by tracking the total recordable incident rate (“TRIR”), which is reviewed on a monthly basis. TRIR is a measure of the rate of recordable workplace injuries, defined below, normalized and stated on the basis of 100 workers for an annual period. The factor is derived by multiplying the number of recordable injuries in a calendar year by 200,000 (i.e., the total hours for 100 employees working 2,000 hours per year) and dividing this value by the total hours actually worked in the year. A recordable injury includes occupational death, nonfatal occupational illness, and other occupational injuries that involve loss of consciousness, restriction of work or motion, transfer to another job, or medical treatment other than first aid.
Industry Trends and Outlook; Impact of the Coronavirus Pandemic
Our business depends, to a significant extent, on the level of unconventional resource development activity and corresponding capital spending of oil and natural gas companies. These activity and spending levels are strongly influenced by the current and expected oil and natural gas prices. Despite healthier commodity prices in 2021 and thus far in 2022, the majority of public E&P companies are spending less on production growth and remaining focused on capital discipline. Even with an average WTI price of $68.14 in 2021, an increase of 74% over 2020, the average U.S. rig count in 2021 only increased 10% year over year. Overall, U.S. activity was slightly up in 2021 versus 2020. Per the Energy Information Administration (“EIA”), U.S. completions increased approximately 32% in 2021 versus 2020. The Permian Basin continues to be the most active basin in North America with approximately 47% of the total U.S. completions in 2021 according to the EIA.
Although there continues to be a disconnect between commodity price and activity levels in comparison to historical levels, we are optimistic looking into 2022 and 2023. Underinvestment in oil and gas development and an increase in overall global demand coming out of the coronavirus pandemic is creating an undersupplied market and supportive commodity prices for activity growth. Most U.S. operators completed their premium drilled but uncompleted wells inventory in 2021 and will need to drill more wells in order to maintain or increase production levels in 2022, and early indications are that North American capital spending in 2022 will increase in comparison to 2021. As a result, we currently expect net price increases
across many service lines throughout 2022; however, the magnitude and timing of potential price increases will depend on a number of factors, and implementing meaningful price increases from very depressed levels is expected to remain very challenging.
Labor constraints will likely remain problematic for the industry, and we expect to have both wage and labor inflation. If activity continues to increase into 2022, we would expect labor and equipment shortages in the market, which could also lead to potential price increases across the industry. Depending on the rate and quantity of rig and frac crew additions, we expect pricing increases, and therefore profitability should increase. However, some if not most of these price increases could potentially be offset by labor and material cost inflation, as well as an inability to complete work due to labor shortages or supply chain constraints. In 2021, the majority of our pricing increases, specifically in coiled tubing and cementing were offset by cost inflation. The market remains extremely volatile as supply chains remain challenged, and labor shortages continue across the United States.
Significant factors that are likely to affect commodity prices moving forward include the extent to which members of OPEC and other oil exporting nations, including Russia, continue to reduce oil export prices and increase production; the effect of energy, monetary, and trade policies of the U.S.; the pace of economic growth in the U.S. and throughout the world, including the potential for macro weakness; geopolitical and economic developments in the U.S. and globally, including conflicts, instability, acts of war or terrorism in oil producing countries or regions, particularly Russia, the Middle East, South America and Africa; changes to energy and EPA policies; and overall North American oil and natural gas supply and demand fundamentals, including the pace at which export capacity grows. As noted above, even with price improvements in oil and natural gas, operator activity may not materially increase, as operators remain focused on operating within their capital plans, and uncertainty remains around supply and demand fundamentals.
In addition, the coronavirus pandemic and efforts to mitigate its effects may continue to have a material adverse impact on demand for oil, commodity prices, and our business generally. See “Risk Factors - Risks Related to the Coronavirus Pandemic” in Item 1A of Part I of this Annual Report for more information. During the pandemic, we have maintained our commitment to the safety of our employees, customers, vendors, and community at large, and we have taken, and are continuing to take, a proactive approach to navigating the pandemic. To mitigate exposure and risk, we have implemented processes and procedures across our entire organization based on federal, regional, and local guidelines and mandates, and our Health, Safety & Environment and management teams are in frequent communication with our entire employee base to ensure they are receiving updated guidelines, processes, and procedures. In response to the pandemic, we have implemented the following changes, for example: at the field level, we are working closely with our customers and vendors to update standard operating procedures, based on social distancing, hand washing, and other recommended best practices set forth by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; electronic assessments have been employed to check the health of employees prior to reporting to work, to ensure facilities are being properly cleaned and sanitized, and to check visitor health before arrival to our locations; internal case managers have been identified to handle all coronavirus-related cases, and all confirmed and potential cases are tracked through closure; many of our corporate and office employees are working virtually to avoid unnecessary risk and exposure; and we have significantly limited any work-related travel. We are actively monitoring updates from regulatory and government bodies and evolving our strategy accordingly in an effort to keep our workforce and communities healthy.
Results of Operations
Revenues
Revenues increased $38.6 million, or 12%, to $349.4 million in 2021. The increase in comparison to 2020 was in line with a 10% increase in average U.S. rig count and a 32% increase in active frac crews. More specifically, tools revenue increased $21.7 million, or 27%, as completion tools stages increased by 60%. In addition, coiled tubing revenue increased $14.6 million, or 31%, as total days worked increased by 31%, and cementing revenue (including pump downs) increased by $11.6 million, or 11%, as total cement job count increased 22%, in each case in comparison to 2020. The overall increase in revenue was partially offset by a decrease in wireline revenue of $9.3 million, or 11%, as total completed wireline stages decreased by 3%, in each case, in comparison to 2020. Looking ahead, we remain optimistic on the outlook for the dissolvable plug market and its continued growth, and we currently expect that our dissolvable technology, which offers a greener solution for our customers, as well as our broader portfolio of completion tools will be a growth driver for us moving forward.
Cost of Revenues (Exclusive of Depreciation and Amortization)
Cost of revenues increased $5.8 million, or 2%, to $308.0 million in 2021. The increase in comparison to 2020 was prevalent across all lines of service and was primarily related to increased activity coupled with cost inflation associated with both labor and materials as well as headcount increases. More specifically, the increase was primarily related to a $10.1 million increase in materials installed and consumed while performing services and a $3.3 million increase in repairs and maintenance and other costs, in comparison to 2020. The overall increase was partially offset by a $3.1 million decrease in bad debt expense and a $2.1 million decrease in cost of revenue type restructuring costs, in comparison to 2020. The overall increase was also partially offset by a $1.3 million decrease in employee costs between periods and $1.1 million in non-cash facility lease costs in 2020 that did not recur in 2021.
Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss)
Adjusted gross profit increased $32.8 million to $41.4 million in 2021 as a result of the factors described above under “Revenues” and “Cost of Revenues.”
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses decreased $4.0 million to $45.3 million in 2021. The decrease in comparison to 2020 was primarily related to a $3.2 million decrease in employee costs mainly due to salary and stock-based compensation
reductions, a $1.2 million decrease in general and administrative type restructuring costs, and a $1.0 million decrease in other general and administrative expenses such as vehicle and office costs in comparison to 2020. The overall decrease was partially offset by a $1.4 million increase in professional fees between periods.
Depreciation
Depreciation expense decreased $3.5 million to $28.9 million in 2021. The decrease in comparison to 2020 was associated with all lines of service and was primarily due to certain assets becoming fully depreciated in recent periods.
Amortization of Intangibles
We recorded $16.1 million in intangible amortization in 2021 and $16.5 million in intangible amortization in 2020, in each case, primarily attributable to technology and customer relationships. The $0.4 million decrease is related to certain intangible assets being fully amortized in 2021.
Impairment of Goodwill
In 2020, we recorded goodwill impairment charges of $296.2 million in our tools, cementing, and wireline reporting units due to sharp declines in global crude oil demand, an economic recession associated with the coronavirus pandemic, sharp declines in oil and natural gas prices, and an increased weighted average cost of capital driven by a reduction in our stock price and the Level 2 fair value of our Senior Notes. These goodwill impairment charges did not recur in 2021 because goodwill was fully impaired in 2020.
(Gain) Loss on Revaluation of Contingent Liabilities
We recorded a $0.5 million loss on the revaluation of contingent liabilities in 2021 compared to a $0.3 million loss on the revaluation of contingent liabilities recorded in 2020. The $0.2 million change was primarily related to a $1.0 million increase in the value of the earnout associated with our acquisition Frac Technology AS between periods. The change was partially offset by a $0.8 million loss on the revaluation of contingent liabilities associated with the Magnum Earnout (as defined in Note 9 - Debt Obligations included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report) in 2020 that did not recur in 2021. The Magnum Earnout was terminated in the second quarter of 2020.
Non-Operating Expenses (Income)
We recorded $14.6 million in non-operating expenses in 2021 compared to $1.8 million in non-operating income for 2020. The $16.4 million decrease in non-operating income was primarily related to a $20.2 million reduction in gains on the extinguishment of debt related to the repurchase of Senior Notes in 2021 compared to 2020, coupled with a $0.4 million reduction in interest and other income between periods. The overall decrease in non-operating income is partially offset by a $4.2 million reduction in interest expense mainly due to a reduced debt balance attributable to repurchases of Senior Notes in recent periods.
Provision (Benefit) for Income Taxes
Our effective tax rate was .01% for 2021 and 0.6% for 2020. Our tax benefit for 2021 is primarily the result of our tax position in state and foreign tax jurisdictions.
Adjusted EBITDA
Adjusted EBITDA increased $31.0 million to $5.2 million for 2021. The Adjusted EBITDA increase is primarily due to the changes in revenue and expenses discussed above. See “Non-GAAP Financial Measures” below for further explanation.
Non-GAAP Financial Measures
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA
EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are supplemental non-GAAP financial measures that are used by management and external users of our financial statements, such as industry analysts, investors, lenders, and rating agencies.
We define EBITDA as net income (loss) before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization.
We define Adjusted EBITDA as EBITDA further adjusted for (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) loss or gain on revaluation of
contingent liabilities, (iv) loss or gain on the extinguishment of debt, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) restructuring charges, (vii) stock-based compensation expense, (viii) loss or gain on sale of property and equipment, and (ix) other expenses or charges to exclude certain items which we believe are not reflective of ongoing performance of our business, such as legal expenses and settlement costs related to litigation outside the ordinary course of business.
Management believes EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA are useful because they allow us to more effectively evaluate our operating performance and compare the results of our operations from period to period without regard to our financing methods or capital structure. We exclude the items listed above from net income (loss) in arriving at these measures because these amounts can vary substantially from company to company within our industry depending upon accounting methods and book values of assets, capital structures, and the method by which the assets were acquired. These measures should not be considered as an alternative to, or more meaningful than, net income (loss) as determined in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (“GAAP”) or as an indicator of our operating performance. Certain items excluded from these measures are significant components in understanding and assessing a company’s financial performance, such as a company’s cost of capital and tax structure, as well as the historic costs of depreciable assets, none of which are components of these measures. Our computations of these measures may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies. We believe that these are widely followed measures of operating performance.
The following table presents a reconciliation of the non-GAAP financial measures of EBITDA and Adjusted EBITDA to the GAAP financial measure of net income (loss):
(1) Amounts relate to the revaluation of contingent liabilities associated with our 2018 acquisitions. The impact is included in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss). For additional information on contingent liabilities, see Note 12 - Commitments and Contingencies included Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
(2) Amounts represent fees and legal settlements associated with legal proceedings brought pursuant to the FLSA and/or similar state laws.
Return on Invested Capital
ROIC is a supplemental non-GAAP financial measure. We define ROIC as after-tax net operating profit (loss), divided by average total capital. We define after-tax net operating profit (loss) as net income (loss) plus (i) goodwill, intangible asset, and/or property and equipment impairment charges, (ii) transaction and integration costs related to acquisitions, (iii) interest expense (income), (iv) restructuring charges, (v) loss or gain on the sale of subsidiaries, (vi) loss or gain on the extinguishment of debt, and (vii) the provision or benefit for deferred income taxes. We define total capital as book value of equity plus the book value of debt less balance sheet cash and cash equivalents. We compute the average of the current and prior period-end total capital for use in this analysis.
Management believes ROIC is a meaningful measure because it quantifies how well we generate operating income relative to the capital we have invested in our business and illustrates the profitability of a business or project taking into account the capital invested. Management uses ROIC to assist them in capital resource allocation decisions and in evaluating business performance. Although ROIC is commonly used as a measure of capital efficiency, definitions of ROIC differ, and our computation of ROIC may not be comparable to other similarly titled measures of other companies.
The following table provides an explanation of our calculation of ROIC for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020:
Adjusted Gross Profit (Loss)
GAAP defines gross profit (loss) as revenues less cost of revenues and includes depreciation and amortization in costs of revenues. We define adjusted gross profit (loss) as revenues less direct and indirect costs of revenues (excluding depreciation and amortization). This measure differs from the GAAP definition of gross profit (loss) because we do not include the impact of depreciation and amortization, which represent non-cash expenses.
Management uses adjusted gross profit (loss) to evaluate operating performance. We prepare adjusted gross profit (loss) to eliminate the impact of depreciation and amortization because we do not consider depreciation and amortization indicative of our core operating performance. Adjusted gross profit (loss) should not be considered as an alternative to gross profit (loss), operating income (loss), or any other measure of financial performance calculated and presented in accordance with GAAP. Adjusted gross profit (loss) may not be comparable to similarly titled measures of other companies because other companies may not calculate adjusted gross profit (loss) or similarly titled measures in the same manner as we do.
The following table presents a reconciliation of adjusted gross profit (loss) to GAAP gross profit (loss).
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Sources and Uses of Liquidity
Historically, we have met our liquidity needs principally from cash on hand, cash flows from operating activities and, if needed, external borrowings and issuances of debt securities. Our principal uses of cash are to fund capital expenditures, service our outstanding debt, fund our working capital requirements and historically, fund acquisitions. Due to our high level of variable costs and the asset-light make-up of our business, we have historically been able to quickly implement cost-cutting measures and will continue to adapt as the market dictates. We have also used cash to make open market repurchases of our debt and may, from time to time, continue to make such repurchases (including with respect to our Senior Notes) when it is opportunistic to do so to manage our debt maturity profile. In addition, we continually monitor potential capital sources, including equity and debt financing, to meet our investment and target liquidity requirements. Our future success and growth will be highly dependent on our ability to continue to access outside sources of capital.
Although we do not budget for acquisitions, pursuing growth through acquisitions may continue to be a part of our business strategy. Our ability to make significant additional acquisitions for cash will require us to obtain additional equity or debt financing, which we may not be able to obtain on terms acceptable to us or at all.
In 2022, our planned capital expenditure budget, excluding possible acquisitions, is expected to be between $20.0 million to $30.0 million. The nature of our capital expenditures is comprised of a base level of investment required to support our current operations and amounts related to growth and company initiatives. Capital expenditures for growth and company initiatives are discretionary. We continually evaluate our capital expenditures, and the amount we ultimately spend will depend on a number of factors, including expected industry activity levels and company initiatives.
At December 31, 2021, we had $21.5 million of cash and cash equivalents and $43.2 million of availability under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility, which resulted in a total liquidity position of $64.7 million. We expect our total liquidity position to continue to erode, due in large part to semi-annual interest payments ($14.0 million each) on the Senior Notes. Based on our current forecasts, we believe that cash on hand, together with cash flow from operations, and current and any potential future borrowings under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility, should be sufficient to meet our cash requirements inclusive of, but not limited to, normal operating needs, debt service obligations and planned capital expenditures and commitments for at least the next twelve months from the issuance date of our consolidated financial statements. However, we can make no assurance regarding our ability to achieve our forecasts, which are materially dependent on improved financial performance and the ever changing market.
At December 31, 2021, we had $15.0 million of borrowings under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility and borrowed an additional $5.0 million in the first two months of 2022. Approximately $28.4 million and $23.3 million in interest payments for both the Senior Notes and the 2018 ABL Credit Facility are due in 2022 and 2023, respectively. The 2018 ABL Credit Facility will mature on October 25, 2023, or, if earlier, on the date that is 180 days before the scheduled maturity date of the Senior Notes if they have not been redeemed or repurchased by such date. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately $320.3 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes outstanding. The Senior Notes will mature on October 25, 2023. Our plans to satisfy these obligations include refinancing or restructuring our indebtedness, seeking additional sources of capital, selling assets, or a combination thereof. Any such transactions may involve the issuance of additional equity or convertible debt securities that could result in material dilution to our stockholders, and these securities could have rights superior to holders of our common stock and could contain covenants that will restrict our operations. Our ability to successfully execute these plans is dependent on our financial condition and operating performance, which are subject to prevailing economic and competitive conditions, and certain financial, business and other factors, many of which are beyond our control. There can be no assurance that we will succeed in executing these plans. If unsuccessful, we will not have sufficient liquidity and capital resources to repay our indebtedness when it matures, or otherwise meet our long-term cash requirements beyond the next twelve months.
Senior Notes
On October 25, 2018, we issued $400.0 million of 8.750% Senior Notes under an indenture, dated as of October 25, 2018 (the “Indenture”), by and among us, including certain of our subsidiaries, and Wells Fargo, National Association, as Trustee. As of December 31, 2021, there were approximately $320.3 million aggregate principal amount of Senior Notes outstanding. The Senior Notes bear interest at annual rate of 8.750% payable on May 1 and November 1 of each year, and the first interest payment was due on May 1, 2019. Based on current amounts outstanding as of December 31, 2021, the semi-annual interest payments are $14.0 million each. The Senior Notes are senior unsecured obligations and are fully and unconditionally guaranteed on a senior unsecured basis by each of our current domestic subsidiaries and by certain future subsidiaries.
The Indenture contains covenants that limit our ability and the ability of our restricted subsidiaries to engage in certain activities. We were in compliance with the provisions of the Indenture at December 31, 2021.
Upon an event of default, the trustee or the holders of at least 25% in aggregate principal amount of then outstanding Senior Notes may declare the Senior Notes immediately due and payable, except that a default resulting from certain events of bankruptcy or insolvency with respect to us, any of our restricted subsidiaries that are a significant subsidiary or any group of restricted subsidiaries that, taken together, would constitute a significant subsidiary, will automatically cause all outstanding Senior Notes to become due and payable.
We repurchased approximately $26.3 million of Senior Notes at a repurchase price of approximately $8.4 million in cash for the year ended December 31, 2021. We also repurchased approximately $53.3 million of Senior Notes at a repurchase price of approximately $14.6 million in cash for the year ended December 31, 2020.
For additional information on the Senior Notes, see Note 9 - Debt Obligations included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
2018 ABL Credit Facility
On October 25, 2018, we entered into a credit agreement dated as of October 25, 2018 (the “2018 ABL Credit Agreement”), that permits aggregate borrowings of up to $200.0 million, subject to a borrowing base, including a Canadian tranche with a sub-limit of up to $25.0 million and a sub-limit of $50.0 million for letters of credit (the “2018 ABL Credit Facility”). The 2018 ABL Credit Facility will mature on October 25, 2023 or, if earlier, on the date that is 180 days before the scheduled maturity date of the Senior Notes if they have not been redeemed or repurchased by such date.
Loans to us and our domestic related subsidiaries (the “U.S. Credit Parties”) under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility may be base rate loans or LIBOR loans; and loans to Nine Energy Canada Inc., a corporation organized under the laws of Alberta, Canada, and its restricted subsidiaries (the “Canadian Credit Parties”) under the Canadian tranche may be Canadian Dollar Offered Rate (“CDOR”) loans or Canadian prime rate loans. The applicable margin for base rate loans and Canadian prime rate loans vary from 0.75% to 1.25% and the applicable margin for LIBOR loans or CDOR loans vary from 1.75% to 2.25% in each case depending on our leverage ratio. In addition, a commitment fee of 0.50% per annum will be charged on the average daily unused portion of the revolving commitments.
The 2018 ABL Credit Agreement contains various affirmative and negative covenants, including financial reporting requirements and limitations on indebtedness, liens, mergers, consolidations, liquidations and dissolutions, sales of assets, dividends and other restricted payments, investments (including acquisitions) and transactions with affiliates. In addition, the 2018 ABL Credit Agreement contains a minimum fixed charge ratio covenant of 1.00 to 1.00 that is tested quarterly when the availability under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility drops below $18.75 million or a default has occurred until the availability exceeds such threshold for 30 consecutive days and such default is no longer outstanding. We were in compliance with all covenants under the 2018 ABL Credit Agreement as of December 31, 2021.
All of the obligations under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility are secured by first priority perfected security interests (subject to permitted liens) in substantially all of the personal property of U.S. Credit Parties, excluding certain assets. The obligations under the Canadian tranche are further secured by first priority perfected security interests (subject to permitted liens) in substantially all of the personal property of Canadian Credit Parties excluding certain assets. The 2018 ABL Credit Facility is guaranteed by the U.S. Credit Parties, and the Canadian tranche is further guaranteed by the Canadian Credit Parties and the U.S. Credit Parties.
At December 31, 2021, we had $15.0 million of borrowings under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility, and our availability under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility was approximately $43.2 million, net of outstanding letters of credit of $0.5 million. We borrowed an additional $5.0 million under the 2018 ABL Credit Facility in the first two months of 2022.
Cash Flows
Our cash flows for the years ended December 31, 2021, and 2020 are presented below:
Operating Activities
Net cash used in operating activities was $40.4 million in 2021 compared to $4.9 million in net cash used in operating activities in 2020. The $35.5 million increase in net cash used in operating activities was primarily a result of a $62.2 million decrease in the change in working capital, including an increase in accounts receivable from increased product and service sales, which has the effect of lagging cash collections, in comparison to 2020. The overall increase in net cash used in operating activities was partially offset by an increase of $26.7 million in cash flow provided by operations, adjusted for any non-cash items, in comparison to 2020.
Investing Activities
Net cash used in investing activities was $11.9 million in 2021 compared to $1.8 million in net cash used in investing activities in 2020. The $10.1 million increase in net cash used in investing activities was primarily related to a $6.0 million increase in cash purchases of property and equipment in comparison to 2020, coupled with a $4.1 million decrease in proceeds from the sale of property and equipment (including insurance) between periods.
Financing Activities
Net cash provided by financing activities was $5.0 million in 2021 compared to $17.4 million in net cash used in financing activities in 2020. The $22.4 million increase in net cash provided by financing activities was primarily related to $15.0 million in proceeds from the 2018 ABL Credit Facility in 2021 that did not occur in 2020. The overall increase in net cash provided by financing activities was also partly attributed to a $6.1 million decrease in purchases of the Senior Notes and a $1.2 million reduction in payments of contingent liabilities between periods.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with GAAP. The preparation of our financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses, and related disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities. We evaluate our estimates and assumptions on a regular basis. We base our estimates on historical experience and various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results may differ from these estimates and assumptions used in preparation of our financial statements.
We consider the significant accounting policies identified below to be “critical accounting estimates” due to the following:
•The policies are dependent on estimates and assumptions made by us about matters that are inherently uncertain.
•The policies involve judgments and uncertainties to such an extent that there is a reasonable likelihood that materially different amounts could have been reported under different conditions, or if different assumptions had been used.
For additional information on our significant accounting policies, see Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Property and Equipment
Property and equipment is stated at cost and depreciated under the straight-line method over the estimated useful life of the asset. Equipment held under finance leases is stated at the present value of its future minimum lease payments and is depreciated under the straight-line method over the shorter of the lease term or the estimated useful life of the asset. Estimated useful lives requires significant judgment which is influenced by our historical experience in operating property and equipment, technological developments, and expectations of future demand. Should our estimates be too long or too short, we could report a disproportionate amount of losses or gains from sale or retirement.
Valuation of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets are reviewed for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of an asset may not be recoverable. In performing the review for impairment, future cash flows expected to result from the use of the asset and its eventual disposal are estimated. If the undiscounted future cash flows are less than the carrying amount of the assets, there is an indication that the asset may be impaired. The amount of the impairment is measured as the difference between the carrying value and the Level 3 fair value of the asset. The Level 3 fair value is determined either through the use of an external valuation, or by means of an analysis of discounted future cash flows based on expected utilization. Determining fair value requires the use of estimates and assumptions. Such estimates and assumptions include revenue growth rates, operating profit margins, weighted average costs of capital, terminal growth rates, future market share, the impact of new product development, and future market conditions, among others. We believe that the estimates and assumptions used in impairment assessments are reasonable and appropriate. Impairment losses are reflected in “Income (loss) from operations” in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Recognition of Provisions for Contingencies
In the ordinary course of business, we are subject to various claims, suits, and complaints. We, in consultation with internal and external advisors, will provide for a contingent loss in the financial statements if it is probable that a liability has been incurred at the date of the financial statements and the amount can be reasonably estimated. Reasonable estimates are based upon an analysis of potential results, assuming a combination of litigation and settlement strategies. The accuracy of these estimates is impacted by, among other things, the complexity of the issues and the amount of due diligence we have been able to perform. If it is determined that the reasonable estimate of the loss is a range and that there is no best estimate within the range, provision will be made for the lower amount of the range. If the actual settlement costs, final judgments, or fines, after appeals, differ from our estimates, there may be a material adverse effect on our future financial results.
Stock-based Compensation and Fair Market Value Determination
We account for awards of stock-based compensation at fair value on the date granted to employees and recognize the compensation expense in the financial statements over the requisite service period. Forfeitures are recorded as they occur. All stock-based compensation expense is recorded using the straight-line method and is included in “General and administrative expenses” in our Consolidated Statements of Income and Comprehensive Income (Loss).
Fair value of all the options outstanding was measured using the Black-Scholes model. Determining the appropriate fair value model and calculating the fair value of options requires the input of highly subjective assumptions, including the expected volatility of the price of our stock, the risk-free rate, the expected term of the options, and the expected dividend yield of our common stock. These estimates involve inherent uncertainties and the application of management’s judgment. If factors change and different assumptions are used, our stock-based compensation expense could be materially different in the future. The Black-Scholes option pricing model requires estimates of key assumptions based on both historical information and management judgment regarding market factors and trends.
Expected Life - The expected term of stock options represents the period the stock options are expected to remain outstanding and is based on the simplified method, which is the weighted average vesting term plus the original contractual term, divided by two.
Expected Volatility - We develop our expected volatility based upon a weighted average volatility of our peer group.
Risk-free Interest Rate - The risk-free interest rates for options granted are based on the average of five year and seven year constant maturity Treasury bond rates whose term is consistent with the expected term of an option from the date of grant.
Expected Term - The expected term is based on the midpoint between the vesting date and contractual term of an option. The expected term represents the period that our stock-based awards are expected to be outstanding.
Expected Dividend Yield - We do not anticipate paying cash dividends on our shares of common stock; therefore, the expected dividend yield is assumed to be zero.
Fair value of the stock-based compensation for all of the performance share units outstanding was measured using a Monte Carlo simulation model.
Recent Accounting Pronouncements
For additional information on recent accounting pronouncements, see Note 2 - Significant Accounting Policies included in Item 8 of Part II of this Annual Report.
Emerging Growth Company Status
We are an “emerging growth company” as defined in the JOBS Act. Under Section 107 of the JOBS Act, as an emerging growth company, we are taking advantage of an extended transition period for the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards, including the reduced reporting requirements and exemptions, and the longer phase-in periods for the adoption of new or revised financial accounting standards, until we are no longer an emerging growth company. Our election to use the longer phase-in periods permitted by this election may make it difficult to compare our financial statements to those of non-emerging growth companies and other emerging growth companies that have opted out of the longer phase-in periods under Section 107 of the JOBS Act and who will comply with new or revised financial accounting standards. If we were to subsequently elect instead to comply with these public company effective dates, such election would be irrevocable pursuant to Section 107 of the JOBS Act.
Smaller Reporting Company Status
We are a “smaller reporting company” as defined by the SEC. As such, we are eligible to comply with the scaled disclosure requirements in several Regulation S-K and Regulation S-X items. Our disclosures in this Annual Report reflect these scaled requirements.