Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion contains forward-looking statements that involve risks and uncertainties. Our actual results could differ materially from those discussed here. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those discussed in this section as well as factors described in “Part I, Item 1A - Risk Factors.”
Overview
Strategic Direction of Our Business
Nektar Therapeutics is a research-based biopharmaceutical company that discovers and develops innovative new medicines in areas of high unmet medical need. Our research and development pipeline of new investigational drugs includes potential therapies for oncology, immunology and virology. We leverage our proprietary and proven chemistry platform to discover and design new drug candidates. These drug candidates utilize our advanced polymer conjugate technology platforms, which are designed to enable the development of new molecular entities that target known mechanisms of action. We continue to make significant investments in new drug discovery and advancing our pipeline of drug candidates as we believe that this is the best strategy to build long-term stockholder value.
In oncology, we focus on developing medicines in immuno-oncology (I-O), which is a therapeutic approach based on targeting biological pathways that stimulate and sustain the body’s immune response in order to fight cancer. In the I-O area, we are executing a broad clinical development program evaluating bempegaldesleukin (previously referred to as NKTR-214).
We are developing bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo®, in collaboration with Bristol-Myers Squibb Company (BMS) as well as other independent development work evaluating bempegaldesleukin in combination with other checkpoint inhibitors and agents with potential complementary mechanisms of action. In August of 2019, the FDA granted a Breakthrough Therapy designation for bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® for the treatment of patients with untreated unresectable or metastatic melanoma. We expect to continue to make substantial research and development investments as we execute our broad clinical development program for bempegaldesleukin.
On February 13, 2018, we entered into a Strategic Collaboration Agreement with BMS (as amended to date, the BMS Collaboration Agreement) that outlined a collaboration for the development and co-commercialization of bempegaldesleukin in combination regimens with BMS medicines including Opdivo®. Under the joint development portion of the arrangement, we and BMS share development costs based on each party’s relative ownership interest in the compounds included in the regimen. For example, we share clinical development costs for bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo®, with 67.5% to BMS and 32.5% to Nektar. For costs of manufacturing bempegaldesleukin, however, BMS is responsible for 35% and Nektar is responsible for 65% of costs. BMS supplies Opdivo® free of charge.
The Collaboration Development Plan is evaluating bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® in ongoing registrational trials in first-line metastatic melanoma, adjuvant melanoma, first-line cisplatin ineligible, PD-L1 low, locally advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer, first-line metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC), and muscle-invasive bladder cancer, as well as a Phase 1/2 dose escalation and expansion study to evaluate bempegaldesleukin plus Opdivo® in combination with either axitinib or cabozantinib in first line RCC in order to support a future Phase 3 registrational trial. Several other registrational-supporting pediatric and safety studies for the combination of bempegaldesleukin and Opdivo® are currently ongoing. For indications not included in the Collaboration Development Plan, the parties are free to develop their own medicines in other indications subject to certain cost sharing, premium reimbursement, and timing terms and conditions.
Under our collaboration, we have received $1.9 billion from BMS, including a $1.0 billion upfront payment and an $850.0 million equity investment upon the effective date of the arrangement in 2018 and $50.0 million in milestones for the initiation of two registrational trials in 2020. The BMS Collaboration Agreement entitles Nektar to receive up to $1.4 billion of potential future milestones for the acceptance of our regulatory submissions and commercial launch of bempegaldesleukin in the US, EU and Japan in up to four indications.
If the results of one or more of our registrational trials in bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® meet their primary endpoints, we are entitled to milestones of $35.0 million and $25.0 million for the acceptance of our Biologics License Application (BLA) with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Marketing Authorisation Application (MAA) with the European Medicines Agency (EMA), respectively, for bempegaldesleukin in the first indication and $30.0 million in aggregate per indication for the acceptance of our BLA and MAA in up to three additional indications. If approved, we are entitled to milestones of $250.0 million in the US and $250.0 million in the European Union (EU) for the first commercial sale of bempegaldesleukin in the first indication and $100.0 million in each of the US and EU for the first commercial sale of bempegaldesleukin in up to three additional indications. As a result, whether and when bempegaldesleukin is approved in any indication will have a significant impact on our future results of operations and financial condition.
On January 12, 2022, we and BMS entered into an Amendment No. 2 to the BMS Collaboration Agreement pursuant to which we and BMS allocated certain responsibilities related to price negotiations and promotion, market access, patient support and related activities to each party. We retain the final decision-making authority regarding the pricing for bempegaldesleukin. Bempegaldesleukin will be sold on a stand-alone basis and there will be no fixed-dose combinations or co-packaging without the consent of both parties. We and BMS will share global commercialization profits and losses for bempegaldesleukin, with Nektar sharing 65% and BMS sharing 35% of the net profits and losses. Each party bears their own non-product specific core commercialization infrastructure costs.
Outside of the Collaboration Development Plan with BMS, we are conducting and pursuing additional I-O research and development activities evaluating bempegaldesleukin in combination with other agents that have potential complementary mechanisms of action. Our strategic objective is to establish bempegaldesleukin as a key component of many I-O combination regimens with the potential to enhance the standard of care in multiple oncology settings. For example, we are independently studying bempegaldesleukin in combination with Keytruda® in a non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) Phase 1/2 trial. In addition, on February 12, 2021, we entered into a financing and co-development collaboration with SFJ Pharmaceuticals to support a Phase 2/3 registrational clinical study of bempegaldesleukin plus Keytruda® in patients with head and neck cancer whose tumors express PD-L1. We expect to continue to make significant and increasing investments exploring the potential of bempegaldesleukin with mechanisms of action that we believe are synergistic with bempegaldesleukin based on emerging clinical development outcomes, scientific findings in cancer biology and preclinical development work.
With our non-BMS clinical collaborations for bempegaldesleukin, generally each party supports the collaboration based on its expertise and resources. For example, our co-development collaboration agreement with SFJ includes both
financial support from SFJ in the form of up to $150.0 million to fund the Phase 2/3 registrational clinical study of bempegaldesleukin plus Keytruda® in head and neck cancer, as well as operational support from SFJ in managing the clinical trial. In addition, we announced on February 17, 2021, that we had entered into a clinical trial collaboration and supply agreement with Merck wherein we will receive supplies of Keytruda® at no cost to us.
Our next most advanced I-O program is NKTR-255. NKTR-255 is a biologic that targets the IL-15 pathway in order to activate the body’s innate and adaptive immunity. Activation of the IL-15 pathway enhances the survival and function of natural killer (NK) cells and induces survival of both effector and CD8+ memory T cells. Recombinant human IL-15 is rapidly cleared from the body and must be administered frequently and in high doses limiting its utility due to toxicity. Through optimal engagement of the IL-15 receptor complex, NKTR-255 is designed to enhance functional NK cell populations and formation of long-term immunological memory, which may lead to sustained and durable anti-tumor immune response. Preclinical findings suggest NKTR-255 has the potential to synergistically combine with antibody-dependent cellular toxicity molecules as well as to enhance CAR-T therapies. We have initiated a Phase 1 dose escalation and expansion clinical study of NKTR-255 in adults with relapsed or refractory non-Hodgkin lymphoma or multiple myeloma, as well as a Phase 1/2 clinical study of NKTR-255 in patients with relapsed or refractory head and neck squamous cell carcinoma or colorectal cancer. In addition, we announced on September 21, 2021, that we had entered into a new oncology clinical collaboration with Merck KGaA Darmstadt, Germany and Pfizer Inc. to evaluate the maintenance regimen of NKTR-255 in combination with avelumab, a PD-L1 inhibitor, in patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma in the Phase II JAVELIN Bladder Medley study.
We are also conducting studies of bempegaldesleukin in combination with NKTR-262. NKTR-262 is a small molecule agonist that targets toll-like receptors found on innate immune cells in the body. NKTR-262 is designed to stimulate the innate immune system and promote maturation and activation of antigen-presenting cells, such as dendritic cells, which are critical to induce the body’s adaptive immunity and create antigen-specific cytotoxic T cells. NKTR-262 is being developed as an intra-tumoral injection in combination with systemic bempegaldesleukin to induce an abscopal response and achieve the goal of tumor regression in cancer patients treated with both therapies. The Phase 1/2 dose-escalation and expansion trial in patients with solid tumors is currently ongoing.
In immunology, NKTR-358 targets the underlying immune system imbalance in the body that occurs in patients with autoimmune disease. NKTR-358 is designed to optimally target the IL-2 receptor complex in order to stimulate proliferation and growth of regulatory T cells. NKTR-358 is being developed as a once or twice monthly self-administered injection for a number of autoimmune diseases. In 2017, we entered into a worldwide license agreement with Eli Lilly and Company (Lilly) to develop and commercialize NKTR-358, pursuant to which we received an initial payment of $150.0 million and are eligible for up to an additional $250.0 million for development and regulatory milestones. We have completed our responsibilities for Phase 1 clinical development and certain drug product development and supply activities. We also share Phase 2 development costs with Lilly, with Lilly responsible for 75% and Nektar responsible for 25% of these costs. We will have the option to contribute funding to Phase 3 development on an indication-by-indication basis, ranging from zero to 25% of the Phase 3 development costs and receive a royalty rate on global NKTR-358 sales up to the low twenties based upon our Phase 3 development cost contribution and the level of annual global product sales. Lilly will be responsible for all costs of global commercialization and we will have an option to co-promote in the U.S. under certain conditions.
We have completed a Phase 1 dose-finding trial of NKTR-358 to evaluate single-ascending doses of NKTR-358 in approximately 100 healthy patients. We also completed treatment of a Phase 1 multiple-ascending dose trial to evaluate NKTR-358 in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Lilly is conducting two Phase 1b studies in patients with psoriasis and atopic dermatitis, and initiated a Phase 2 study in SLE in October 2020 and a Phase 2 study in ulcerative colitis in March 2021. In addition, based on positive interim Phase 1b results in atopic dermatitis announced in December 2021, Lilly is planning to initiate a Phase 2 study in that indication and also plans to initiate another Phase 2 study in another immune-mediated disease.
In virology, we have studied bempegaldesleukin in a Phase 1b clinical study in adult patients who had been diagnosed with mild COVID-19 infection to evaluate whether bempegaldesleukin’s adaptive immune-stimulating mechanism to promote priming and proliferation of T cells and NK cells could be useful in the emerging treatment options for COVID-19. We also have a preclinical research collaboration with Gilead to test the combination of NKTR-255 with therapies in Gilead’s antiviral portfolio.
The level of our future research and development investment will depend on a number of trends and uncertainties including clinical study outcomes, future studies required to advance programs to regulatory approval, and the economics related to potential future collaborations that may include up-front payments, development funding, milestones, and royalties. Over the next several years, we plan to continue to make significant investments to advance our early drug candidate pipeline.
We have historically derived all of our revenue and substantial amounts of operating capital from our collaboration agreements. In addition to our collaborations with BMS and Lilly, we have received upfront and milestone payments under a
number of other previous collaboration agreements, several of which have resulted in approved drugs, for which we may continue to manufacture the polymer reagents used in the production of the drug products and may be entitled to royalties for net sales of these approved drugs. As of December 31, 2020, however, we have sold the majority of our rights to receive royalties under these arrangements, including:
•2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement: In 2012, we sold all of our rights to receive royalties from CIMZIA® (for the treatment of Chron’s disease and other autoimmune indications) and MIRCERA® (for the treatment of anemia associated with chronic kidney disease) under our collaborations with UCB Pharma and F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, respectively, to RPI Finance Trust (RPI), an affiliate of Royalty Pharma for $124.0 million.
•2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement: In December 2020, we sold our rights, subject to a cap, to receive royalties from MOVANTIK® / MOEVNTIG® (for the treatment of opioid-induced constipation), ADYNOVATE® / ADYNOVI® (a half-life extension product of Factor VIII) and other hemophilia products, under our arrangements with AstraZeneca AB, Baxalta, Inc. (a wholly owned-subsidiary of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Ltd.), and Novo Nordisk A/S, respectively, for $150.0 million to entities managed by HealthCare Royalty Management (HCR) under a capped sale arrangement, such that all future royalties return to Nektar if HCR receives $210.0 million in royalties by December 31, 2025 (the 2025 Threshold) or $240.0 million if the 2025 Threshold is not met. See Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for a further description of the capped nature of this agreement.
While in the near-term we continue to expect to generate substantially all of our revenue from collaboration arrangements, including the potential remaining $1.4 billion in regulatory and commercial launch milestones under the BMS collaboration, our plan is to generate significant commercial revenue from proprietary products, the first of which being bempegaldesleukin, if approved. Since we do not have experience commercializing products or an established commercial organization, there will be substantial risks and uncertainties in future years as we build commercial, organizational, and operational capabilities.
Our business is subject to significant risks, including the risks inherent in our development efforts, the results of our clinical trials, our dependence on the marketing efforts by our collaboration partners, uncertainties associated with obtaining and enforcing patents, the lengthy and expensive regulatory approval process and competition from other products. For a discussion of these and some of the other key risks and uncertainties affecting our business, see Item 1A "Risk Factors".
While the approved drugs and clinical development programs described above are key elements of our future success, we believe it is critically important that we continue to make substantial investments in our earlier-stage drug candidate pipeline. We have several drug candidates in earlier stage clinical development or being explored in research that we are preparing to advance into the clinical trials in future years. We are also advancing several other drug candidates in preclinical development in the areas of I-O, immunology, and other therapeutic indications. We believe that our substantial investment in research and development has the potential to create significant value if one or more of our drug candidates demonstrates positive clinical results, receives regulatory approval in one or more major markets and achieves commercial success. Drug research and development is an inherently uncertain process with a high risk of failure at every stage prior to approval. The timing and outcome of clinical trial results are extremely difficult to predict. Clinical development successes and failures can have a disproportionately positive or negative impact on our scientific and medical prospects, financial condition and prospects, results of operations and market value.
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic
In March 2020, COVID-19, the disease resulting from a novel strain of coronavirus infection, was declared a global pandemic. Many countries, including the United States and India, initially took steps such as restricting travel, closing schools, and issuing shelter-in-place orders to slow or moderate the spread of the virus. More recently, states and countries have adopted individualized approaches to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, the emergence of new variants of the coronavirus, such as the Delta and Omicron variants, and local resurgences in number and rates of infections, and the further spread of the virus may result in the return of prior restrictions or the institution of restrictions in the affected areas, which could have an adverse effect on our business, including our clinical trial timelines. We have been monitoring our supply chains for any disruptions or constraints caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. To date, we have not experienced any significant impacts on our supply, but ongoing global shortages in labor, raw materials and equipment could limit our ability to manufacture our products or to supply drug candidates for our clinical trials, or delay our research and development efforts. It remains unclear how long the negative impacts caused by the coronavirus will continue into the future.
Currently, our operations in research, manufacturing and maintenance that occur within our facilities are continuing in accordance with applicable guidelines and orders. Across all our locations, we have instituted a temporary work from home policy for office personnel who do not need to work on site to maintain productivity and we allow employees to voluntarily return to work on site with appropriate health and safety measures. The safety and well-being of our employees, and the patients
and healthcare providers in our clinical trial programs, are of first and foremost importance to us. We believe that the safety measures we are taking and instructing our contractors to take in response to the COVID-19 pandemic meet or exceed the guidance and requirements issued from government and public health officials. We continue to monitor our operations and applicable government recommendations in light of new developments in the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
We and our partners are currently engaged in the clinical testing of our drug candidates and the COVID-19 pandemic introduces significant challenges to our clinical development programs which are central to our business. The evolving situation around the COVID-19 pandemic, along with the resulting public health guidance measures that have been put into place, have thus far had varying impacts on the clinical testing of our drug candidates depending on the therapeutic indication, geographic distribution of clinical trial sites, the clinical trial stage, and, in certain cases, our partners’ general corporate approach to the COVID-19 pandemic. Any current assessments of the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our clinical programs, including the specific clinical programs discussed below, are difficult to predict and subject to change and, with regard to individual clinical trial sites within these studies, will likely vary by the geographic region in which they are located.
The COVID-19 pandemic has not had a significant impact on timelines for the ongoing registrational clinical trials studying the combination of bempegaldesleukin and Opdivo® in cancer indications being led by Nektar (such as adjuvant melanoma, RCC and first-line cisplatin ineligible, PD-L1 low, locally advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer). We currently expect to have topline data readouts for our RCC and urothelial cancer trials in the first half of 2022. For Nektar’s Phase 1/2 trial studying the combination of bempegaldesleukin and Keytruda® in NSCLC, although the COVID-19 pandemic delayed the initiation of certain investigator sites in Europe earlier in the trial, we presented initial safety as well as preliminary overall response rate data for the dose-escalation and 0.006 mg/kg NSCLC expansion cohorts of this study in the second half of 2021. We are closely monitoring the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the European and other ex-U.S. sites for any impact on timelines for the ongoing study. With regard to Nektar’s ongoing Phase 1/2 clinical study of NKTR-262 in patients with solid tumors, this study largely remains on schedule although we experienced some initial challenges with new investigator site initiations. Nektar’s Phase 1 clinical study of NKTR-255 in patients with relapsed/refractory hematologic malignancies has enrolled slower than anticipated due to ongoing challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, and the dose-escalation monotherapy portion of the study is currently expected to be completed in the first half of 2022.
For clinical studies of our drug candidates being run by our partners, BMS is enrolling patients in each of the BMS-led registration studies and re-started initiation of new investigator sites in the third quarter of 2020 following a pause in the initiation of new investigator sites it instituted for all of its studies as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the summer of 2020, BMS extended its timeline estimates by approximately six months for the first data read-outs for the first-line melanoma trial, which we currently expect to occur in the first half of 2022. The overall supply chain impact stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic delayed the start of the Phase 2b study of NKTR-358 in ulcerative colitis (UC), which is run by our partner Lilly and which Lilly is currently enrolling along with a Phase 2 study in moderate to severe lupus patients. Resource constraints at contract research organizations also caused some delays in data availability. While BMS and Lilly are not currently projecting any delays related to the COVID-19 pandemic, the rapid development and fluidity of the COVID-19 pandemic preclude any firm estimates as to the ultimate effect this disease will have on our collaborators’ clinical trials. As a result, there remains substantial uncertainty as to potential impacts on our collaboration partner studies.
In an effort to mitigate the negative effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our clinical trials (both in terms of clinical trial timelines and integrity of clinical study data), we have taken steps to help our clinical trial investigators and their teams continue to provide care and uninterrupted access to their patients. Particularly, in the context of our clinical trials directed to investigational cancer treatments, for example, we are actively working with our study sites to implement measures to prevent study protocol violations, to minimize any disruption of treatment visits, to accommodate for patient visit delays caused by limited access to healthcare facilities, to leverage alternative methods for maintaining clinical trial integrity, and to properly record patient event data that may be influenced by the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, to the extent that the integrity of individual patient data is negatively affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, we will consider measures to maintain the integrity of the clinical study overall (such as over-enrolling patients into the study and removing all patients originating from an affected study site when performing statistical analyses of study endpoints). Although these measures may have the benefit of preserving the overall integrity of a clinical study, implementing these measures could result in a delay in completing the study.
With respect to financing our near-term business needs, as set forth below in “Key Developments and Trends in Liquidity and Capital Resources,” we estimate we have working capital to fund our current business plans through at least the next twelve months.
Key Developments and Trends in Liquidity and Capital Resources
We estimate that we have working capital to fund our current business plans for at least the next twelve months from the date of filing. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $798.8 million in cash and investments in marketable securities.
Results of Operations
Years Ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 is presented below. Additional information required by Item 7 for the year ended December 31, 2019 can be found in Item 7 in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year December 31, 2020, filed with the SEC on February 26, 2021 and is incorporated herein by reference.
Revenue (in thousands, except percentages)
Our revenue is derived from our collaboration agreements, under which we may receive product sales revenue, royalties, and license fees, as well as development and sales milestones and other contingent payments. We recognize revenue when we transfer promised goods or services to our collaboration partners. The amount of upfront fees received under our license and collaboration agreements allocated to continuing obligations, such as development or manufacturing and supply commitments, is generally recognized as we deliver products or provide development services. As a result, there may be significant variations in the timing of receipt of cash payments and our recognition of revenue. We make our best estimate of the timing and amount of products and services expected to be required to fulfill our performance obligations. Given the uncertainties in research and development collaborations, significant judgment is required to make these estimates.
As noted above, dependent on whether one of more of our registrational studies in bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® meet their primary endpoints, we may file a BLA and/or MAA for bempegaldesleukin in one or more indications. We are entitled to milestones of $35.0 million and $25.0 million for the acceptance of our BLA and MAA filings, respectively, for bempegaldesleukin in the first indication and $30.0 million in aggregate per indication for the acceptance of our BLA and MAA for up to three additional indications. If approved, we are entitled to milestones of $250.0 million in the US and $250.0 million in the EU for the first commercial sale of bempegaldesleukin in the first indication and $100.0 million in each of the US and EU for the first commercial sale of bempegaldesleukin in up to three additional indications.
Accordingly, the recognition of these milestones, if any, and product sales for bempegaldesleukin, if approved, is dependent upon the timing of the readouts of our registrational trials and, if the results are positive, the timelines for regulatory filing submissions and reviews.
Product Sales
Product sales include predominantly fixed price manufacturing and supply agreements with our collaboration partners and are the result of firm purchase orders from those partners. The timing of shipments is based solely on the demand and requirements of our collaboration partners and is not ratable throughout the year.
Product sales increased for the year ended December 31, 2021, as compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, due to increased demand from our collaboration partners.
Other than the potential for sales of bempegaldesleukin, if approved and as described above, we expect product sales in 2022 to decrease compared to 2021 due to decreased demand from our collaboration partners.
Royalty Revenue
On December 16, 2020, we entered into the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement with HCR, under which we sold to HCR certain of our rights to receive royalty payments arising on worldwide net sales of MOVANTIK®, ADYNOVATE® and REBINYN® beginning October 1, 2020. As a result, we recognized royalty revenue for these products for the nine months ended September 30, 2020, and recognized these royalties as non-cash royalty revenue for the three months ended December
31, 2020 and for the year ended December 31, 2021. Please see Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information on the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement.
We did not recognize any royalty revenue during 2021 because we recognized all such royalties as non-cash royalty revenue as a result of the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement, and we expect this presentation to continue through the end of the HCR royalty sale arrangement.
Non-cash Royalty Revenue Related to Sales of Future Royalties
For a discussion of our Non-cash royalty revenue, please see our discussion below “Non-Cash Royalty Revenue and Non-Cash Interest Expense.”
License, Collaboration and Other Revenue
License, collaboration and other revenue includes the recognition of upfront payments, milestone and other contingent payments received in connection with our license and collaboration agreements and certain research and development activities. The level of license, collaboration and other revenue depends in part upon the estimated recognition period of the upfront payments allocated to continuing performance obligations, the achievement of milestones and other contingent events, the continuation of existing collaborations, the amount of research and development work, and entering into new collaboration agreements, if any.
During the year ended December 31, 2020, pursuant to the BMS Collaboration Agreement, we recognized $25.0 million for the achievement of the first patient, first visit in the registrational muscle-invasive bladder cancer trial, which was achieved on January 30, 2020, and $25.0 million for the achievement of the first patient, first visit in the registrational adjuvant melanoma trial, which we achieved on July 27, 2020. We did not achieve any additional milestones during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Other than the potential for the recognition of milestones under our BMS Collaboration Agreement, we expect license, collaboration and other revenue for 2022 to be consistent with 2021.
The timing and future success of our drug development programs and those of our collaboration partners are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties. See Item 1A. Risk Factors for discussion of the risks associated with the complex nature of our collaboration agreements.
Revenue by geography (in thousands)
Revenue by geographic area is based on the headquarters or shipping locations of our partners. The following table sets forth revenue by geographic area:
Revenue attributable to the U.S. for the year ended December 31, 2021 was lower than for the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to the recognition of $50.0 million of milestones during the year ended December 31, 2020, from the BMS Collaboration Agreement as described above.
Cost of goods sold (in thousands, except percentages)
Our strategy is to manufacture and supply polymer reagents to support our drug candidates or our third-party collaborators where we have a strategic development and commercialization relationship or where we derive substantial economic benefit. Typically, we have elected to enter into and maintain those manufacturing relationships associated with long-term collaboration agreements which include multiple sources of revenue, which we view holistically and in aggregate. We have a predominantly fixed cost base associated with our manufacturing activities. As a result, our product gross profit and margin are significantly impacted by the mix and volume of products sold in each period.
Product gross margin improved for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to a more favorable product mix in 2021 compared to 2020. We have a manufacturing arrangement with a partner that includes a fixed price which is less than the fully burdened manufacturing cost for the polymer reagent, and we expect this arrangement to continue with this partner in future years. We also receive royalty revenue from this collaboration. In each of the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the royalty revenue from this collaboration exceeded the related negative gross profit.
We expect product gross margin to continue to fluctuate in future periods depending on the level and mix of manufacturing orders from our customers. Other than the potential for sales of bempegaldesleukin, which, if approved and as described above, would improve our product gross margin, we expect product gross margin to remain negative in 2022 and to be approximately consistent with 2021 as a result of the collaborative arrangement described above.
Research and development expense (in thousands, except percentages)
Research and development expense consists primarily of clinical study costs, contract manufacturing costs, direct costs of outside research, materials, supplies, licenses and fees as well as personnel costs (including salaries, benefits, and stock-based compensation). Research and development expense also includes certain overhead allocations consisting of support and facilities-related costs. Where we perform research and development activities under a joint development collaboration, such as our collaboration with BMS, we record the expense reimbursement from our partners as a reduction to research and development expense, and we record our share of our partners’ expenses as an increase to research and development expense. Under the BMS Collaboration Agreement, BMS generally bears 67.5% of development costs for bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® and 35% of costs for manufacturing bempegaldesleukin.
We utilize our employee and infrastructure resources across multiple development and research programs. The following table presents expenses incurred for clinical and regulatory services, clinical supplies, and preclinical study support provided by third parties as well as contract manufacturing costs for each of our drug candidates. The table also presents other costs and overhead consisting of personnel, facilities and other indirect costs (in thousands):
_______________________________________________________________
(1)Clinical Study Status definitions are provided in the chart found in Part I, Item 1. Business.
(2)Development expenses for bempegaldesleukin include expenses under the BMS Collaboration Agreement, other collaboration agreements and our own independent studies. The amounts for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include net reductions of $64.3 million and $90.4 million, respectively, of development cost reimbursements from BMS under our collaboration, net of our share of BMS’s costs.
(3)The amounts for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 include reductions of $37.2 million and $37.8 million of employee cost reimbursements from BMS under our collaboration.
Research and development expense was consistent between the year ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020. Research and development expense increased for our independent development of bempegaldesleukin outside of the BMS Collaboration Agreement, including our registrational Phase 2/3 trial in head and neck cancer under our co-development agreement with SFJ and our Phase 1b trial in COVID-19. Research and development expense decreased under our BMS Collaboration Agreement because we have fully enrolled our registrational trials in first-line cisplatin ineligible, PD-L1 low, locally advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer and first-line metastatic renal cell carcinoma and because we completed certain manufacturing activities for bempegaldesleukin in 2020. These decreases were partially offset by an increase in expense for our Phase 3 adjuvant melanoma trial under the BMS Collaboration Agreement. As a result of the decrease in expense under the BMS Collaboration Agreement, the net reductions recorded to research and development expense for BMS’s reimbursements of our costs decreased from $128.2 million for the year ended December 31, 2020 to $101.5 million for the year ended December 31, 2021. Please see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding our BMS Collaboration Agreement..
Additionally, research and development expense increased for our development of NKTR-255 in our Phase 1/2 studies in liquid and solid tumors, partially offset by a decrease in development costs for NKTR-358. We completed certain Phase 1 clinical development and drug product development deliverables for NKTR-358 in 2020, for which we were responsible for 100% of costs. Phase 1B and Phase 2 development continues, for which we are responsible for 25% of costs and Lilly is responsible for 75% of costs.
We expect research and development expense to increase for 2022 compared to 2021. We expect our development expense for bempegaldesleukin to increase as we continue our registrational trial in adjuvant melanoma and our Phase 2/3 study in head and neck cancer under our co-development agreement with SFJ. We expect research and development expense to increase for our continued development of Phase 1/2 dose-escalation and expansion studies for NKTR-255 in multiple myeloma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma, relapsed or refractory head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, and colorectal cancer. In addition, we are collaborating with Lilly to develop NKTR-358, and Lilly will be conducting the recently started Phase 2 studies and other ongoing studies in 2022, for which we are responsible for 25% of costs. The timing and amount of our future clinical investments will vary significantly based upon our evaluation of ongoing clinical results and the structure, timing, and scope of additional clinical development programs and potential clinical collaboration partnerships (if any) for these programs.
In addition to our drug candidates that we plan to evaluate in clinical development during 2022 and beyond, we believe it is vitally important to continue our substantial investment in a pipeline of new drug candidates to continue to build the value
of our drug candidate pipeline and our business. Our discovery research organization is identifying new drug candidates across a wide range of molecule classes, including small molecules and large proteins, peptides and antibodies, across multiple therapeutic areas. We also plan from time to time to evaluate opportunities to in-license potential drug candidates from third parties to add to our drug discovery and development pipeline. We plan to continue to advance our most promising early research drug candidates into preclinical development with the objective to advance these early stage research programs to human clinical studies over the next several years.
Our expenditures on current and future preclinical and clinical development programs are subject to numerous uncertainties in timing and cost to completion. In order to advance our drug candidates through clinical development, each drug candidate must be tested in numerous preclinical safety, toxicology and efficacy studies. We then conduct clinical studies for our drug candidates that take several years to complete. The cost and time required to complete clinical trials may vary significantly over the life of a clinical development program as a result of a variety of factors, including but not limited to:
•the number of patients required for a given clinical study design;
•the length of time required to enroll clinical study participants;
•the number and location of sites included in the clinical studies;
•the clinical study designs required by the health authorities (i.e. primary and secondary endpoints as well as the size of the study population needed to demonstrate efficacy and safety outcomes);
•the potential for changing standards of care for the target patient population;
•the competition for patient recruitment from competitive drug candidates being studied in the same clinical setting;
•the costs of producing supplies of the drug candidates needed for clinical trials and regulatory submissions;
•the safety and efficacy profile of the drug candidate;
•the use of clinical research organizations to assist with the management of the trials; and
•the costs and timing of, and the ability to secure, approvals from government health authorities.
Furthermore, our strategy includes the potential of entering into collaborations with third parties to participate in the development and commercialization of some of our drug candidates such as those collaborations that we have already completed for bempegaldesleukin, NKTR-358, or clinical collaborations where we would share costs and operational responsibility with a partner such as we have done with NKTR-255. In certain situations, the clinical development program and process for a drug candidate and the estimated completion date will largely be under the control of that third party and not under our control. We cannot forecast with any degree of certainty which of our drug candidates will be subject to future collaborations or how such arrangements would affect our development plans or capital requirements.
The timing and outcomes of our clinical studies could be impacted by the uncertainties of the COVID-19 pandemic. Please see discussion above on effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The risks and uncertainties associated with our research and development projects are discussed more fully in Item 1A. Risk Factors. As a result of the uncertainties discussed above, we are unable to determine with any degree of certainty the duration and completion costs of our research and development projects, anticipated completion dates or when and to what extent we will receive cash inflows from a collaboration arrangement or the commercialization of a drug candidate.
General and administrative expense (in thousands, except percentages)
General and administrative expense includes the cost of administrative staffing, business development, sales and marketing, finance, and legal activities as well as certain overhead allocations consisting of support and facilities-related costs. General and administrative expense increased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared with the year ended December 31, 2020 primarily due to increased personnel costs as we begin a stage appropriate build of our commercial capability to co-commercialize bempegaldesleukin with BMS.
We expect general and administrative expense to increase for 2022 compared to 2021, as we continue to build our commercial capabilities. However, we will only incur our most significant commercialization expenditures, if the results of at
least one of our registrational studies in bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® meets its primary endpoints. BMS and we share commercial costs, using a ratio of 35% to BMS and 65% to Nektar, and each party bears its own costs for non-product specific core commercialization infrastructure.
Impairment of Assets and Other Costs for Terminated Program
On January 14, 2020, the joint FDA Anesthetic Drug Products Advisory Committee and Drug Safety and Risk Management Committee did not recommend approval of our NDA for NKTR-181. As a result, we withdrew our NDA and decided to make no further investments in this program. On February 26, 2020, the Audit Committee of our Board of Directors approved management’s plan for the wind-down of the NKTR-181 program.
As a result, in the three months ended March 31, 2020, we wrote off $19.7 million of advance payments to contract manufacturers for commercial batches of NKTR-181. We also incurred $25.5 million of additional costs, primarily for non-cancellable commitments to our contract manufacturers and severance costs.
Change in Fair Value of Development Derivative Liability
As discussed in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, we remeasure the development derivative liability under our co-development agreement with SFJ to fair value at each reporting date. The change in fair value recorded for the year ended December 31, 2021 primarily reflects the accretion of the scenario-based probability-adjusted discounted cash flows of our obligation to potentially pay Success Payments to SFJ using our imputed borrowing rate of 12.7%, net of the accretion of SFJ’s obligation to fund the SCCHN Clinical Trial, using SFJ’s estimated borrowing rate of 1.5%. We review our estimates at each reporting period, and, in particular, in future periods, as information becomes available, such as the applicable clinical trial results and FDA approval decisions, we will re-evaluate our probability of success estimates related to achieving FDA approval for bempegaldesleukin in the Melanoma Indication, the SCCHN Indication and one additional indication, and will record a corresponding increase or decrease in the fair value of the development derivative liability. Additionally, in future periods, we may adjust our estimate of the probability of a successful interim futility analysis and we will record a corresponding increase or decrease to the fair value of the development derivative liability, reflecting the decrease or increase (as applicable) in the likelihood of SFJ’s resulting obligation to complete the full SCCHN Clinical Trial. Such changes in the probabilities of success may result in a material expense or benefit in the period when the information is received.
For 2022, we expect that we will record a significant remeasurement adjustment when we receive the results of our registrational study in the Melanoma Indication. If the Melanoma Clinical Trial meets its primary endpoints, our probability of paying Success Payments to SFJ will significantly increase, which will significantly increase the fair value of the development derivative liability. Conversely, if the Melanoma Clinical Trial does not meet its primary endpoints, our probability of paying Success Payments to SFJ will significantly decrease, which will significantly decrease the fair value of the development derivative instrument.
Non-Cash Royalty Revenue, Non-Cash Interest Expense and Loss on Revaluation of Liability (in thousands, except percentages)
As discussed in Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, we continue to recognize non-cash royalty revenue for the 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement and the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement.
2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement
Non-cash royalty revenue for the 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement resulting from net sales of CIMZIA® and MIRCERA® for the year ended December 31, 2021 was consistent with the year ended December 31, 2020. Non-cash interest expense for the 2012 Purchase and Sales Agreement decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020 due to the lower interest rate used in the three months ended December 31, 2021 as a result of the revaluation of the liability.
As discussed in Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, to resolve UCB's challenges to our patents and their resulting obligation to pay us the royalties on net sales of CIMZIA® which we had sold to RPI, RPI and UCB negotiated a reduction in the royalty term and decreased royalty rates over the remaining term, which was implemented through the Settlement Agreement between UCB and us. As a result of accounting for the Settlement Agreement as a debt modification, we remeasured the liability to fair value based on the present value of the royalty payments to RPI after the modification, discounted at a rate of 16%. The recognition of the loss on the revaluation has no effect on our cash flows, and the net income statement effect over the term of 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement remains unchanged.
Over the term of this arrangement, the net proceeds of the transaction of $114.0 million, consisting of the original proceeds of $124.0 million, net of $10.0 million in payments from us to RPI, is amortized as the difference between the non-cash royalty revenue and the sum of the non-cash interest expense and the loss on the revaluation of the liability. To date, we have amortized $35.7 million of the net proceeds. There are a number of factors that could materially affect our estimated interest rate, in particular, the amount and timing of royalty payments from future net sales of CIMZIA® and MIRCERA®. As a result, future interest rates could differ significantly. After the modification, we will continue to periodically assess future non-cash royalty revenues, and we will adjust any such change in our estimated interest rate prospectively based on our best estimates of future non-cash royalty revenue such that future non-cash interest expense will amortize the remaining $78.3 million of the net proceeds, since all changes in the royalties are absorbed by RPI.
Before the modification, we had increased our forecasts of future non-cash royalties at various intervals, primarily due to sales of CIMZIA® exceeding previous expectations. Due to these increases in estimated future royalties, we increased the prospective effective interest rate from 17% at inception to 48% as of the modification date. In connection with the modification and the reduction in the royalty rate and the royalty term, the net present value of the modified royalty stream, discounted at the current fair market value discount rate of 16%, is higher than the prior liability balance. The difference of $23.5 million was reported as a loss on the revaluation of the liability.
2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement
As discussed in Note 8 to the Consolidated Finance Statements and above under Royalty Revenue, we began recognizing non-cash royalty revenue for the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement in the three months ended December 31, 2020. Non-cash royalty revenue and non-cash interest expense increased for 2021 as we recognized them for the full year.
The 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement provides for a capped return sale arrangement under which the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement will automatically expire, and HCR’s right to receive the sold royalties will cease when HCR has received payments equaling $210.0 million (the 2025 Threshold), if the 2025 Threshold is achieved on or prior to December 31, 2025, or $240.0 million, if the 2025 Threshold is not achieved on or prior to December 31, 2025. Our estimate of the imputed interest rate reflects that our estimates for sales of MOVANTIK®, ADYNOVATE® and REBINYN® are sufficient to achieve the 2025 Threshold. As a result, we expect the interest rate to remain consistent between 2021 and 2022. However, if sales estimates decline and we conclude that the 2025 Threshold will not be achieved, we expect that the interest rate would increase modestly.
Interest Income and Other Income (Expense), net (in thousands, except percentages)
Interest income and other income (expense), net decreased for the year ended December 31, 2021 compared to the year ended December 31, 2020, primarily due to decreases in market interest rates and lower investment balances which have been utilized to fund our operations and the repayment of our senior notes on April 13, 2020. The effective interest rate earned on investments which we purchased after the COVID-19 pandemic began has been significantly lower than historical interest rates. We expect that our interest income and other income (expense), net will decrease for 2022 compared to 2021 due to lower investments balances as we fund our operations and continued low interest rates.
Interest expense (in thousands, except percentages)
Interest expense during the year ended December 31, 2020 consisted of interest from our senior secured notes. In October 2015, we issued $250.0 million in aggregate principal amount of 7.75% senior secured notes, which we repaid on April 13, 2020. As a result, we incurred no interest expense after the repayment date.
Income Tax Expense (in thousands, except percentages)
For the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, our income tax expense primarily results from our foreign operations. Due to our expected net loss in 2022, we expect income tax expense to be consistent with 2021 and reflect taxable income for our foreign operations.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have financed our operations primarily through revenue from upfront and milestone payments under our strategic collaboration agreements, royalties and product sales, as well as public and private placements of debt and equity securities. At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $798.8 million in cash and investments in marketable securities.
We estimate that we have working capital to fund our current business plans for at least the next twelve months from the date of filing. We expect the clinical development of our drug candidates including bempegaldesleukin, NKTR-358, and NKTR-255 will continue to require significant investment to continue to advance in clinical development with the objective of obtaining regulatory approval or entering into one or more collaboration partnerships. Additionally, we have begun to invest in a stage appropriate build for commercialization of bempegaldesleukin. If the results of one or more of our registrational trials in bempegaldesleukin meet their primary endpoints to support health authority filings, we expect to increase our commercialization investment significantly to prepare for the commercial launch of bempegaldesleukin. The preparation for our potential first commercial drug launch requires a significant investment in building a commercial infrastructure, hiring a commercial sales force and incurring other third-party costs, which we will incur before we begin to receive any revenues from the sale of bempegaldesleukin, if approved. Even if our BLA or MAA for bempegaldesleukin is approved, we cannot be assured that the gross margin from sales of bempegaldesleukin will be sufficient to recover the costs of these investments in the near-term period following commercial launch. Under our BMS Collaboration Agreement, we share commercialization costs, using a ratio of 35% to BMS, 65% to Nektar, but each parties bears its own costs for non-product specific core commercialization infrastructure. If bempegaldesleukin is approved, we will share the net commercial profits and losses in the same manner of 35% to BMS and 65% to Nektar.
In the past, we have received a number of significant payments from collaboration agreements and other significant transactions, including $1.9 billion in total consideration received under our arrangement with BMS and a $150.0 million upfront payment from Lilly for our collaboration agreement for NKTR-358. In the future, we expect to receive substantial
payments from our collaboration agreements with BMS and Lilly. In particular, under the BMS Collaboration Agreement, as discussed above, we are entitled to approximately $1.4 billion of potential future milestones for the acceptance of our regulatory submissions and commercial launch of bempegaldesleukin in the US, EU and Japan in up to four indications. Of these milestones, $560.0 million are associated with the acceptance of our regulatory submissions and commercial launches of bempegaldesleukin in its first indication in the U.S. and EU, subject to regulatory approval. As a result, whether and when bempegaldesleukin is approved in any indication will have a significant impact on our future liquidity and capital resources. We have no credit facility or any other sources of committed capital.
On February 12, 2021, we entered into a co-development agreement with SFJ Pharmaceuticals (SFJ), pursuant to which SFJ will pay up to $150.0 million in committed funding to support a Phase 2/3 study of bempegaldesleukin in combination with pembrolizumab (Keytruda®) for first-line treatment of patients with metastatic or unresectable recurrent squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck (the SCCHN Clinical Trial) whose tumors express PD-L1 (the SCCHN Indication). In exchange for funding the SCCHN Clinical Trial, SFJ is entitled to a series of contingent success-based payments with the first payment due after substantial completion of the SCCHN Clinical Trial which we currently expect to occur in late 2024 or early 2025 as follows: (i) if bempegaldesleukin receives FDA approval for first line metastatic melanoma or the SCCHN Indication, we would pay SFJ $450.0 million over a series of five annual payments with the first annual payment being $30.0 million; (ii) if bempegaldesleukin receives FDA approval in both the Melanoma Indication and the SCCHN Indication, we would pay SFJ an additional $150.0 million paid over a series of seven annual payments; and (iii) if bempegaldesleukin receives FDA approval in an indication other than the Melanoma Indication or the SCCHN Indication, we would pay SFJ a one-time payment of $37.5 million. See Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
In the short term, we do not anticipate that the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic will have a material effect on our results of operations or financial position since we do not generate significant cash flows from recurring revenues and our revenues are generally less affected by shelter-in place or similar orders. However, if delays caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in commencing and enrolling patients in our clinical trials or those run by our partners result in a delay in completing these trials, our ability to file for regulatory approval and commercialize these products (if approved) and receive associated milestone payments may also be delayed.
Due to the potential for adverse developments in the credit markets, we may experience reduced liquidity with respect to some of our investments in marketable securities. These investments are generally held to maturity, which, in accordance with our investment policy, is less than two years. However, if the need arises to liquidate such securities before maturity, we may experience losses on liquidation. To date we have not experienced any liquidity issues with respect to these securities. We believe that, even allowing for potential liquidity issues with respect to these securities and the effect of the COVID-19 pandemic on the financial markets, our remaining cash and investments in marketable securities will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next twelve months.
Our current business plan is subject to significant uncertainties and risks as a result of, among other factors, clinical and regulatory outcomes for bempegaldesleukin, the sales levels of our products, if and when they are approved, the sales levels for those products for which we are entitled to royalties, if and when they are approved, clinical program outcomes, whether, when and on what terms we are able to enter into new collaboration transactions, expenses being higher than anticipated, unplanned expenses, cash receipts being lower than anticipated, and the need to satisfy contingent liabilities, including litigation matters and indemnification obligations.
The availability and terms of various financing alternatives, if required in the future, substantially depend on many factors including the success or failure of drug development programs in our pipeline. The availability and terms of financing alternatives and any future significant payments from existing or new collaborations depend on the positive outcome of ongoing or planned clinical studies, whether we or our partners are successful in obtaining regulatory authority approvals in major markets, and if approved, the commercial success of these drugs, as well as general capital market conditions. We may pursue various financing alternatives to fund the expansion of our business as appropriate.
We currently have an effective shelf registration statement on Form S-3 (the 2021 Shelf Registration Statement) on file with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which expires in March 2024. The 2021 Shelf Registration Statement currently permits the offering, issuance and sale by us of up to an aggregate offering price of $300.0 million of common stock, preferred stock, debt securities and warrants in one or more offerings and in any combination, all of which may be offered, issued and sold in “at-the-market” sales pursuant to an equity distribution agreement with Cowen and Company, LLC (the Equity Distribution Agreement). No securities have been sold under the 2021 Shelf Registration Statement or the Equity Distribution Agreement.
Our only significant noncancellable contractual commitments relate to our leases. Please see Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Cash flows from operating activities
Cash flows used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $412.7 million.
Cash flows used in operating activities for the year ended December 31, 2020 totaled $313.3 million, which includes $353.6 million of net operating cash uses and $9.7 million for interest payments on our senior secured notes, partially offset by $50.0 million in milestones under the BMS Collaboration Agreement.
We expect that cash flows used in operating activities, excluding upfront, milestone and other contingent payments received, if any, will increase in 2022 compared to 2021 primarily as a result of increased research and development expenses. If the results of one or more of our registrational trials for bempegaldesleukin in combination with Opdivo® meets their primary endpoints, we expect our cash flows used in preparing for the commercial launch of bempegaldesleukin will significantly increase. However, we are entitled to milestones for the acceptance of our BLA or MAA filing by the FDA and EMA, respectively, and the commercial launch of bempegaldesleukin, the receipt of which is dependent upon if and when our BLA or MAA is accepted, our filings are approved and we are able to complete a first commercial sale of bempegaldesleukin. A substantial portion of these milestones are based on the first commercial sale of bempegaldesleukin in the U.S. and EU and there is therefore uncertainty regarding the timing of achievement of this portion of the milestones depending on health authority review timelines.
Cash flows from investing activities
We paid $15.0 million and $7.3 million to purchase or construct property, plant and equipment in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Cash flows from financing activities
As described in Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in the second quarter of 2020, we redeemed the senior secured notes at par and therefore repaid the principal of $250.0 million.
On December 16, 2020, we entered into a purchase and sale agreement (the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement) with entities managed by Healthcare Royalty Management, LLC, pursuant to which we sold our rights to receive royalty payments arising from the worldwide net sales of MOVANTIK®, ADYNOVATE® and REBINYN®, beginning on October 1, 2020. We received proceeds of $146.3 million, representing the selling price of $150.0 million, net of transaction costs. See Note 8 for additional details on the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement, including the capped nature of the arrangement.
We received proceeds from issuance of common stock related to our employee option and stock purchase plans of $33.2 million and $23.4 million in the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation and presentation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period.
We base our estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form our basis for making judgments about the carrying value of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources and evaluate our estimates on an ongoing basis. Actual results may differ materially from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions. We have determined that, for the periods in this report, the following accounting policies and estimates are critical in understanding our financial condition and the results of our operations.
Development Derivative Liability
As described above and in Note 6 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, in February 2021, we entered into a co-development agreement with SFJ (the SFJ Agreement), pursuant to which SFJ will provide up to $150.0 million in committed funding for a Phase 2/3 registrational clinical study of bempegaldesleukin plus Keytruda® in patients with head and neck cancer whose tumors express PD-L1 (the SCCHN Indication). In exchange for funding the SCCHN Clinical Trial, SFJ is entitled to a series of contingent success-based payments as follows: (i) if bempegaldesleukin receives FDA approval for first line metastatic melanoma (the Melanoma Indication) or the SCCHN Indication, we would pay SFJ $450.0 million over a series of five annual
payments with the first payment due after substantial completion of the SCCHN Clinical Trial which we currently expect to occur in late 2024 or early 2025; (ii) if bempegaldesleukin receives FDA approval in both the Melanoma Indication and the SCCHN Indication, we would pay SFJ an additional $150.0 million paid over a series of seven annual payments; and (iii) if bempegaldesleukin receives FDA approval in an indication other than first line metastatic melanoma or the SCCHN Indication, would pay SFJ a one-time payment of $37.5 million.
The SCCHN Clinical Trial provides for an interim futility analysis, and unless the futility criteria are met, SFJ is required to complete the SCCHN Clinical Trial. However, if the futility criteria are met, SFJ has the responsibility to wind down the SCCHN Clinical Trial at its sole cost. and the Success Payments, if any, for the Melanoma Indication and/or the additional bempegaldesleukin indication are reduced pro rata based on the costs incurred by SFJ for the SCCHN Clinical Trial over the aggregate commitment of $150.0 million.
We account for the SFJ Agreement as a derivative instrument, which we measure based on the scenario-based discounted cash flows of our obligation to pay the Success Payments to SFJ, net of the scenario-based discounted cash flows of SFJ’s obligation to fund the SCCHN Clinical Trial. Accordingly, we record increases to the derivative liability as SFJ funds the SCCHN Clinical Trial as non-cash research and development expense or as we receive cash payments from SFJ, and we record adjustments to the derivative as the net present value of these two scenario-based discounted cash flows changes over time as the Change in fair value of development derivative liability line in our Consolidated Financial Statements. Our discounted cash flow methodology makes a number of complex assumptions requiring significant management judgment about the probability and timing of cash flows and the risk-adjusted rate we use to discount such cash flows to present value. The key inputs to the valuation include our estimates of the following: (i) the probability and timing of achieving FDA approval in the Melanoma Indication, the SCCHN Indication and any other bempegaldesleukin indication, (ii) the timing of the substantial completion of the SCCHN Clinical Trial that SFJ must achieve before receiving a Success Payment, (iii) the probability of termination of the study due to meeting the interim futility criteria, (iv) the amount of costs incurred by SFJ if the success criterion for the interim futility analysis is not met, (v) SFJ’s cost of borrowing (1.5% as of December 31, 2021), and (vi) the Company’s imputed cost of borrowing for debt with similar terms (12.7% as of December 31, 2021).
Substantially all of these inputs are considered Level 3 inputs in the fair value hierarchy because no market data exists which we can directly or indirectly observe to assist us in developing these estimates. Additionally, the inputs which have the most significant effect on the valuation of this derivative instrument are our estimates related to the probability and timing of the SCCHN Clinical Trial meeting the futility criteria, the results of the registrational trials in the Melanoma Indication, the SCCHN Indication and another bempegaldesleukin indication meeting their primary endpoints, and the FDA approval of bempegaldesleukin in one or more indications. We generally do not believe we will have information to adjust these probabilities until these clinical results are released to us, and therefore when we adjust these assumptions in the period when the information becomes available to us, we expect that such adjustment will have a material effect on our financial condition and results of operations.
Debt Modification
As discussed in Note 8 to our Consolidated Financial Statements, to resolve UCB’s challenges to our patents and their resulting obligation to pay us the royalties on net sales of CIMZIA® which we had sold to RPI, RPI and UCB negotiated a reduction in the royalty term and decreased royalty rates over the remaining term. This negotiation was implemented through the Letter Agreement between RPI and us, which permitted us to enter into the Settlement Agreement with UCB. When we initially sold our rights to receive royalties to RPI, we concluded that we should account for the transaction as debt under ASC 450-10 Debt (ASC 450-10) due to our continuing involvement in the generation of the royalties due to our obligation to manufacture the polymer reagent purchased by UCB for the production of CIMZIA®. Since this obligation remained unchanged as a result of the Settlement Agreement, we concluded that we should account for the Letter Agreement within the scope of ASC 450-10.
In our assessment, we concluded that the Letter Agreement represented a modification of the 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement, since RPI had agreed to reduced royalty payments. Since our estimates of the present value of the reduction in the future royalties exceeded 10% of our estimates of the present value of the royalties before the modification (including the royalties from MIRCERA® which remain unchanged as a result of these agreements), we concluded that we should treat the modification as an extinguishment of the prior liability and recognize a new liability based on the revised royalty payments and term, discounted to fair value. The estimation of the fair value required us to develop estimates of the future sales of CIMZIA® and MIRCERA® over the remaining royalty terms, as well as estimate an appropriate discount rate. Since no active, traded markets exist for arrangements of this nature, we concluded that the 2020 Purchase and Sale Arrangement was economically similar enough to the modified 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement to use as a basis for the discount rate because the products under both arrangements are well established drugs and the duration of the arrangements are similar. Accordingly,
we utilized our estimated imputed interest rate of 16% from the inception of the 2020 Purchase and Sale Agreement as the discount rate to estimate the fair value of the modified 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement.
If our estimates of the future royalties to be received by RPI under the modified 2012 Purchase and Sale Agreement had been higher or lower, our estimated fair value of the new liability would have been higher or lower as well, resulting in a larger or smaller loss on the revaluation. Similarly, if our estimated discount rate had been lower or higher, the estimated fair value of the liability would have been higher or lower, resulting in a larger or smaller loss on revaluation.
Collaborative Arrangements
When we enter into collaboration agreements with pharmaceutical and biotechnology partners, we assess whether the arrangements fall within the scope of Accounting Standards Codification (ASC) 808, Collaborative Arrangements (ASC 808) based on whether the arrangements involve joint operating activities and whether both parties have active participation in the arrangement and are exposed to significant risks and rewards. To the extent that the arrangement falls within the scope of ASC 808, we assess whether the payments between us and our collaboration partner fall within the scope of other accounting literature. If we conclude that payments from the collaboration partner to us represent consideration from a customer, such as license fees and contract research and development activities, we account for those payments within the scope of ASC 606, Revenue from Contracts with Customers. However, if we conclude that our collaboration partner is not a customer for certain activities and associated payments, such as for certain collaborative research, development, manufacturing and commercial activities, we record such payments as a reduction of research and development expense or general and administrative expense, based on where we record the underlying expense.
We have concluded that our collaboration agreements with BMS and Lilly fall within the scope of ASC 808. We concluded that the upfront and milestone payments under these arrangements fall within the scope of ASC 606 and therefore recognize these payments as revenue in License, collaboration and other revenue. However, due to the collaborative nature of our joint development and commercialization of bempegaldesleukin, we recognize the reimbursements we receive from BMS for their share of the costs that we incur for the development, manufacturing and commercialization of bempegaldesleukin as a reduction of research and development expense or general and administrative expense, as applicable.
Revenue Recognition
We recognize license, collaboration and other research revenue, including the upfront fees and milestone payments based on the facts and circumstances of each contractual agreement. At the inception of each agreement, we determine which promises represent distinct performance obligations, for which management must use significant judgment. Additionally, at inception and at each reporting date thereafter, we must determine and update, as appropriate, the transaction price, which includes variable consideration such as development and commercial launch milestones. These milestones include the $1.7 billion clinical, regulatory and commercial launch milestones under our collaboration agreements with BMS and Lilly. We must use judgment to determine when to include the variable consideration for these milestones in the transaction price such that inclusion of such variable consideration will not result in a significant reversal of revenue recognized when the contingency surrounding the variable consideration is resolved. To date, we have not included these remaining milestones from BMS and Lilly in the respective transaction prices due to the significant uncertainties involved with clinical development and regulatory approval. We generally do not believe that we would update the transaction price before events that are outside of our control occur, such as the release of clinical trial results, regulatory acceptance of a BLA or similar filing or regulatory approval. However, if these results are positive, we may conclude that certain milestones meet the recognition requirements for inclusion in the transaction price and therefore we would recognize them as revenue before the milestone event occurs and the payment becomes due to us, provided that the achievement of the milestone is within our control.
Accrued Clinical Trial Expenses
We record an accrued expense for the estimated unbilled costs of our clinical study activities performed by third parties. The financial terms of these agreements are subject to negotiation, vary from contract to contract and may result in uneven payment flows to our vendors. Payments under the contracts depend on factors such as the achievement of certain events, successful enrollment of patients and completion of certain clinical trial activities. We generally recognize costs associated with the start-up and reporting phases of the clinical trials as incurred. We generally accrue costs associated with the treatment phase of clinical trials based on the estimated activities performed by our third party vendors, including our contract research organizations. We may also accrue expenses based on the total estimated cost of the treatment phase on a per patient basis and expense the per patient cost ratably over the estimated patient treatment period. In specific circumstances, such as for certain time-based costs, we recognize clinical trial expenses ratable over the service period, as we believe that this methodology may be more reflective of the timing of costs incurred.
We base our estimates on the best information available at the time. However, additional information may become available to us which may allow us to make a more accurate estimate in future periods. In this event, we may be required to record adjustments to research and development expenses in future periods when the actual level of activity becomes more certain. Such increases or decreases in cost are generally considered to be changes in estimates and will be reflected in research and development expenses in the period identified.