Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with our consolidated financial statements and accompanying notes included in Item 8 of this Form 10-K. This section of this Form 10-K generally discusses 2021 and 2020 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. Discussions of 2019 items and year-to-year comparisons between 2020 and 2019 are not included in this Form 10-K, and can be found in “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in Part II, Item 7 of our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended January 2, 2021.
Our fiscal year is the 52- or 53-week period that ends on the Saturday nearest to December 31. Our fiscal year 2021 ended on January 1, 2022, fiscal year 2020 ended on January 2, 2021, and fiscal year 2019 ended on December 28, 2019. All fiscal years presented in this Form 10-K, except fiscal year 2020, included 52 weeks. Additionally, all quarters, except the fourth quarter of 2020, included 13 weeks. Fiscal year 2020 included 53 weeks, with a 14-week fourth quarter. Unless otherwise stated, all information presented herein is based on our fiscal calendar, and references to particular years, quarters, months or periods refer to our fiscal years ended in January or December and the associated quarters, months and periods of those fiscal years.
Fiscal Year Highlights
Impact of COVID-19 on our Business
The extent of the continuing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on our operational and financial performance is uncertain and will depend on many factors outside our control, including the timing, extent, trajectory and duration of the pandemic, the emergence of new variants, the development, availability, distribution and effectiveness of vaccines and treatments, the imposition of protective public safety measures, and the impact of the pandemic on the global economy. We continue to monitor the situation and may take further actions altering our business operations that we determine are in the best interests of our employees, customers, suppliers, and stakeholders, or as required by federal, state, or local authorities. As COVID-19 and its impacts are unprecedented and ever evolving, future events and effects related to the pandemic cannot be determined with precision and actual results could significantly differ from estimates or forecasts.
SK hynix License Agreement and Supply Agreement
On April 5, 2021, we entered into a Strategic Product Supply and License Agreement (the “License Agreement”) and Product Purchase and Supply Agreement with SK hynix, Inc., a South Korean memory semiconductor supplier (“SK hynix”). Both agreements have a term of 5 years. Under the License Agreement, (a) we have granted to SK hynix fully paid, worldwide, non-exclusive, non-assignable licenses to certain of our patents covering memory technologies and (b) SK hynix has granted to us fully paid, worldwide, non-exclusive, non-assignable licenses to our patent portfolio. In addition, the License Agreement provided for the settlement of all intellectual property proceedings between us and SK hynix and a settlement fee of $40 million paid to us by SK hynix. In addition, the parties have agreed to collaborate on certain technology development activities.
Amendment to SVB Credit Agreement
On April 9, 2021, we entered into an amendment to a credit agreement dated October 31, 2009 with Silicon Valley Bank (“SVB”) (as the same may from time to time be amended, modified, supplemented or restated, the “SVB Credit Agreement”) to accrue interest on advances at a per annum rate equal to the greater of 2.25% above the Wall Street Journal prime rate (“Prime Rate”) or 5.50% and to extend the maturity date to December 30, 2021. In December 2021, after meeting the conditions set forth in the amendment, the amount available for borrowing was increased to $7.0 million and the maturity date was extended to April 29, 2022 upon our request.
2019 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On June 24, 2019, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “2019 Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park Capital Fund, LLC (“Lincoln Park”), pursuant to which we had the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of $10 million in shares of our common stock over the 36-month term of the 2019 Purchase Agreement subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the 2019 Purchase Agreement. From July 2019 through the completion of sales in July 2021, Lincoln Park purchased an aggregate of 21,120,265 shares of our common stock for a net purchase price of $10 million under the 2019 Purchase Agreement. During the same period, in connection with the purchases, we issued to Lincoln Park an aggregate of 818,420 shares of our common stock as commitment shares in noncash transactions. In July 2021, we completed the sales under the 2019 Purchase Agreement.
2020 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On March 5, 2020, we entered into another purchase agreement (the “2020 Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which we had the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of $20 million in shares of our common stock over the 36-month term of the 2020 Purchase Agreement subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the 2020 Purchase Agreement. From March 2020 through the completion of sales in February 2021, Lincoln Park purchased an aggregate of 32,944,717 shares of our common stock for a net purchase price of $20 million under the 2020 Purchase Agreement. During the same period, in connection with the purchases, we issued to Lincoln Park an aggregate of 917,431 shares of our common stock as commitment shares in noncash transactions. In February 2021, we completed the sales under the 2020 Purchase Agreement.
First 2021 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On July 12, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “First 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which we had the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of $17.4 million in shares of our common stock over the 36-month term of the First 2021 Purchase Agreement subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the First 2021 Purchase Agreement. During 2021, Lincoln Park purchased an aggregate of 2,383,748 shares of our common stock for a net purchase price of $17.4 million under the First 2021 Purchase Agreement. In connection with the purchases, during 2021, we issued to Lincoln Park an aggregate of 120,500 shares of our common stock as commitment shares in noncash transactions. In October 2021, we completed the sales under the First 2021 Purchase Agreement.
Second 2021 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On September 28, 2021, we entered into a purchase agreement (the “Second 2021 Purchase Agreement”) with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of $75 million in shares of our common stock over the 36-month term of the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement. During 2021, Lincoln Park purchased an aggregate of 1,550,000 shares of our common stock for a net purchase price of $10.9 million under the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement. In connection with the purchases, we issued to Lincoln Park an aggregate of 20,809 shares of our common stock as additional commitment shares in noncash transactions.
Subsequent to January 1, 2022, Lincoln Park purchased an aggregate of 250,000 shares of our common stock for a net purchase price of $1.5 million under the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement. In connection with the purchases, we issued to Lincoln Park an aggregate of 2,860 shares of our common stock as additional commitment shares in noncash transactions.
Paycheck Protection Program Loan
On April 23, 2020, we entered into an unsecured promissory note with a principal amount of $0.6 million through Hanmi Bank under the Paycheck Protection Program (“PPP”) (“PPP Loan”) administered by the Small Business Administration (“SBA”) and established as part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (“CARES Act”). The PPP Loan bore interest at 1.0% per annum and would mature in April 2022 with the first six months of
interest and principal payments deferred. The amount borrowed under the PPP Loan was eligible for forgiveness if we would meet certain conditions. In May 2021, the full amount outstanding under the PPP Loan was forgiven resulting in a gain of $0.6 million.
Repayment of SVIC Promissory Note
On November 18, 2015, we entered into a Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note and Warrant Purchase Agreement, with SVIC No. 28 Technology Business Investment L.L.P., a Korean limited liability partnership (“SVIC”) and affiliate of Samsung Venture Investment Co., pursuant to which we sold SVIC a Senior Secured Convertible Promissory Note (“SVIC Note”) and a Stock Purchase Warrant (“SVIC Warrant”). The SVIC Note had an original principal amount of $15.0 million, accrued interest at a rate of 2% per year, was due and payable in full on December 31, 2021. The SVIC Warrant granted SVIC a right to purchase 2,000,000 shares of our common stock at an exercise price of $0.30 per share, subject to certain adjustment as set forth therein, was only exercisable in the event we exercised our right to redeem the SVIC Note prior to December 31, 2025. We made the repayment of $16.8 million on December 27, 2021, and SVIC purchased 2,000,000 shares of common stock at an exercise price of $0.30 per share on December 28, 2021. As a result, neither the SVIC Note nor the SVIC Warrant remained outstanding as of January 1, 2022.
Ineffective Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A material weakness is a deficiency, or a combination of deficiencies, in internal control over financial reporting such that there is a reasonable possibility that a material misstatement of our annual or interim consolidated financial statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. In performing their audit of our internal control over financial reporting as required by Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, as amended, our independent registered public accounting firm concluded that our internal control over financial reporting was ineffective as of January 1, 2022 due to two material weaknesses. The identified material weaknesses, at January 1, 2022, relate to (i) the lack of an independent board and audit committee and (ii) ineffective design and maintenance of controls over user access and program change management related to certain information technology (IT) systems that support our financial reporting processes.
While the control weaknesses identified did not result in any identified misstatements, a reasonable possibility exists that a material misstatement to the annual or interim consolidated financial statements and disclosures will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.
In an effort to remediate the identified material weakness related to the lack of an independent board and audit committee and to enhance our internal controls, our finance and accounting personnel are continuing to follow all of the same procedures that they undertook in preparation for independent audit committee meetings on a quarterly and annual basis. Our CEO and sole director will oversee these processes and review materials prepared by the finance and accounting staff as well as our independent auditors on a quarterly and annual basis. In an effort to remediate the identified material weakness related to our ineffective design and maintenance of controls over user access and program change management related to certain IT systems, we hired a full-time Senior Director of IT in the fourth quarter of 2021 with a primary mandate to focus on SOX compliance and mitigation plans for 2022. If our remedial measures are insufficient to address the material weakness, or if additional material weaknesses or significant deficiencies in our internal control over financial reporting occur in the future, we may not be able to timely or accurately report our results of operations or maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures. If we are unable to report financial information timely or accurately, or to maintain effective disclosure controls and procedures, we could be required to restate our financial statements and be subject to, among other things, regulatory or enforcement actions, securities litigation, limitations on our ability to access capital markets, debt rating agency downgrades or rating withdrawals, or loss in confidence of our investors, any one of which could adversely affect the valuation of our common stock and our business prospects. We can give no assurance that the measures we have taken and plan to take in the future will remediate the material weaknesses identified or that any additional material weaknesses will not arise in the future due to a failure to implement and maintain adequate internal control over financial reporting.
Results of Operations
Net Sales and Gross Margin
Net sales and gross margin for 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Net Sales
Net sales include (i) resales of certain component products, including DIMMs, SSDs and dynamic random access memory integrated circuits (“DRAM ICs” or “DRAM”) products, and sales of our high-performance memory subsystems and (ii) an upfront non-refundable license fee of $40 million recognized for licensing of our patents pursuant to the License Agreement with SK hynix entered into in April 2021.
Net product sales increased by $55.1 million during 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of a $52.0 million increase in the resale of DIMMs and components and an increase of $3.0 million of Netlist SSD and Netlist branded products.
Gross Margin
Product gross margin increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to higher sales across all product groups. Product gross margin percentage decreased between the periods as a result of the change in our product mix.
Operating Expenses
Operating expenses for 2021 and 2020 were as follows (dollars in thousands):
Research and Development
Research and development expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily as a result of an increase in engineering employee headcount and overhead to support the development of the next generation HybriDIMM.
Intellectual Property Legal Fees
Intellectual property legal fees consist of legal fees incurred for enforcement, protection and patent filings and prosecution. Although we expect intellectual property legal fees to generally increase over time as we continue to protect, defend and enforce and seek to expand our patent portfolio, these increases may not be linear but may occur in
lump sums depending on the due dates of patent filings and their associated fees and the arrangements we may make with our legal advisors in connection with enforcement proceedings, which may include fee arrangements or contingent fee arrangements in which we would pay these legal advisors on a scaled percentage of any negotiated fees, settlements or judgments awarded to us based on if, how and when the fees, settlements or judgments are obtained. See Note 7 “Commitments and Contingencies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.
Intellectual property legal fees increased during 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to higher legal expenses incurred to seek breach of contract of the Joint Development and License Agreement entered into between Netlist and Samsung on November 12, 2015 and to defend and enforce our patent portfolio.
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative expenses increased in 2021 compared to 2020 due primarily to an increase in employee headcount and overhead and outside services. As a result of the significant increase in the value of our non-affiliate public float in recent periods, we transitioned to becoming a “large accelerated filer” as of January 1, 2022 which means that we need to file our quarterly and annual reports on an accelerated basis and that we need to be prepared to have our independent registered public accounting firm audit and attest to our internal control over financial reporting. Complying with these new requirements require us to invest a material amount in enhancing our financial reporting infrastructure that will cause our selling, general and administrative expenses to increase in future periods.
Other Income (Expense), Net
Other expense, net for 2021 and 2020 was as follows (dollars in thousands):
Interest expense, net, consists primarily of interest expense on the $15 million secured convertible note issued to Samsung Venture Investment Co. (“SVIC”) (“SVIC Note”) in November 2015 and a revolving line of credit under the SVB Credit Agreement, along with the accretion of debt discounts and amortization of debt issuance costs on the SVIC Note. In December 2021, we repaid the full amounts outstanding under the SVIC Note. During 2021, other income (expense), net includes the gain on forgiveness of the PPP Loan of $0.6 million recognized during the second quarter of 2021.
Provision for Income Taxes
During 2021, we recorded a provision for income taxes of $6.6 million related to the Korean withholding tax incurred in connection with the upfront non-refundable license fee of $40 million from SK hynix recognized during the second quarter of 2021. Due primarily to this withholding tax, our effective tax rate for 2021 was higher at 58% than the statutory federal income tax rate of 21%. For 2020, our effective tax rate was 0% with the statutory tax rate of 21% due primarily to our net loss and valuation allowances.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We believe our existing balance of cash and cash equivalents, which totaled $58.5 million as of January 1, 2022, along with cash receipts from revenues, borrowing availability under the SVB Credit Agreement, the equity financing available under the Second 2021 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement, funds raised through other future debt and equity offerings and taking into account cash expected to be used in our operations, will be sufficient to meet our anticipated cash needs for at least the next 12 months.
For a description of contractual obligations, see Note 4, “Debt” and Note 5, “Leases” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K.
Cash Flow Summary
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the consolidated statements of cash flows, are summarized as follows (in thousands):
Net cash provided by operating activities for 2021 was primarily a result of net income of $4.8 million, non-cash adjustments to net income of $2.0 million, offset by net cash outflows from changes in operating assets and liabilities of $1.0 million driven predominantly by an increase in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable and inventories. Net cash provided by financing activities for 2021 primarily consisted of $39.6 million in net proceeds from issuance of common stock under the 2019, 2020 and First and Second 2021 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreements, $11.8 million in proceeds from exercise of stock options and warrants and $3.3 million in net borrowings under the SVB Credit Agreement, partially offset by $17.1 million in repayment of SVIC Note and other debt and $1.1 million in payments for taxes related to net share settlement of equity awards.
Net cash used in operating activities for 2020 was primarily a result of a net loss of $7.3 million, adjusted for non-cash charges of $2.1 million, offset by net cash outflows from changes in working capital balances of $2.9 million driven predominantly by a decrease in accounts payable, partially offset by an increase in accounts receivable. Net cash provided by financing activities for 2020 primarily consisted of $12.2 million in net proceeds from issuance of common stock under the 2020 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement, $0.6 million in proceeds from the issuance of the PPP Loan and $0.7 million in net borrowings under the SVB Credit Agreement, partially offset by $0.4 million in payments of note payable to finance insurance policies.
Capital Resources
Second 2021 Lincoln Park Purchase Agreement
On September 28, 2021, we entered into the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park, pursuant to which we have the right to sell to Lincoln Park up to an aggregate of $75 million in shares of our common stock over the 36-month term of the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement subject to the conditions and limitations set forth in the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement. As of January 1, 2022, $64.1 million remains available under the Second 2021 Purchase Agreement with Lincoln Park.
SVB Credit Agreement
On October 31, 2009, we entered into the SVB Credit Agreement, which provides for a revolving line of credit of up to $5.0 million. The borrowing base is limited to 85% of eligible accounts receivable, subject to certain adjustments as set forth in the SVB Credit Agreement. On April 9, 2021, we entered into an amendment to the SVB Credit Agreement to accrue interest on advances at a per annum rate equal to the greater of 2.25% above the Prime Rate or 5.50% and to extend the maturity date to December 30, 2021 In December 2021, after meeting the conditions set forth in the amendment, the amount available for borrowing was increased to $7.0 million and the maturity date was extended to April 29, 2022 upon our request.
As of January 1, 2022, the outstanding borrowings under the SVB Credit Agreement were $7.0 million. During the year ended January 1, 2022, we made net borrowings of $3.3 million under the SVB Credit Agreement.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The preparation of financial statements and related disclosures in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States and our discussion and analysis of our financial condition and operating results require our management to make judgments, assumptions and estimates that affect the amounts reported. Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Part II, Item 8 of this Form 10-K describes the significant accounting policies and methods used in the preparation of our consolidated financial statements. Management bases its estimates on historical experience and on various other assumptions it believes to be reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities.
Sales Return Reserves
Our revenue generating activities include variable consideration which is recorded as a reduction of the transaction price based upon expected amounts at the time revenue for the corresponding product sale is recognized. Common forms of variable consideration include limited rights of return for up to 30 days, except for sales of excess component inventories, which contain no right-of-return privileges and volume rebates for meeting established sales targets. Estimates of variable consideration and determination of whether to include estimated amounts in the transaction price are based largely on an assessment of the anticipated performance and all information (historical, current and forecasted) that is reasonably available.
Returns for products sold are estimated using the expected value method and are recorded as a reduction in reported revenues at the time of sale based upon historical product return experience and is adjusted for known trends to arrive at the amount of consideration to which we expect to receive. Estimated amounts are included in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved.
Inventories
Inventories are valued at the lower of cost or the net realizable value. Cost is determined on an average cost basis which approximates actual cost on a first-in, first-out basis and includes raw materials, labor and manufacturing overhead. Net realizable value is the estimated selling prices in the ordinary course of business, less reasonably predictable costs of completion, disposal, and transportation. We evaluate inventory balances for excess quantities and obsolescence on a regular basis by analyzing estimated demand, inventory on hand, sales levels and other information and reduce inventory balances to net realizable value for excess and obsolete inventory based on this analysis. At the point of the write-down recognition, a new, lower cost basis for that inventory is established, and subsequent changes in facts and circumstances do not result in the restoration or increase in that newly established cost basis.
Warranties
We offer standard product warranties generally ranging from one to three years to our memory subsystem products customers, depending on the negotiated terms of any purchase agreements, and has no other post-shipment obligations or separately priced extended warranty or product maintenance contracts. These warranties require us to repair or replace defective product returned to us during the warranty period at no cost to the customer. Warranties are not offered on sales of component products. We record an estimate for warranty related costs at the time of sale based on our historical and estimated future product return rates and expected repair or replacement costs. Estimated future warranty costs are recorded in the period in which the sale is recorded and are included in cost of sales in the consolidated statements of operations.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based awards are comprised principally of stock options, restricted stock awards (“RSAs”) and restricted stock units (“RSUs”). Stock-based compensation cost is measured at the grant date based on the fair value of the award
and is recognized as an expense over the requisite service period, which is the vesting period, on a straight-line basis, net of estimated forfeitures. We use the Black-Scholes option pricing model to determine the grant date fair value of stock options. The model requires us to estimate the expected volatility and expected term of the stock options, which are highly complex and subjective variables. The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of our common stock. The expected term is computed using the simplified method as our best estimate given our lack of actual exercise history. The risk-free rate selected to value any particular grant is based on the U.S. Treasury rate that corresponds to the expected term of the grant effective as of the date of the grant. The expected dividend assumption is based on our history and management’s expectation regarding dividend payouts. The grant-date fair value of RSAs and RSUs equals the closing price of our common stock on the grant date.
Uncertain Tax Positions
We recognize the tax benefit from an uncertain tax position only if it is more likely than not that the tax position will be sustained upon examination by the taxing authorities based on the technical merits of our position. The tax benefit recognized in the financial statements for a particular tax position is based on the largest benefit that is more likely than not to be realized. The amount of unrecognized tax benefits is adjusted as appropriate for changes in facts and circumstances, such as significant amendments to existing tax laws, new regulations or interpretations by the taxing authorities, new information obtained during a tax examination, or resolution of an examination.
The application of tax laws and regulations is subject to legal and factual interpretation, judgment and uncertainty. Tax laws and regulations may change as a result of changes in fiscal policy, changes in legislation, the evolution of regulations and court rulings. Therefore, the actual liability for U.S. or foreign taxes may be materially different from our estimates, which could require us to record additional tax liabilities or to reduce previously recorded tax liabilities, as applicable.
Recent Accounting Standards
See Note 1 “Summary of Significant Accounting Policies” of the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements in Item 8 of this Form 10-K for further discussion.