ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT'S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations together with our financial statements and the notes to those statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K. In addition to historical financial information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that reflect our plans, estimates and beliefs. You should not place undue reliance on these forward-looking statements, which involve risks and uncertainties. As a result of many factors, including but not limited to those set forth under ‘‘Risk Factors,’’ our actual results may differ materially from those anticipated in these forward-looking statements. See “Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements.”.
Overview
Business Review and Outlook
It is management’s view that the Company has made good progress during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, with December 2021 marking a significant milestone in the Company’s evolutionary journey as the first commercial deliveries of our sugarBEAT® non-invasive glucose monitor (“CGM”) were made to the UK licensee, MySugarWatch Limited (“MSW”). It is expected that MSW will sell the CGM under the brand MySugarWatch® and MSW has developed a subscription-based diabetes coaching and management service that will be provided alongside the CGM, primarily targeting those with type 2 diabetes. A key priority of the Company’s being to provide ongoing support to MSW as it commences its own launch plan.
Furthermore, on September 24, 2021, the Company entered into a License, Supply and Distribution Agreement with ‘MySugarWatch DuoPack Limited’ (“MSW-DP”), a sister company of MSW, whereby MSW-DP will provide CGM sensors free of charge with certain medications that are widely prescribed to persons with Type 2 diabetes. These medications are due to come off patent in the fourth calendar quarter of 2022 in Europe and the UK, and 2023 in the USA. The agreed sale price of sensors to MSW-DP under the terms of the agreement is $20 per box of 5 sensors for the USA market, and in Europe and the UK 12.50 Euros in the first 12 months from product launch and 10 Euros thereafter per box of 5 sensors. Nemaura’s anticipated cost of goods per sensor on large-scale production is $1 per sensor. As of January 2022, there were over 2 million prescriptions written for these medications each month in the combined key EU and UK territories. The company believes this will provide an opportunity for rapid market penetration in the use of its CGM sensors, at a scale that can enable the targeted lower cost of goods to be achieved and thereby support both revenue and margin growth into the future.
Management is now focused on fulfilling the remainder of the UK licensees’ initial orders and supporting MSW’s UK launch, while also developing the capabilities of the Company to develop and service new channels of business across other geographic markets via the use of our BEAT platform. To this end the company is now actively planning product launch in other territories that accept the CE mark registration. In addition, the company is seeking to exploit its product platform in the consumer space. All of these avenues are expected to strengthen revenue generation in future periods.
In line with this view, the Company has taken the following actions during the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022
Entered into a new leased facility to provide the additional space requirements for commercial product assembly.
Increased headcount of production operatives; this will be phased in line with the volume forecasts currently available, however the Company has also factored in an ability to scale further and faster should this be required.
Moved forward with placing phased orders for raw materials to ensure future product availability to support both our UK Licensee while also providing for capacity to flex up further as other routes to market materialize in line with management’s commercialization program.
Engaged with external third party manufacturers with the ability to provide significant scale up services for product manufacture moving forward.
Affiliated Company Relationships
Pharma was incorporated in November 2005. Through October 2013, all technology development and related transactions were incurred by Pharma. As new technology platforms were invented and developed, additional companies were set up to contain these new technology platforms, and to aid in the process of raising further investments to progress the development of these subsequent technologies. However, due to the small size of the operations, low number of employees and laboratory and office space required, initially, certain costs were borne by Pharma and charged to DDL as required. On April 4, 2018, a service agreement was put into place between Pharma and DDL which covered the development of sugarBEAT® under Pharma’s ISO13485 Accreditation. In lieu of these services, Pharma invoices DDL on a periodic basis for said services. Services are provided at cost plus a service surcharge amounting to less than 10% of the total costs incurred. This agreement includes all aspects of the development, registration and manufacture of sugarBEAT®.
Full legal title and beneficial ownership of the CE mark and all related intellectual property remains with Nemaura Medical under the terms of the service contract.
Dr. D.F.H. Chowdhury and Mr. Bashir Timol are officers of Pharma. The current management at DDL, including Dr. D. F. H. Chowdhury allocate 15% - 20% of their time to oversee the current operations at Pharma and will in due course implement a new management team in Pharma, and provide ongoing support in an advisory role. Pharma is a drug delivery company, which means that its activities are entirely related to the administration of drugs to the body of a human or animal subject. DDL is a diagnostic company, which means it is entirely focused on extracting molecules from the human or animal subject and analyzing it to make a diagnosis or to monitor the level of a particular molecule such as glucose. These are two independent businesses engaged in different activities, therefore there is no conflict of interest between the two and management does not see any conflicts arising from the allocations of some of DDL management time to overseeing the operations of Pharma.
Payments made solely for work that Dr. D. F. H. Chowdhury performs for Pharma in his capacity as manager are not charged to Nemaura Medical Inc. and are not included in our consolidated financial statements.
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
Management’s plans and basis of presentation
The Company has experienced recurring losses and negative cash flows from operations. On March 31, 2022, the Company had cash balances of $17,749,233, total stockholders’ equity of $466,804 and an accumulated deficit of $37,731,476. To date, the Company has in large part relied on equity financing to fund its operations. Initially additional funding also came from related party contributions. The Company expects to continue to incur losses from operations for the near-term and these losses could be significant as the Company implements and scales its product commercialization strategy.
Management’s strategic assessment includes the following potential options:
- support the UK and EU launch of sugarBEAT®;
- obtaining further regulatory approval for the sugarBEAT® device in other countries such as the U.S.;
- exploring licensing and partnership opportunities in other territories;
- developing the sugarBEAT® device for commercialization for other applications; and
- considering whether additional future capital raises can further enhance and accelerate the delivery of the Company’s strategic growth objectives.
Results of Operations
Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2022 Compared to Fiscal Year Ended March 31, 2021
Revenue
December 2021 marked a pivotal milestone for the Company as the Company commenced deliveries of sugarBEAT® to MSW pursuant to the initial order placed in April 2021. These deliveries continued in line with the schedule agreed with MSW during the remainder of the current fiscal year.
While the majority of the $503,906 revenue recognized related to the delivery of goods, a proportion also related to the recognition of the GBP 1 million (approximately $1.32 million), that was previously received and held within deferred revenue, relating to the exclusive Marketing Rights Agreement that was signed with MSW. We expect to record the remainder of the revenue over an approximately 10-year term from the date sales to MSW commenced.
There was no revenue recognized in the year ended March 31, 2021.
Research and Development Expenses
Research and development expenses were $1,556,988 and $1,554,603 for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The stabilization in costs here being established as the Company’s historically more significant research and development expenditure relating to clinical trials and improvements made to the sugarBEAT® device started to flatten out over the year. We expect that the sugarBEAT® related research and development expenses will reduce in future periods as the product is launched, however the Company expects to continue to incur research and development costs to both enhance, refine and extend the platform capabilities for alternative applications.
General and Administrative Expenses
General and administrative expenses were $6,173,049 and $3,032,138 for the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. These consisted of fees for legal, professional, consultancy, audit services, investor relations, insurance, advertising and general and operational wages. The increase in expenses being driven predominantly by increased wages, as additional headcount has been added to support the operational scale up process across both our UK and U.S. teams. Increases have also been seen in insurance, rent and depreciation and amortization, which are considered to be directly related to the commercialization steps undertaken during the period. In addition to this, a non-cash item charge of $440,196 was booked as a result of the mark-to-market impact from the revaluation of the foreign currency forward contracts in place as of the fiscal period end, along with a further non-cash charge of $133,529 in relation to the fair value of share options issued to directors.
As the Company continues to scale up to service its existing order book, it is expected that general and administrative expenses will continue to exhibit a similar higher cost profile moving forward, as the business continues to transition to an operationally focused base that is expected to result in increased functional expenses relating to production, sales, marketing, customer service, as well as enhancements to other existing functions.
Other Comprehensive Income
For the fiscal years ended March 31, 2022 and 2021 other comprehensive income saw a charge of $257,885 versus a credit of $472,559, respectively, arising from foreign currency translation adjustments.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have experienced net losses and negative cash flows from operations since our inception. We have sustained cumulative losses of $37,731,476 through March 31, 2022. We have historically financed our operations through a combination of debt and equity funding. During the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, warrants to purchase 366,892 shares of common stock were exercised and provided $2,963,658 of additional funding. Additionally, 397,524 shares of common stock were issued under the ATM facility, which provided $1,568,027 of additional funds, net of costs of $50,765, and a further 375,000 shares of common stock were issued to generate further funding of $1,500,000.
At March 31, 2022, the Company had net working capital of ($494,444) which included cash balances of $17,749,233 and notes payable of $19,188,724. The Company reported a net loss of $13,886,805 for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, which included interest expense of $6,666,630.
Having reviewed the company’s forward looking cashflow requirements in relation to the cash balance held at March 31, 2022, management is aware of the need to raise additional funds in order to finance the ongoing commercialization of sugarBEAT®. The Company had $17,749,233 of cash at March 31, 2022, which management consider to be more than sufficient to fund the ongoing operational expenses of the business, however the terms of the existing debt held on balance sheet will fall due for repayment as of February 2023, which will trigger a requirement to either restructure the debt or obtain additional, new, funding.
In evaluating the going concern position of the company, management have considered the ability of the company to raise additional funding in combination with one or more of the different funding options available to it at this time. Based on current and ongoing engagement with potential funding providers, Management believe that there is a reasonable expectation that funding could be provided by one, or more, of the following options:
· Equity funding - the company has immediate access to funds through the ATM facility that is currently in place; in addition to this, there are various alternative mechanisms available to the company similar to those used previously e.g. direct sale of shares to interested third parties, similar to the stake sold to Tiger Trading Partners L.L.C. in February 2022, as well as other mechanisms to sell common stock via an underwritten agreement or the further exercise of warrants by the current warrant holders etc.
· Debt funding - the company continues to be in ongoing discussions with third party debt providers, including the incumbent, to enable the existing debt facility to be restructured or renewed, should management feel that this route offers a more attractive option compared to the sale of equity that is dependent on the current market conditions.
· Alternative funding as used in the past such as the sale of licenses. As product development is now at a significant more advanced stage then it was, it is management’s belief that the sufficient funding could be provided through the sale of licenses in a similar way to the UK license agreement sale that help provided early-stage development funding.
As a consequence of this funding requirement being triggered without the funding bridge have been put in place by the date of filing these consolidated financial statements, ASC 205-40 requires that management recognize and disclose this point as an event which creates a substantial doubt as the Company’s ability to continue as a going concern for at least one year from the date of filing of these consolidate financial statements.
Cash Flows
Net cash used by our operating activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, was $6,504,041 which reflected the following key cashflow movements: a net loss of $13,886,805 which included non-cash items booked as an expense relating to the accretion of the debt discount ($6,666,630), mark-to-market valuation of the foreign currency forward contracts that were held at fiscal year-end ($440,196), stock-based compensation paid to an employee combined the fair value of options issued to directors ($220,917), and depreciation and amortization ($229,810).
Cashflows were also impacted by increases in inventory of $637,149, and accounts receivable - related parties of $250,092 relating to the acquisition of raw materials to support manufacture and delivery of product to our UK Licensee; the increase in inventory being largely offset by the decrease in prepaid expenses of $519,346 vs the prior year end which reflected upfront payments for inventory at that time.
Working capital cashflow was also impacted by a decrease in accounts payable of $117,384, due to timing of purchases and an increase in other liabilities and accrued expenses of $310,490.
Net cash used by our operating activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, was $5,998,097 which were driven by cashflow movements relating to the following: A net loss of $6,258,596 which was partially offset by non-cash items booked as an expense relating to the accretion of the debt discount ($2,007,687), stock-based compensation paid to third party suppliers ($113,171), and depreciation and amortization ($98,075). Cashflows were also impacted by an increase in inventory of $564,313, combined with and increase in prepaid expenses of $767,050, and an increase in Accounts receivable - related party, as the Company geared up towards commercialization.
Net cash used in investing activities was $956,482 for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, which reflected expenditure on property and equipment to support the commencement of manufacture of product for sale during the year of $481,718, combined with ongoing spend on software development ($391,073) and patent costs ($83,691), to enhance the businesses digital offering and protect the intellectual property developed.
Net cash used in investing activities was $836,440 for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, which reflected expenditure for software development costs of $663,758, combined with costs related to patent filings of $81,952, and the purchase of property and equipment of $90,730.
Net cash utilized in financing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2022, was $6,368,315. This includes repayments made in relation to debt funding of $12,400,000, which was partially offset by the proceeds from the issuance of common stock in relation to equity funding was $3,118,792, with associated cash costs of $50,765, combined with the sale of warrants which provided a further $2,963,658 of cash funding.
Net cash provided by financing activities for the fiscal year ended March 31, 2021, was $37,986,392. Proceeds from the issuance of common stock in relation to equity funding was $15,750,672 with associated cash costs of $957,193; the sale of warrants providing a further $400,503. $25,000,000 was provided via the issuance of two notes payable during the year, with associated cash costs incurred of $1,525,035 while repayments made were $600,000. $82,555 of cash expense was incurred in relation to concluding the full repayment of the insurance financing arrangement.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have no off-balance sheet arrangements that have or are reasonably likely to have a current or future material effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources.
Contractual Obligations
None.
Critical Accounting Policies and Significant Judgments and Estimates
Our management’s discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations is based on our audited consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of these consolidated financial statements requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the consolidated financial statements, as well as the reported results of operations during the reporting periods. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and on various other factors that we believe are reasonable under the circumstances, the results of which form the basis for making judgments about the carrying values of assets and liabilities that are not readily apparent from other sources. Actual results could differ from these estimates under different assumptions or conditions. Our significant accounting policies are described in more detail in the notes to our consolidated financial statements included elsewhere in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.