ITEM 7. MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS.
You should read the following discussion and analysis of our financial condition and plan of operations together with “Selected Financial Data” and our financial statements and the related notes appearing elsewhere in this prospectus. In addition to historical information, this discussion and analysis contains forward-looking statements that involve risks, uncertainties and assumptions. Our actual results may differ materially from those discussed below. Factors that could cause or contribute to such differences include, but are not limited to, those identified below, and those discussed in the section titled “Risk Factors” included elsewhere in this prospectus. All amounts in this report are in U.S. dollars, unless otherwise noted.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This report, including exhibits that are being filed as part of this report, as well as other statements made by Nanomix Corporation (the “Company”, “we”, “us”, and “our”), contain “forward-looking statements” that include information relating to future events, future financial performance, strategies, expectations, competitive environment and regulation. Words such as “may,” “should,” “could,” “would,” “predicts,” “potential,” “continue,” “expects,” “anticipates,” “future,” “intends,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” and similar expressions, as well as statements in future tense, identify forward-looking statements.
These forward-looking statements include such things as: investment objectives and the Company’s ability to make investments in a timely manner on acceptable terms; references to future success of the Company’s products; the Company’s business strategy; estimated future capital expenditures; sales of the Company’s products; competitive strengths and goals; and, other similar matters.
These forward-looking statements reflect the Company’s current beliefs and expectations with respect to future events and are based on assumptions and are subject to risks and uncertainties and other factors outside the Company’s control that may cause actual results to differ materially from those projected. Such factors include, but are not limited to, the following: ability to develop, commercialize and market new products; ability to market and sell products, whether through an internal, direct sales force or third parties; ability to manufacture products in accordance with applicable specifications, performance standards and quality requirements; ability to obtain, and timing and cost of obtaining, necessary regulatory approvals for new products or new indications or applications for existing products; ability to comply with applicable regulatory requirements; ability to effectively resolve warning letters, audit observations and other findings or comments from the FDA or other regulatory entities; changes in relationships, including disputes or disagreements, with strategic partners or other parties and reliance on strategic partners for the performance of critical activities under collaborative arrangements; competing products and technology changes; reduction or deferral of public funding available to customers; competition from new or better technology or lower cost products; market acceptance of our products; changes in market acceptance of products based on product performance or other factors, including changes in testing guidelines, algorithms or other recommendations by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other agencies; ability to fund research and development and other products and operations; ability to obtain and maintain new or existing product distribution channels; reliance on sole supply sources for critical products and components; ability to reach and maintain sustained profitability; uncertainty relating to patent protection and potential patent infringement claims; uncertainty and costs of litigation relating to patents and other intellectual property; availability of licenses to patents or other technology; obstacles to international marketing and manufacturing of products; ability to sell products internationally, including the impact of changes in international funding sources and testing algorithms; adverse movements in foreign currency exchange rates; loss or impairment of sources of capital; ability to attract and retain qualified personnel; exposure to product liability and other types of litigation; changes in international, federal or state laws and regulations; customer consolidations and inventory practices; equipment failures and ability to obtain needed raw materials and components; the impact of terrorist attacks and civil unrest; changes in laws or regulations; global and regional economic conditions; and general political, business and market conditions.
Although the Company believes the expectations reflected in such forward-looking statements are based upon reasonable assumptions, these are only assumptions, and forward-looking statements should not be read as a guarantee of future performance or results and will probably not be accurate indications of when such performance or results will be achieved. Investors are cautioned that forward-looking statements may not be reliable and speak only as of the date they are made and that, except as required by law, the Company undertakes no obligation to update these forward-looking statements to reflect any future events or circumstances. All subsequent written or oral forward-looking statements attributable to the Company or to individuals acting on its behalf are expressly qualified in their entirety by this section.
Investors should also be aware that while we do, from time to time, communicate with securities analysts, it is against our policy to disclose any material non-public information or other confidential commercial information to securities analysts unless and until we have made it publicly available. Accordingly, stockholders should not assume that we agree with any statement or report issued by any analyst irrespective of the content of the statement or report. Furthermore, we have a policy against issuing or confirming financial forecasts or projections issued by others. Thus, to the extent that reports issued by securities analysts contain any projections, forecasts or opinions, such reports are not the responsibility of the Company.
Overview
This discussion and analysis should be read in conjunction with the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and related notes. The discussion and analysis of our financial condition and results of operations are based upon our consolidated financial statements, which have been prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“U.S. GAAP”). The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. GAAP requires us to make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities, disclosure of any contingent liabilities at the financial statement date and reported amounts of revenue and expenses during the reporting period. On an ongoing basis, we review our estimates and assumptions. Our estimates are based on our historical experience and other assumptions that we believe to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results are likely to differ from those estimates under different assumptions or conditions, but we do not believe such differences will materially affect our financial position or results of operations. Our critical accounting policies, the policies we believe are most important to the presentation of our financial statements and require the most difficult, subjective and complex judgments, are outlined below in “Critical Accounting Policies,’’.
This management’s discussion and analysis of financial condition and results of operations (“MD&A”) is intended to help you understand the business operations and financial condition of the Company as of December 31, 2021.
Our MD&A is presented in six sections:
● Executive Overview
● Consolidated Results of Operations
● Liquidity and Capital Resources
● Recent Developments
● Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
● Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
Executive Overview
On June 6, 2021, Boston Therapeutics and Nanomix, Inc., or Nanomix, completed a reverse merger, or the Merger, resulting in the formation of Nanomix Corporation (the “Company”).
The Company issued to the shareholders of Nanomix 1,000,000 shares of a newly created Series C Convertible Preferred Stock of the Company (the “Preferred Stock”). Upon the effectiveness of the amendment to our Certificate of Incorporation to effectuate the reverse stock split of one-for-173, all such shares of Preferred Stock issued to Nanomix shareholders automatically converted into approximately 35,644,997 shares of common stock of the Company, the warrants to be assumed at closing may be exercisable into approximately 2,124,687 shares of common stock of the Company and the options and restricted stock units assumed at closing may be exercisable into approximately 5,718,838 shares of common stock of the Company. The shares of common stock issuable upon conversion of the Preferred Stock together with warrants, restricted stock units and options to be assumed on the closing date represented approximately 80% of the outstanding shares of Common Stock of the Company upon closing of the Merger.
The Closing of the merger effectuated a change in control of the Company. As a result of the Closing, the Nanomix shareholders own approximately 80.0% of the Company’s issued and outstanding common stock on a fully diluted basis assuming full conversion of the Series C Preferred Stock. As Nanomix is now the controlling management party, financial statements are consolidated based on the historical results of operations for Nanomix and the combined balance sheets of the entities. The Company’s name change to “Nanomix Corporation” and the symbol change to “NNMX” were effective November 15, 2021. The previously approved 173:1 reverse stock split was effective on March 3, 2022.
Our Business
Nanomix Corporation is a development stage company that seeks to develop, manufacture, and commercialize point-of-care diagnostic tests that are used to detect or monitor diseases. The Company’s product development efforts are focused on our proprietary technology, a novel point-of-care diagnostic platform that offers certain customer advantages as compared to other point-of-care diagnostic technologies. Nanomix, Inc. was originally formed in 2001 as a nanotechnology sensor company. In 2009, ownership changed and the business was redirected to development and commercialization of a mobile point-of-care diagnostic platform.
Business Strategy
The healthcare market is rapidly evolving to incorporate a decentralized system of care delivery within a broad spectrum of environments: the emergency department, skilled nursing facilities, elderly homes, urgent care centers, ambulances, and remote locations. While hospital central laboratories currently are the gold standard of clinical testing, a mobile diagnostic platform offering high-quality testing results at affordable prices is needed to serve the decentralized testing requirements. The Nanomix eLab System is specifically designed to meet this evolving market need. The system includes a durable, handheld, rechargeable battery powered instrument and a disposable multiplex, microfluidic test cartridge. Proprietary biosensors deliver laboratory-quality performance wherever the patient or healthcare provider needs it, including a wide range of testing environments outside the hospital. The Nanomix eLab System is well suited for markets that include pre-hospital assessment, chronic medical care, and post-hospital disease management, as well as use in remote locations far from traditional centers of health care delivery. Whether in an Emergency Department, an Urgent Care facility, a skilled nursing facility or on an ambulance, the Nanomix eLab System is designed to help mobile health providers to quickly assess a patient’s condition and intervene with a higher level of care when necessary.
Our initial product development focus is on testing for critical medical conditions where rapidly available information is needed to help inform clinical decision making. The Nanomix S1 Assay Panel is designed to provide information about critical infections, including sepsis, in approximately 11 minutes. The S1 Assay Panel has received CE marking. Future product development efforts for other critical conditions are planned for development.
Results of Operations
Results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2021 and 2020
The results of operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Total Revenues
Total net revenues during the year ended December 31, 2021 were $142 thousand, a decrease of $371 thousand compared to the same period in 2020. The decrease in total net revenues was attributable to a reduction of COVID-19 development funding received from BARDA. The BARDA funding began in 2020 and the project funding was completed earlier in 2021. There was no appreciable product related revenue in either period.
Research and Development
This category includes costs incurred for product and process development, and clinical & regulatory affairs. Costs for the year ended December 31, 2021 were largely related to the development and clinical trials of two assays for COVID-19. Costs in the year ended December 31, 2020 were related to the development of the S1 Assay Panel and development work on the COVID-19 program. All development efforts were for development of the eLab platform.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
Selling, general and administrative expense (“SG&A”) for the year ended December 31, 2021 increased by $1,615 thousand from the same period in 2020. The increase was due to establishment of a sales and marketing function in 2021 and increased general and administrative costs in 2021 mainly from legal and accounting costs related to the merger and subsequent regulatory filings.
Other Income (Expense)
Other Income (Expense) in 2021 was $3,740 thousand, an increase in expense of $2,454 compared to 2020. Other expense in 2021 was primarily composed of loss on debt modification of $2,385 thousand and interest expense of $2,217 thousand for the year ended December 31, 2021. Interest expense of $2,217 thousand in 2021 and $1,286 thousand in 2020 are primarily related to issued Secured Notes and Unsecured Convertible Notes used to fund the Company’s operations. The Secured Notes and accrued interest were exchanged into senior secured convertible notes and the unsecured Notes and Accrued interest were converted to Preferred Series C stock in 2021 as part of the merger. Boston Therapeutics notes and related accrued interest, predating the merger, were converted into common stock or remain on the balance sheet.
Other expense in 2021 was reduced by $408 thousand in forgiveness of the PPP loan received in 2020 and by a gain in the fair value of derivative and warrant liabilities in the amount of $454 thousand.
Net Loss
The Net Loss for the year ended December 31, 2021 was $9.465 million versus $6.192 million for the same period in 2020. The increased loss of $3.273 million was largely due to the loss on debt modification, an increase in interest expense, offset by the PPP loan forgiveness and the change in the fair value of warrant and derivative liabilities.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Overview
Our liquidity requirements are primarily to fund our business operations, including capital expenditures and working capital requirements. Our primary sources of liquidity are additional capital investment and debt.
On June 25, 2021, the Company entered into a securities purchase agreement with accredited investors pursuant to which the Company issued senior secured convertible notes in an aggregate principal amount of approximately $8.4 million for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $7.9 million. Immediately prior to the execution of the agreement described above, we entered into exchange agreements with the holders of outstanding promissory notes with an aggregate principal amount, together with accrued but unpaid interest, of approximately $2.1 million. The holders of the outstanding promissory notes were issued senior secured notes in the financing described above for an aggregate principal amount of $2.1 million. In connection with the issuance of the Notes, we issued to the Investors warrants to purchase an aggregate of approximately 4.1 million shares of Common Stock (collectively, the “Warrants”). The Company received approximately $5.8 million in funding from the transaction.
Cash Flows
As of December 31, 2021, the Company had cash and equivalents of $297 thousand compared to $15 thousand as of December 31, 2020 and outstanding debt of $8.4 million compared to $9.3 million as of the end of 2020.
Cash used in operating activities during the year ended December 31, 2021 was $6.318 million. The net loss of $9.465 million for 2021 was increased by non-cash gains of $408 thousand in forgiveness of the PPP loan and accrued interest received in 2020 and a change of $454 thousand in the fair value of derivative and warrant liabilities, offset by a loss on debt modification of $2,385 thousand, and amortization of the discount from the issue of promissory notes of $1,478 thousand, which were the significant non-cash expense items.
Cash used by investing activities during 2021 of $273 thousand was primarily for investing in of manufacturing equipment offset by cash received in the merger.
Cash provided by financing activities during 2021 of $6.9 million was primarily related to proceeds from the sale of Senior Secured Convertible notes and convertible debt issuances used to fund company operations.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
The Company does not have any off-balance sheet arrangements, as defined in Item 303(a)(4)(ii) of Regulation S-K under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended.
Recent Developments
In June 2021, the Company completed a merger with Boston Therapeutics, a publicly held entity. The Company is the majority shareholder of the resulting entity. As part of the merger agreement, substantially all of the Company’s debt has been converted to equity in the merged entity. In addition, and in conjunction with the merger, Boston Therapeutics entered into a Convertible Equity arrangement, issuing $8.3 million in secured Notes and a related cash investment of $5.8 million.
Significant Accounting Policies and Critical Accounting Estimates
Significant accounting policies are described in Note 3 - Significant Accounting Policies to the audited consolidated financial statements included herein. Certain of our accounting policies require the application of significant judgment by management in selecting the appropriate assumptions for calculating financial estimates. By their nature, these judgments are subject to an inherent degree of uncertainty. These judgments are based on our historical experience, terms of existing contracts, our evaluation of trends in the industry, information provided by our customers and information available from other outside sources, as appropriate. We consider an accounting estimate to be critical if:
● It requires us to make assumptions about matters that were uncertain at the time we were making the estimate, and
● Changes in the estimate or different estimates that we could have selected would have had a material impact on our financial condition or results of operations.
The following listing is not intended to be a comprehensive list of all of our accounting policies. In many cases, the accounting treatment of a particular transaction is specifically dictated by accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, with no need for management’s judgment in their application. There are also areas in which management’s judgment in selecting any viable alternative would not produce a materially different result. There have been no significant changes in our critical accounting estimates during the year ended December 31, 2021.
Revenue Recognition
For certain contracts, we recognize revenue from R&D, milestone and grant revenues when earned. Grants are invoiced after expenses are incurred, as that is the depiction of the timing of the transfer of services. Performance obligations generally follow the major phases of product development processes: design feasibility & planning, product development & design optimization, design verification, design validation & process validation, and pivotal studies. Further details regarding revenue recognition are document at Note 3(b) - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies: Revenue Recognition to the Unaudited Condensed Consolidated Financial Statements.
Stock-Based Compensation
We recognize the fair value of equity-based awards as compensation expense in our statement of operations. The fair value of our stock option awards was estimated using a Black-Scholes option valuation model. This valuation model’s computations incorporate highly subjective assumptions, such as the expected stock price volatility and the estimated life of each award. The fair value of the options, after considering the effect of expected forfeitures, is then amortized, generally on a straight-line basis, over the related vesting period of the option.
Research & Development Costs
Research and development activities consist primarily of new product development, continuing engineering for existing products, and regulatory and clinical trial costs. Costs related to research and development efforts on existing or potential products are expensed as incurred.
Accounts Receivable
No allowance has been provided for uncollectible accounts. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has $0 and $821 accounts receivable balance, respectively.
Income Taxes
Income taxes are accounted for under ASC 740 authoritative guidance (“Guidance”), which requires the asset and liability method of accounting for deferred income taxes. Deferred tax assets and liabilities are determined based on the difference between the financial statement and tax bases of assets and liabilities. Deferred tax assets or liabilities at the end of each period are determined using the tax rate expected to be in effect when taxes are actually paid or recovered.
The Guidance also requires that a valuation allowance be established when it is more likely than not that all or a portion of a deferred tax asset will not be realized. A review of all available positive and negative evidence needs to be considered, including a company’s current and past performance, the market environment in which the company operates, length of carryback and carryforward periods and existing contracts that will result in future profits. The Company believes that it is more likely than not that it will not be able to utilize its net operating loss carryforwards and maintains a full valuation allowance. The Company maintains a full valuation allowance on research and development tax credits.
The Guidance also prescribes a comprehensive model for recognizing, measuring, presenting and disclosing in the consolidated financial statements tax positions taken or expected to be taken on a tax return, including a decision whether to file or not to file in a particular jurisdiction.