ITEM 7: MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read in conjunction with the information contained in the financial statements of the Company and the notes thereto appearing elsewhere herein and in conjunction with the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended June 30, 2022. Readers should carefully review the risk factors disclosed in this Form 10-K and other documents filed by the Company with the SEC.
As used in this report, the terms “Company”, “we”, “our”, “us” and “NNVC” refer to NanoViricides, Inc., a Nevada corporation.
PRELIMINARY NOTE REGARDING FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Annual Report contains forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws. These include statements about our expectations, beliefs, intentions or strategies for the future, which we indicate by words or phrases such as “anticipate,” “expect,” “intend,” “plan,” “will,” “we believe,” “NNVC believes,” “management believes” and similar language. The forward-looking statements are based on the current expectations of NNVC and are subject to certain risks, uncertainties and assumptions, including those set forth in the discussion under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations” in this report. Actual results may differ materially from results anticipated in these forward-looking statements. We base the forward-looking statements on information currently available to us, and we assume no obligation to update them.
Investors are also advised to refer to the information in our previous filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), especially on Forms 10-K, 10-Q and 8-K, in which we discuss in more detail various important factors that could cause actual results to differ from expected or historic results. It is not possible to foresee or identify all such factors. As such, investors should not consider any list of such factors to be an exhaustive statement of all risks and uncertainties or potentially inaccurate assumptions.
Management’s Plan of Operation
The Company’s drug development business model was formed in May 2005 with a license to the patents and intellectual property held by TheraCour that enabled creation of drugs engineered specifically to combat viral diseases in humans. This exclusive license from TheraCour serves as a foundation for our intellectual property. The Company was granted a worldwide exclusive license to this technology for several drugs with specific targeting mechanisms for the treatment of the following human viral diseases: Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV/AIDS), Hepatitis B Virus (HBV), Hepatitis C Virus (HCV), Rabies, Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV-1 and HSV-2), Influenza and Asian Bird Flu Virus. The Company entered into an Additional License Agreement with TheraCour granting the Company the exclusive licenses for technologies developed by TheraCour for the additional virus types: Dengue viruses, Japanese Encephalitis virus, West Nile Virus, Viruses causing viral Conjunctivitis (a disease of the eye) and Ocular Herpes, and Ebola/Marburg viruses. The Company completed a license agreement for the field of VZV indications in November 2019 from TheraCour. The Company completed a license agreement for the field of human Coronavirus indications in September 2021 from TheraCour. TheraCour has not denied any licenses sought by the Company in the past.
The Company discloses the risk that the Company may want to add further virus types to its drug pipeline as the Company progresses further. The Company would then need to negotiate with TheraCour appropriate license agreements to include those of such additional viruses that the Company determines it wants to follow for further development. Historically, the Company initiates negotiations for
Page 91 of 115
additional licenses when initial exploratory research determines that a viable drug candidate for the targeted field is possible. We are seeking to add to our existing portfolio of products through our internal discovery pre-clinical development programs and through an in-licensing strategy.
The licenses granted by TheraCour are for entire set of pathologies that the licensed virus is a causative agent for. The licenses are not for single drug/indication pairs, which is the customary mode of licensing in the Pharmaceutical industry. Thus these are very broad licenses and enable NanoViricides to pursue a number of indications as well as develop drug candidates with different characteristics as is best suited for the indications, without having to license the resulting drugs for each indication separately, as with normal pharmaceutical industry licensing.
The Company plans to develop several drugs through the preclinical studies and clinical trial phases with the goal of eventually obtaining approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”) and International regulatory agencies for these drugs. The Company plans, when appropriate, to seek regulatory approvals in several international markets, including developed markets such as Europe, Japan, Canada, Australia, and Emerging Regions such as Southeast Asia, India, China, Central and South America, as well as the African subcontinent. The seeking of these regulatory approvals would only come when and if one or more of our drugs have significantly advanced through the US FDA and international regulatory process. If and as these advances occur, the Company may attempt to partner with more established pharmaceutical companies to advance the various drugs through the approval process.
The Company intends to perform the regulatory filings and own all the regulatory licenses for the drugs it is currently developing. The Company will develop these drugs in part via subcontracts to TheraCour, the exclusive source for these nanomaterials. The Company may manufacture these drugs itself, or under subcontract arrangements with external manufacturers that carry the appropriate regulatory licenses and have appropriate capabilities. The Company intends to distribute these drugs via subcontracts with distributor companies or in partnership arrangements. The Company plans to market these drugs either on its own or in conjunction with marketing partners. The Company also plans to actively pursue co-development, as well as other licensing agreements with other pharmaceutical companies. Such agreements may entail up-front payments, milestone payments, royalties, and/or cost sharing, profit sharing and many other instruments that may bring early revenues to the Company. Such licensing and/or co-development agreements may shape the manufacturing and development options that the Company may pursue. The Company has received significant interest from certain pharmaceutical companies for potential licensing or co-development of some of our drug candidates. However, none of these distributor or co-development agreements is in place at the current time.
There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to develop effective nanoviricides, or if developed, that we will have sufficient resources to be able to successfully manufacture and market these products to commence revenue-generating operations.
There can be no assurance that other developments in the field would not impact our business plan adversely. For example, successful creation and availability of an effective vaccine may reduce the potential market size for a particular viral disease, or an effective drug may be developed by competitors that becomes difficult to compete against with our limited resources. Our goal, which we can give no assurance that we will achieve, is for NanoViricides, Inc. to become the premier company developing highly safe and effective drugs that employ an integrated multiplicity of actions as enabled by our nanomedicine approach for anti-viral therapy.
To date, we have engaged in organizational activities; developing and sourcing compounds and preparing nano-materials; and experimentation involving preclinical studies using cell cultures and animal models of efficacy and safety. We have generated funding through the issuances of debt and the sales of securities under our shelf registration and the private placement of common stock (See, Item 5). The Company does not currently have any long-term debt. We have not generated any revenues and we do not expect to generate revenues in the near future. We may not be successful in developing our drugs and start selling our products when planned, or we may not become profitable in the future. We have incurred net losses in each fiscal period since inception of our operations.
Current Financial Status
NanoViricides technology is now maturing rapidly toward clinical drug trials, with the new facility, expanded staff, and the financial strength that we have attained since uplisting to NYSE American in September 2013. We are working diligently towards entering our first broad-spectrum anti-coronavirus drug, NV-CoV-2 for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection that causes COVID-19, into human clinical trials.
Page 92 of 115
As of June 30, 2022, the end of the reporting period, we had $14,066,359 in cash and cash equivalents, prepaid expenses of $350,021 and $8,694,194 of property and equipment, net of accumulated depreciation. Our liabilities at June 30, 2022 are $412,837 including a short term loan payable of $94,788 payable to BankDirect, accounts payable of $57,960 payable to third parties and accounts payable to TheraCour of $214.397. Stockholders’ equity was $23,082,025 at June 30, 2022. In comparison, as of June 30, 2021, we had $20,516,677 in cash and cash equivalents, prepaid expenses of $307,102 and property and equipment was $9,084,901, net of accumulated depreciation. Our liabilities at June 30, 2021 were $351,146, including accounts payable of $200,016 payable to third parties, and accounts payable to TheraCour of $31,539. Stockholders’ equity was $29,911,167 at June 30, 2021.
During the year ended June 30, 2022, we spent approximately $5.9 million in cash toward operating activities and approximately $324,000 in capital investment. In contrast, we spent approximately $8.2 million in cash toward operating activities and approximately $239,000 in capital investment in the year ended June 30, 2021. We anticipate capital expenditures of approximately $200,000 in the next twelve months.
As of June 30, 2022, we have a cash and cash equivalent balance of $14,066,359 that is expected to be sufficient to fund our currently budgeted operations for more than one year from the filing of the Company’s Form 10K.
The Company has an accumulated deficit at June 30, 2022 of approximately $122.5 million and a net loss of approximately $8.1 million and net cash used in operating activities of approximately $5.9 million for the fiscal year then ended. In addition, the Company has not generated any revenues and no revenues are anticipated in the foreseeable future. Since May 2005, the Company has been engaged exclusively in research and development activities focused on developing targeted antiviral drugs. The Company has not yet commenced any product commercialization. Such losses are expected to continue for the foreseeable future and until such time, if ever, as the Company is able to attain sales levels sufficient to support its operations. The Company believes that it has several important milestones that it will be achieving in the ensuing year. Management believes that as it achieves these milestones, the Company’s ability to raise additional funds in the public markets would be enhanced.
Management believes that the Company’s existing resources will be sufficient to fund the Company’s planned operations and expenditures through October 2023. However, the Company cannot provide assurance that its plans will not change or that changed circumstances will not result in the depletion of its capital resources more rapidly than it currently anticipates. The accompanying audited financial statements do not include any adjustments that may result from the outcome of such unidentified uncertainties.
Results of Operations
The Company is a biopharmaceutical company and does not have any revenue for the years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021.
Comparison of the Year End June 30, 2022 to the Year Ended June 30, 2021
Revenues - The Company is a non-revenue producing entity.
Operating Expenses - Research and development expenses for the year ended June 30, 2022 decreased $329,679 to $5,784,862 from $6,114,541 for the year ended June 30, 2021. This year-to-year decrease is generally attributable to decreases in lab supplies and chemicals, employee compensation expenses and lab fees for pre IND studies offset by a payment of a license fee. General and administrative expenses decreased $300,828 to $2,328,737 for the year ended June 30, 2022 from $2,629,565 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in general and administrative expenses is generally attributable to decreases in legal and professional expenses.
Interest Income - Interest income was $11,859 and $9,348 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Interest income increased due to higher interest rates for the majority of the year ended June 30, 2022 offset by lower cash balances.
Interest Expense- The Company has incurred interest expense of $5,123 and $85,405 for the years ended June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021 respectively. The decrease results from the payoff of a mortgage loan in December, 2020.
Income Taxes - There is no provision for income taxes due to ongoing operating losses. As of June 30, 2022, we had estimated cumulative tax benefits and development tax credits and other deferred tax credits resulting in a deferred tax asset of $36,506,779. This amount has been offset by a full valuation allowance.
Page 93 of 115
Net Loss - For the year ended June 30, 2022, the Company had a net loss of $8,106,863, or a basic and fully diluted loss per share of $0.70 compared to a net loss of $8,822,189, or a basic and fully diluted loss per share of $0.81 for the year ended June 30, 2021. The decrease in the Company’s net loss for the year ended June 30, 2022 from the year ended June 30, 2021 of $715,326 is generally attributable to an decrease in operating expenses and interest expense in the year ended June 30, 2022.
Liquidity and Capital Reserves
The Company had cash and cash equivalents of $14,066,359 and $20,516,677 as of June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively. On the same dates, current liabilities outstanding totaled $412,837 and $351,146, respectively. As of June 30, 2022 and June 30, 2021, total current liabilities included short term loan payable of $94,788 and $95,306, respectively
Since inception, the Company has expended substantial resources on research and development. Consequently, we have sustained substantial losses. The Company has an accumulated deficit of $122,492,176 and $114,385,313 at June 30, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
The Company anticipates several important milestones that it will be achieving in the ensuing year. Management believes that as it achieves these milestones, the Company’s ability to raise additional funds in the public markets would be enhanced.
Management believes that the Company’s existing resources will be sufficient to fund the Company’s planned operations and expenditures through October 2023. However, the Company cannot provide assurance that its plans will not change or that changed circumstances will not result in the depletion of its capital resources more rapidly than it currently anticipates. The accompanying audited financial statements do not include any adjustments that may result from the outcome of such unidentified uncertainties.
Research and Development Costs
The Company does not maintain separate accounting line items for each project in development. The Company maintains aggregate expense records for all research and development conducted. Because at this time all of the Company’s projects share a common core material, the Company allocates expenses across all projects at each period-end for purposes of providing accounting basis for each project. Project costs are allocated based upon labor hours performed for each project.
The Company has signed several cooperative research and development agreements with different agencies and institutions.
The Company expects to enter into additional cooperative agreements with other governmental and non-governmental, academic, or commercial, agencies, institutions, and companies. There can be no assurance that a final agreement may be achieved and that the Company will execute any of these agreements. However, should any of these agreements materialize, the Company will implement a system to track these costs by project and account for these projects as customer-sponsored activities and show these project costs separately.
The following Table 4 summarizes the primary components of our research and development expenses as allocated, during the periods presented in this Annual Report on Form 10-K.
Table 4: R&D Cost Allocations
Anticipated Budgets and Expenditures in the Near Future
The Company has ended the year on a reasonable financial footing by controlling costs and expenditures. We project that our current available financing is sufficient for accomplishing the goal of filing one IND or equivalent regulatory applications and executing initial
Page 94 of 115
human trials of our lead drug candidate, NV-CoV-2. We will need additional financing to execute on our business plan and to complete human clinical trials of our drug candidates into drug approval. Our Coronavirus drug candidate NV-CoV-2 has completed IND-enabling studies, we are currently working on compiling the IND application and finding and engaging an appropriate Clinical Research Organization for planning and executing the clinical studies. NV-CoV-2 is expected to rapidly move into human clinical studies in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Our Shingles Skin Cream, has completed IND-enabling studies, and we intend to file an IND for this drug once the COVID-19 situation abates. We have completed scale-up and manufacture of NV-387, the drug substance (API) in NV-CoV-2, and the drug products NV-CoV-2 Orals Syrup and NV-CoV-2 Oral Gummies. We have scheduled cGMP-compliant clinical batch production of the same. After NV-CoV-2 drug candidate enters clinical trials, we plan on undertaking further development of the NV-HHV-1 Skin Cream for the treatment of Shingles, including scale-up of manufacture, cGMP compliant batches, and additional studies that may be required. We anticipate that these drug candidates will move forward into IND or equivalent regulatory filings, and ensuing human clinical trials. As these drug candidates are advancing into the clinic, we believe that our additional drug candidates, including two or more drug candidates in the HerpeCide program will also move forward into IND-enabling studies. We intend to further re-engage our FluCide and HIVCide drug development programs once we have established our platform technology with the Coronavirus and HerpeCide program drug candidates. We are thus poised for strong growth with a number of drug candidates in a number of disease indications.
Financings
On July 31, 2020, the Company entered into an At Market Issuance Sales Agreement (the “Sales Agreement”) with B. Riley Securities, Inc. and Kingswood Capital Markets, a division of Benchmark Investments, Inc. (each a “Sales Agent” and collectively, the “Sales Agents”), pursuant to which the Company may offer and sell, from time to time, through or to the Sales Agents, shares of Common Stock (the “Placement Shares”), having an aggregate offering price of up to $50 million (the “ATM Offering”). Sales pursuant to the Sales Agreement will be made only upon instructions by the Company to the Sales Agents, and the Company cannot provide any assurances that it will issue any Shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement. Actual sales will depend on a variety of factors to be determined by the Company from time to time, including (among others) market conditions, the trading price of the Company’s common stock, capital needs and determinations by the Company of the appropriate sources of funding for the Company. The Company is not obligated to make any sales of common stock under the Sales Agreement and the Company cannot provide any assurances that it will issue any shares pursuant to the Sales Agreement. On March 2, 2021 the Company sold 814,242 shares of common stock at an average price of $7.83 under the Sales Agreement with B. Riley Securities, Inc. The net proceeds to the Company from the offering was approximately $6.1 million after deducting underwriting discounts and commissions and other offering expenses.
As of June 30, 2022, we had a cash and cash equivalent balance of $14,066,359 that is expected to be sufficient to fund the Company’s planned operations and expenditures through October 2023. The Company also believes that additional non-dilutive financing will be available under the COVID-19 program upon advancing it further toward or into human clinical trials. The Company also believes that due to the pandemic, it will be possible to rapidly take our anti-coronavirus drug into human clinical trials under the COVID-19 regulatory pathways of the US FDA or other regulatory authorities.
Requirement for Additional Capital
The Company believes that our cash and cash equivalent balance will provide sufficient funds for us to be able to advance at least one of its drug candidates into human clinical trial stage, and to continue our operations through October, 2023 with the available cash. The Company estimates that it will need additional funding to continue further development of its drug candidates through later stages of human clinical trials if it does not form a collaborative licensing or partnership agreement with a party that would provide such funding such as Big Pharma.
Based on our current rate of expenditures and anticipated changes, we have estimated a total cash expenditure budget of approximately $10 million from July 1, 2022 through October 2023, of which approximately $7 million is expected to go towards IND filing and initial human clinical trials of NV-CoV-2, our antiviral treatment for COVID, and approximately $3 million is budgeted for general and administrative expenses.
These anticipated expenses for the subsequent period commencing on July 1, 2022 can be summarized as follows:
1. Planned costs of $4,500,000: Planned costs for further prepatory research and development work for Phase II/III clinical trials for NV-CoV-2 and NV-CoV-2-R. These include GLP and non-GLP in vivo and in vitro studies required as per
Page 95 of 115
regulatory guidance, the VZV (Shingles) drug development program, and other indications in HerpeCide program.This includes staffing costs of approximately $2,500,000, for the scientific staff and consulting firms to assist with FDA compliance, material characterization, pharmaco-kinetic, pharmaco-dynamic and toxicology studies, and other items related to FDA compliance, as required for development of necessary data for filing an Investigational New Drug with the United States Food and Drug Administration.
2. Clinical trial manufactured batch of drug product approximately $1,000,000 for Phase 1 and 2a for the first Coronavirus (COVID-19) program drug candidate NV-CoV-2.
3. Anticipated clinical trial costs for the COVID-19 drug candidate of approximately $1,500,000 for Phase 1 and 2a. We anticipate that these clinical trials will be designed with the goal of an emergency use approval during the current pandemic provided it continues to persist. We may need to modify the program to seek full-fledged approval for our broad-spectrum coronavirus drug candidate if the pandemic is resolved by the time we are completing Phase 2a human clinical trials of this drug candidate.
4. Corporate overhead of $2,800,000: This amount includes budgeted office salaries, legal, accounting, investor relations, public relations, business development, and other costs expected to be incurred by being a public reporting company.
5.
Capital costs of $200,000: This is the estimated cost for additional equipment and laboratory improvements.
We estimate that beyond the current budgetary one-year period ending October 15, 2023, to the period ending October 15, 2024, further human clinical development of NV-CoV-2 towards Emergency Use Authorization, followed by expansion of studies towards full approval, for further clinical studies towards full-fledged approval of our Coronavirus drug candidate as may be necessary, development for IND and initial human clinical studies of the NV-HHV-1 Skin Cream for Topical Treatment of Shingles, and for developing additional drug indications based on the Shingles skin cream candidate, NV-HHV-1, in the HerpeCide program, we may need approximately an additional $14 million, or approximately $10 million more than our anticipated remaining cash as of October 2023. The additional funds will be needed to pay additional, subcontract costs related to the expansion and further development of our drug pipeline, for human clinical trials, and for additional capital and operational expenditures
These anticipated additional expenses for the two-year period commencing October 16, 2022 can be summarized as follows:
1. Planned research and development costs of $8,000,000: Planned costs for additional indications in HerpeCide program, This includes staffing costs of approximately $5,000,000, for the scientific staff and consulting firms to assist with FDA compliance, material characterization, pharmaco-kinetic, pharmaco-dynamic and toxicology studies, and other items related to FDA compliance, as required for development of necessary data for filing an Investigational New Drug with the United States Food and Drug Administration.
2. Clinical trial manufactured batch of drug product approximately $2,000,000 for Phase 2b and 3 for the NV-CoV-2 Coronavirus program candidate, and $1,000,000 for Phase 1 and 2a for the NV-HHV-1 VZV Shingles program drug candidate.
3. Clinical Trials Costs budgeted as follows: anticipated Phase 2b and 3 Clinical Trial Costs for the COVID-19 of approximately $5,000,000, and $1,000,000 for the Phase 1 and 2a clinical trials for the skin cream for Shingles for the Skin Cream for Shingles.
4. Corporate overhead of $6,000,000.
5. Capital costs for laboratory and pilot manufacturing equipment of $1,000,000.
6. As our programs mature and as we are able to move additional drug candidates into human clinical trials we will continue to require additional funding for such activities. As a rule of thumb, we estimate that, for each drug candidate that goes into clinical trials, if Phase I and Phase II are successful, we anticipate approximately $10 million for Phase III human clinical trials for that drug candidate to enable us to file a New Drug Application (NDA) with the US FDA for obtaining marketing approval. These estimates are based on rough quotes from potential investigators, and assumptions relative to additional
Page 96 of 115
costs. These estimates assume that our drug candidates are highly effective and therefore would require relatively few patients in each arm of the each trial in order to establish statistically significant results.
We believe that as we become a clinical stage company, and as our programs mature towards FDA approval, the Company’s market capitalization should improve substantially, based on market capitalizations of comparable public companies in clinical stages. If so, we believe that we will be able to raise the additional necessary funds through public financings as needed. We believe that our coronavirus program is maturing rapidly towards human clinical trials, and if we are successful in achieving an emergency use approval for a coronavirus drug candidate, we may be able to generate substantial revenues during the current pandemic using our existing cGMP-capable manufacturing capacity itself.
We believe we have sufficient funding to take our Coronavirus drug candidate into initial human clinical trials. We will need to raise additional funds to take NV-HHV-1 and additional topical HerpeCide drug candidate indications into an IND application stage. There is no assurance that the Company will be successful in obtaining sufficient financing on terms acceptable to the Company to fund these programs. Management believes that as a result of the management plan, the Company’s existing resources and access to the capital markets will permit the Company to fund planned operations and expenditures for at least one year from the filing of the 10-K. However, the Company cannot provide assurance that its plans will not change or that changed circumstances will not result in the depletion of its capital resources more rapidly than it currently anticipates.
The Company has limited experience with pharmaceutical drug development. Thus, our budget estimates are not based on experience, but rather based on advice given by our associates and consultants. As such these budget estimates may not be accurate. In addition, the actual work to be performed is not known at this time, other than a broad outline, as is normal with any scientific work. As further work is performed, additional work may become necessary or change in plans or workload may occur. Such changes may have an adverse impact on our estimated budget. Such changes may also have an adverse impact on our projected timeline of drug development.
We believe that the coming year’s work plan will lead us to obtain certain information about the safety and efficacy of our coronavirus drug candidate NV-CoV-2 in human clinical trials. If our studies are not successful, we will have to develop additional drug candidates and perform further studies. If our studies are successful, then we expect to be able to undertake further studies in animal models to obtain necessary data regarding the pharmaco-kinetic and pharmaco-dynamic profiles and further human clinical studies, expanding into Phase 2b, and Phase 3 human clinical trials of our drug candidates.
Our strategy is to minimize capital expenditure. We therefore rely on third party collaborations for the testing of our drug candidates. We continue to engage with our previous collaborators.
Our animal efficacy studies as well as safety/toxicology studies are performed by third parties. We opt into drug developments against specific disease indications for which we have appropriate partners that can perform the necessary cell culture and animal efficacy studies.
We report summaries of its studies as the data becomes available to us, after analyzing and verifying the same, in our press releases. The studies of biological testing of materials provide information that is relatively easy to understand and therefore readily reported. In addition, we continue to engage in substantial work that is needed for the optimization of synthesis routes and for the chemical characterization of the nanoviricide drug candidates. We also continue to work on improving the drug candidates and the virus binding ligands where necessary. We continue to work on creating the information needed for the development of controlled chemical synthesis procedures that is vital for developing c-GMP manufacturing processes. We have also begun to publish what we believe are our extraordinary achievements in the COVID-19 space in peer reviewed journals.
We cannot accurately project the timeline of when we would be able to take a drug candidate into clinical studies, nor can we predict when we may be able to achieve our first drug approval, if any. As such we do not provide any guidance on expected timelines. We have no experience in having taken a single drug through the US FDA or any international drug approval process as of now. As such, we may not be able to estimate the time or cost of these studies accurately. However, we try to do our best by using expert consultants and preparing reasonable estimates based on quotations from various contract research organizations.
Our timelines depend upon several assumptions, many of which are outside the control of the Company, and thus are subject to delays.
Page 97 of 115
We plan on seeking non-dilutive financing, grants and contracts, as well as pharmaceutical partnerships, as our NV-CoV-2 drug matures into human clinical trials. Management further intends to use capital and debt financing, as required, to fund the Company’s operations. There can be no assurance that the Company will be able to obtain the additional capital resources, non-dilutive financings, grants and contracts, or pharmaceutical partnerships.
The Company is considered to be a development stage company and will continue in the development stage until it generates revenues from the sales of its products or services.
Off Balance Sheet Arrangements
We have not entered into any off-balance sheet arrangements during the year ended June 30, 2022.
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING POLICIES AND ESTIMATES
Accounting for Stock Based Compensation - The Company follows the provisions of ASC 718 - Stock Compensation, which requires the measurement of compensation expense for all shared-based payment awards made to employees, non-employee directors, and non-employees including employee stock options. Shared-based compensation expense is based on the grant date fair value estimated in accordance with the provisions of ASC 718 and is generally recognized as an expense over the requisite service period, net of forfeitures.
RECENT ACCOUNTING PRONOUNCEMENTS
Recently Issued Accounting Pronouncements
The Company considers the applicability and Impact of all Accounting Standard Updates (“ASU’s”). There were no recent ASU’s that are expected to have a material impact on the Company’s balance sheets or statements of operations.